Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Introduction 2 Theory 3 Classification of methods Toggle Classification of methods subsection 3.1 Type of radiative energy 3.2 Nature of the interaction 3.3 Type of material 3.3.1 Atoms 3.3.2 Molecules 3.3.3 Crystals and extended materials 3.3.4 Nuclei 4 Other types 5 Applications 6 History 7 DIY Spectroscopy 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Spectroscopy 79 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский سرائیکی Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study involving matter and electromagnetic radiation This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Spectroscopy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An example of spectroscopy: a prism separates white light by dispersing it into its component colors.

Spectroscopy is the field of study that measures and interprets electromagnetic spectra .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In narrower contexts, spectroscopy is the precise study of color as generalized from visible light to all bands of the electromagnetic spectrum.

Spectroscopy, primarily in the electromagnetic spectrum, is a fundamental exploratory tool in the fields of astronomy , chemistry , materials science , and physics , allowing the composition, physical structure and electronic structure of matter to be investigated at the atomic, molecular and macro scale, and over astronomical distances .

Historically, spectroscopy originated as the study of the wavelength dependence of the absorption by gas phase matter of visible light dispersed by a prism . Current applications of spectroscopy include biomedical spectroscopy in the areas of tissue analysis and medical imaging .

Matter waves and acoustic waves can also be considered forms of radiative energy, and recently gravitational waves have been associated with a spectral signature in the context of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO).

[ 3 ] Introduction [ edit ] Spectroscopy is a branch of science concerned with the spectra of electromagnetic radiation as a function of its wavelength or frequency measured by spectrographic equipment, and other techniques, in order to obtain information concerning the structure and properties of matter.

[ 4 ] Spectral measurement devices are referred to as spectrometers , spectrophotometers , spectrographs or spectral analyzers . Most spectroscopic analysis in the laboratory starts with a sample to be analyzed, then a light source is chosen from any desired range of the light spectrum, then the light goes through the sample to a dispersion array (diffraction grating instrument) and captured by a photodiode . For astronomical purposes, the telescope must be equipped with the light dispersion device. There are various versions of this basic setup that may be employed.

Spectroscopy began with Isaac Newton splitting light with a prism; a key moment in the development of modern optics .

[ 5 ] Therefore, it was originally the study of visible light that we call color that later under the studies of James Clerk Maxwell came to include the entire electromagnetic spectrum .

[ 6 ] Although color is involved in spectroscopy, it is not equated with the color of elements or objects that involve the absorption and reflection of certain electromagnetic waves to give objects a sense of color to our eyes. Rather spectroscopy involves the splitting of light by a prism, diffraction grating, or similar instrument, to give off a particular discrete line pattern called a "spectrum" unique to each different type of element. Most elements are first put into a gaseous phase to allow the spectra to be examined although today other methods can be used on different phases. Each element that is diffracted by a prism-like instrument displays either an absorption spectrum or an emission spectrum depending upon whether the element is being cooled or heated.

[ 7 ] Until recently all spectroscopy involved the study of line spectra and most spectroscopy still does.

[ 8 ] Vibrational spectroscopy is the branch of spectroscopy that studies the spectra.

[ 9 ] However, the latest developments in spectroscopy can sometimes dispense with the dispersion technique. In biochemical spectroscopy, information can be gathered about biological tissue by absorption and light scattering techniques. Light scattering spectroscopy is a type of reflectance spectroscopy that determines tissue structures by examining elastic scattering.

[ 10 ] In such a case, it is the tissue that acts as a diffraction or dispersion mechanism.

Spectroscopic studies were central to the development of quantum mechanics , because the first useful atomic models described the spectra of hydrogen, which include the Bohr model , the Schrödinger equation , and Matrix mechanics , all of which can produce the spectral lines of hydrogen , therefore providing the basis for discrete quantum jumps to match the discrete hydrogen spectrum. Also, Max Planck 's explanation of blackbody radiation involved spectroscopy because he was comparing the wavelength of light using a photometer to the temperature of a Black Body .

[ 11 ] Spectroscopy is used in physical and analytical chemistry because atoms and molecules have unique spectra. As a result, these spectra can be used to detect, identify and quantify information about the atoms and molecules. Spectroscopy is also used in astronomy and remote sensing on Earth. Most research telescopes have spectrographs. The measured spectra are used to determine the chemical composition and physical properties of astronomical objects (such as their temperature , density of elements in a star, velocity , black holes and more).

[ 12 ] An important use for spectroscopy is in biochemistry. Molecular samples may be analyzed for species identification and energy content.

[ 13 ] Theory [ edit ] The underlying premise of spectroscopy is that light is made of different wavelengths and that each wavelength corresponds to a different frequency. The importance of spectroscopy is centered around the fact that every element in the periodic table has a unique light spectrum described by the frequencies of light it emits or absorbs consistently appearing in the same part of the electromagnetic spectrum when that light is diffracted. This opened up an entire field of study with anything that contains atoms. Spectroscopy is the key to understanding the atomic properties of all matter. As such spectroscopy opened up many new sub-fields of science yet undiscovered. The idea that each atomic element has its unique spectral signature enabled spectroscopy to be used in a broad number of fields each with a specific goal achieved by different spectroscopic procedures. The National Institute of Standards and Technology maintains a public Atomic Spectra Database that is continually updated with precise measurements.

[ 14 ] The broadening of the field of spectroscopy is due to the fact that any part of the electromagnetic spectrum may be used to analyze a sample from the infrared to the ultraviolet telling scientists different properties about the very same sample. For instance in chemical analysis, the most common types of spectroscopy include atomic spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy, ultraviolet and visible spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy and nuclear magnetic resonance .

[ 15 ] In nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), the theory behind it is that frequency is analogous to resonance and its corresponding resonant frequency. Resonances by the frequency were first characterized in mechanical systems such as pendulums , which have a frequency of motion noted famously by Galileo .

[ 16 ] Classification of methods [ edit ] A huge diffraction grating at the heart of the ultra-precise ESPRESSO spectrograph.

[ 17 ] Spectroscopy is a sufficiently broad field that many sub-disciplines exist, each with numerous implementations of specific spectroscopic techniques. The various implementations and techniques can be classified in several ways.

Type of radiative energy [ edit ] The types of spectroscopy are distinguished by the type of radiative energy involved in the interaction. In many applications, the spectrum is determined by measuring changes in the intensity or frequency of this energy. The types of radiative energy studied include: Electromagnetic radiation was the first source of energy used for spectroscopic studies. Techniques that employ electromagnetic radiation are typically classified by the wavelength region of the spectrum and include microwave , terahertz , infrared , near-infrared , ultraviolet-visible , x-ray , and gamma spectroscopy.

Particles, because of their de Broglie waves , can also be a source of radiative energy. Both electron and neutron spectroscopy are commonly used. For a particle, its kinetic energy determines its wavelength.

Acoustic spectroscopy involves radiated pressure waves.

Dynamic mechanical analysis can be employed to impart radiating energy, similar to acoustic waves, to solid materials.

Nature of the interaction [ edit ] The types of spectroscopy also can be distinguished by the nature of the interaction between the energy and the material. These interactions include: [ 2 ] Absorption spectroscopy : Absorption occurs when energy from the radiative source is absorbed by the material. Absorption is often determined by measuring the fraction of energy transmitted through the material, with absorption decreasing the transmitted portion.

Emission spectroscopy : Emission indicates that radiative energy is released by the material. A material's blackbody spectrum is a spontaneous emission spectrum determined by its temperature. This feature can be measured in the infrared by instruments such as the atmospheric emitted radiance interferometer.

[ 18 ] Emission can also be induced by other sources of energy such as flames , sparks , electric arcs or electromagnetic radiation in the case of fluorescence .

Elastic scattering and reflection spectroscopy determine how incident radiation is reflected or scattered by a material.

Crystallography employs the scattering of high energy radiation, such as x-rays and electrons, to examine the arrangement of atoms in proteins and solid crystals.

Impedance spectroscopy : Impedance is the ability of a medium to impede or slow the transmittance of energy. For optical applications, this is characterized by the index of refraction .

Inelastic scattering phenomena involve an exchange of energy between the radiation and the matter that shifts the wavelength of the scattered radiation. These include Raman and Compton scattering .

Coherent or resonance spectroscopy are techniques where the radiative energy couples two quantum states of the material in a coherent interaction that is sustained by the radiating field. The coherence can be disrupted by other interactions, such as particle collisions and energy transfer, and so often require high intensity radiation to be sustained.

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a widely used resonance method, and ultrafast laser spectroscopy is also possible in the infrared and visible spectral regions.

Nuclear spectroscopy are methods that use the properties of specific nuclei to probe the local structure in matter, mainly condensed matter , molecules in liquids or frozen liquids and bio-molecules.

Quantum logic spectroscopy is a general technique used in ion traps that enables precision spectroscopy of ions with internal structures that preclude laser cooling , state manipulation, and detection.

Quantum logic operations enable a controllable ion to exchange information with a co-trapped ion that has a complex or unknown electronic structure.

Type of material [ edit ] Spectroscopic studies are designed so that the radiant energy interacts with specific types of matter.

Atoms [ edit ] Atomic spectra comparison table, from "Spektroskopische Methoden der analytischen Chemie" (1922).

Atomic spectroscopy was the first application of spectroscopy.

Atomic absorption spectroscopy and atomic emission spectroscopy involve visible and ultraviolet light. These absorptions and emissions, often referred to as atomic spectral lines, are due to electronic transitions of outer shell electrons as they rise and fall from one electron orbit to another. Atoms also have distinct x-ray spectra that are attributable to the excitation of inner shell electrons to excited states.

Atoms of different elements have distinct spectra and therefore atomic spectroscopy allows for the identification and quantitation of a sample's elemental composition. After inventing the spectroscope, Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff discovered new elements by observing their emission spectra. Atomic absorption lines are observed in the solar spectrum and referred to as Fraunhofer lines after their discoverer. A comprehensive explanation of the hydrogen spectrum was an early success of quantum mechanics and explained the Lamb shift observed in the hydrogen spectrum, which further led to the development of quantum electrodynamics .

Modern implementations of atomic spectroscopy for studying visible and ultraviolet transitions include flame emission spectroscopy , inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy , glow discharge spectroscopy , microwave induced plasma spectroscopy, and spark or arc emission spectroscopy. Techniques for studying x-ray spectra include X-ray spectroscopy and X-ray fluorescence .

Molecules [ edit ] The combination of atoms into molecules leads to the creation of unique types of energetic states and therefore unique spectra of the transitions between these states. Molecular spectra can be obtained due to electron spin states ( electron paramagnetic resonance ), molecular rotations , molecular vibration , and electronic states. Rotations are collective motions of the atomic nuclei and typically lead to spectra in the microwave and millimetre-wave spectral regions. Rotational spectroscopy and microwave spectroscopy are synonymous. Vibrations are relative motions of the atomic nuclei and are studied by both infrared and Raman spectroscopy . Electronic excitations are studied using visible and ultraviolet spectroscopy as well as fluorescence spectroscopy .

[ 2 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Studies in molecular spectroscopy led to the development of the first maser and contributed to the subsequent development of the laser .

Crystals and extended materials [ edit ] The combination of atoms or molecules into crystals or other extended forms leads to the creation of additional energetic states. These states are numerous and therefore have a high density of states. This high density often makes the spectra weaker and less distinct, i.e., broader. For instance, blackbody radiation is due to the thermal motions of atoms and molecules within a material. Acoustic and mechanical responses are due to collective motions as well.
Pure crystals, though, can have distinct spectral transitions, and the crystal arrangement also has an effect on the observed molecular spectra. The regular lattice structure of crystals also scatters x-rays, electrons or neutrons allowing for crystallographic studies.

Nuclei [ edit ] Nuclei also have distinct energy states that are widely separated and lead to gamma ray spectra. Distinct nuclear spin states can have their energy separated by a magnetic field, and this allows for nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy .

Other types [ edit ] This section is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this section , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( April 2016 ) Other types of spectroscopy are distinguished by specific applications or implementations: Acoustic resonance spectroscopy is based on sound waves primarily in the audible and ultrasonic regions.

Auger electron spectroscopy is a method used to study surfaces of materials on a micro-scale.  It is often used in connection with electron microscopy.

Cavity ring-down spectroscopy Circular dichroism spectroscopy Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy is a recent technique that has high sensitivity and powerful applications for in vivo spectroscopy and imaging.

[ 23 ] Cold vapour atomic fluorescence spectroscopy Correlation spectroscopy encompasses several types of two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy.

Deep-level transient spectroscopy measures concentration and analyzes parameters of electrically active defects in semiconducting materials.

Dielectric spectroscopy Dual-polarization interferometry measures the real and imaginary components of the complex refractive index.

Electron energy loss spectroscopy in transmission electron microscopy.

Electron phenomenological spectroscopy measures the physicochemical properties and characteristics of the electronic structure of multicomponent and complex molecular systems.

Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy Force spectroscopy Fourier-transform spectroscopy is an efficient method for processing spectra data obtained using interferometers.

Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy is a common implementation of infrared spectroscopy. NMR also employs Fourier transforms .

Gamma spectroscopy Hadron spectroscopy studies the energy/mass spectrum of hadrons according to spin , parity , and other particle properties. Baryon spectroscopy and meson spectroscopy are types of hadron spectroscopy.

Multispectral imaging and hyperspectral imaging is a method to create a complete picture of the environment or various objects, each pixel containing a full visible, visible near infrared, near infrared, or infrared spectrum.

Inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy uses the changes in current due to inelastic electron-vibration interaction at specific energies that can also measure optically forbidden transitions.

Inelastic neutron scattering is similar to Raman spectroscopy, but uses neutrons instead of photons.

Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy , also called laser-induced plasma spectrometry Laser spectroscopy uses tunable lasers [ 24 ] and other types of coherent emission sources, such as optical parametric oscillators, [ 25 ] for selective excitation of atomic or molecular species.

Light scattering spectroscopy (LSS) is a spectroscopic technique typically used to evaluate morphological changes in epithelial cells in order to study mucosal tissue and detect early cancer and precancer .

[ 10 ] [ 26 ] Mass spectroscopy is a historical term used to refer to mass spectrometry . The current recommendation is to use the latter term.

[ 27 ] The term "mass spectroscopy" originated in the use of phosphor screens to detect ions.

Mössbauer spectroscopy probes the properties of specific isotopic nuclei in different atomic environments by analyzing the resonant absorption of gamma rays . See also Mössbauer effect .

Multivariate optical computing is an all optical compressed sensing technique, generally used in harsh environments, that directly calculates chemical information from a spectrum as analogue output.

Neutron spin echo spectroscopy measures internal dynamics in proteins and other soft matter systems.

Nuclear quadrupole resonance is a chemical spectroscopy method mediated by NMR of the electric field gradient (EFG) in the absence of magnetic field Perturbed angular correlation (PAC) uses radioactive nuclei as probe to study electric and magnetic fields ( hyperfine interactions ) in crystals ( condensed matter ) and bio-molecules.

Photoacoustic spectroscopy measures the sound waves produced upon the absorption of radiation.

Photoemission spectroscopy Photothermal spectroscopy measures heat evolved upon absorption of radiation.

Pump-probe spectroscopy can use ultrafast laser pulses to measure reaction intermediates in the femtosecond timescale.

Raman optical activity spectroscopy exploits Raman scattering and optical activity effects to reveal detailed information on chiral centers in molecules.

Raman spectroscopy Saturated spectroscopy Scanning tunneling spectroscopy Spectrophotometry Spin noise spectroscopy traces spontaneous fluctuations of electronic and nuclear spins.

[ 28 ] Time-resolved spectroscopy measures the decay rates of excited states using various spectroscopic methods.

Time-stretch spectroscopy [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Thermal infrared spectroscopy measures thermal radiation emitted from materials and surfaces and is used to determine the type of bonds present in a sample as well as their lattice environment.  The techniques are widely used by organic chemists, mineralogists , and planetary scientists .

Transient grating spectroscopy measures quasiparticle propagation. It can track changes in metallic materials as they are irradiated.

Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy Vibrational circular dichroism spectroscopy Video spectroscopy X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy Applications [ edit ] UVES is a high-resolution spectrograph on the Very Large Telescope .

[ 31 ] There are several applications of spectroscopy in the fields of medicine, physics, chemistry, and astronomy.  Taking advantage of the properties of absorbance and with astronomy emission , spectroscopy can be used to identify certain states of nature.  The uses of spectroscopy in so many different fields and for so many different applications has caused specialty scientific subfields. Such examples include: Determining the atomic structure of a sample [ 32 ] Studying spectral emission lines of the sun and distant galaxies [ 33 ] Space exploration Cure monitoring of composites using optical fibers .

Estimating weathered wood exposure times using near infrared spectroscopy.

[ 34 ] Measurement of different compounds in food samples by absorption spectroscopy both in visible and infrared spectrum.

Measurement of toxic compounds in blood samples Non-destructive elemental analysis by X-ray fluorescence .

Electronic structure research with various spectroscopes.

Redshift to determine the speed and velocity of a distant object Determining the metabolic structure of a muscle Monitoring dissolved oxygen content in freshwater and marine ecosystems Altering the structure of drugs to improve effectiveness Characterization of proteins Respiratory gas analysis in hospitals [ 7 ] Finding the physical properties of a distant star or nearby exoplanet using the Relativistic Doppler effect .

[ 35 ] In-ovo sexing : spectroscopy allows to determine the sex of the egg while it is hatching. Developed by French and German companies, both countries decided to ban chick culling , mostly done through a macerator, in 2022.

[ 36 ] Process monitoring  in Industrial process control [ 37 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of spectroscopy The history of spectroscopy began with Isaac Newton 's optics experiments (1666–1672). According to Andrew Fraknoi and David Morrison , "In 1672, in the first paper that he submitted to the Royal Society , Isaac Newton described an experiment in which he permitted sunlight to pass through a small hole and then through a prism. Newton found that sunlight, which looks white to us, is actually made up of a mixture of all the colors of the rainbow." [ 38 ] Newton applied the word "spectrum" to describe the rainbow of colors that combine to form white light and that are revealed when the white light is passed through a prism.

Fraknoi and Morrison state that "In 1802, William Hyde Wollaston built an improved spectrometer that included a lens to focus the Sun's spectrum on a screen. Upon use, Wollaston realized that the colors were not spread uniformly, but instead had missing patches of colors, which appeared as dark bands in the spectrum." [ 38 ] During the early 1800s, Joseph von Fraunhofer made experimental advances with dispersive spectrometers that enabled spectroscopy to become a more precise and quantitative scientific technique. Since then, spectroscopy has played and continues to play a significant role in chemistry, physics, and astronomy. Per Fraknoi and Morrison, "Later, in 1815, German physicist Joseph Fraunhofer also examined the solar spectrum, and found about 600 such dark lines (missing colors), are now known as Fraunhofer lines, or Absorption lines." [ 38 ] [ better source needed ] In quantum mechanical systems, the analogous resonance is a coupling of two quantum mechanical stationary states of one system, such as an atom , via an oscillatory source of energy such as a photon . The coupling of the two states is strongest when the energy of the source matches the energy difference between the two states. The energy E of a photon is related to its frequency ν by E = hν where h is the Planck constant , and so a spectrum of the system response vs. photon frequency will peak at the resonant frequency or energy. Particles such as electrons and neutrons have a comparable relationship, the de Broglie relations , between their kinetic energy and their wavelength and frequency and therefore can also excite resonant interactions.

Spectra of atoms and molecules often consist of a series of spectral lines, each one representing a resonance between two different quantum states. The explanation of these series, and the spectral patterns associated with them, were one of the experimental enigmas that drove the development and acceptance of quantum mechanics. The hydrogen spectral series in particular was first successfully explained by the Rutherford–Bohr quantum model of the hydrogen atom. In some cases spectral lines are well separated and distinguishable, but spectral lines can also overlap and appear to be a single transition if the density of energy states is high enough. Named series of lines include the principal , sharp , diffuse and fundamental series .

DIY Spectroscopy [ edit ] Spectroscopy has emerged as a growing practice within the maker movement , enabling hobbyists and educators to construct functional spectrometers using readily available materials.

[ 39 ] Utilizing components like CD/DVD diffraction gratings, smartphones, and 3D-printed parts, these instruments offer a hands-on approach to understanding light and matter interactions. Smartphone applications [ 40 ] [ 41 ] along with open-source tools [ 42 ] facilitate integration, greatly simplify the capturing and analysis of spectral data. While limitations in resolution, calibration accuracy, and stray light management exist compared to professional equipment, DIY spectroscopy provides valuable educational experiences [ 43 ] and contributes to citizen science initiatives, fostering accessibility to spectroscopic techniques.

See also [ edit ] Applied spectroscopy Astronomical spectroscopy Atomic spectroscopy Biomedical spectroscopy Coronium Frances Lowater Least-squares spectral analysis List of spectroscopists Metamerism (color) Operando spectroscopy Scattering theory Spectral line ratios Spectral power distribution Spectral theory Spectroscopic notation Telluric contamination Virtually imaged phased array Notes [ edit ] ^ Duckett, Simon; Gilbert, Bruce (2000).

Foundations of Spectroscopy . Oxford Science Publications.

ISBN 978-0198503354 .

^ a b c Crouch, Stanley R.; Skoog, Douglas A.; Holler, F. J. (2007).

Principles of instrumental analysis . Australia: Thomson Brooks/Cole.

ISBN 9780495012016 .

^ Bartusiak, Marcia (2017-06-27), "Einstein's Unfinished Symphony: The Story of a Gamble, Two Black Holes, and a New Age of Astronomy" , Einstein’s Unfinished Symphony , Yale University Press, doi : 10.12987/9780300228120 , ISBN 9780300228120 , OCLC 1039140043 , S2CID 246149887 , retrieved 2023-05-22 Google Books ^ The Oxford American College Dictionary . G.P. Putnam's Sons. 2002.

ISBN 9780399144158 .

OCLC 48965005 .

^ " Isaac Newton and the problem of color ", Steven A. Edwards, AAAS.

^ "1861: James Clerk Maxwell's greatest year" . King's College London. 18 April 2011. Archived from the original on 22 June 2013 . Retrieved 28 March 2013 .

^ a b PASCO, " What is Spectroscopy?

" ^ Sutton, M. A. " Sir John Herschel and the Development of Spectroscopy in Britain ". The British Journal for the History of Science, vol. 7, no. 1, [Cambridge University Press, The British Society for the History of Science], 1974, pp. 42–60.

^ Lazić, Dejan. "Introduction to Raman Microscopy/Spectroscopy". Application of Molecular Methods and Raman Microscopy/Spectroscopy in Agricultural Sciences and Food Technology, edited by Dejan Lazić et al., Ubiquity Press, 2019, pp. 143–50, http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctvmd85qp.12 .

^ a b Perelman, L. T.; Backman, V.; Wallace, M.; Zonios, G.; Manoharan, R.; Nusrat, A.; Shields, S.; Seiler, M.; Lima, C.; Hamano, T.; Itzkan, I.; Van Dam, J.; Crawford, J. M.; Feld, M. S. (1998-01-19).

"Observation of Periodic Fine Structure in Reflectance from Biological Tissue: A New Technique for Measuring Nuclear Size Distribution" .

Physical Review Letters .

80 (3): 627– 630.

Bibcode : 1998PhRvL..80..627P .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.80.627 .

^ Kumar, Manjit. Quantum: Einstein, Bohr, and the great debate about the nature of reality / Manjit Kumar.—1st American ed., 2008. Chap.1.

^ "Spectra and What They Can Tell Us" .

Imagine the Universe!

. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. August 2013.

^ Nonell, Santi; Viappiani, Cristiano.

"Basic Spectroscopy" .

Photobiological Sciences Online .

^ " Atomic Spectra Database ", NIST.

^ Saul, Louise. (April 6, 2020). " The Different Types of Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis ". AZoOptics. Retrieved on November 10, 2021.

^ Isaac Asimov, Understanding Physics, Vol. 1, p.108.

^ "A Taste of ESPRESSO" . Retrieved 15 September 2015 .

^ Mariani, Z.; Strong, K.; Wolff, M.; Rowe, P.; Walden, V.; Fogal, P. F.; Duck, T.; Lesins, G.; Turner, D. S.; Cox, C.; Eloranta, E.; Drummond, J. R.; Roy, C.; Turner, D. D.; Hudak, D.; Lindenmaier, I. A. (2012).

"Infrared measurements in the Arctic using two Atmospheric Emitted Radiance Interferometers" .

Atmospheric Measurement Techniques .

5 (2): 329– 344.

Bibcode : 2012AMT.....5..329M .

doi : 10.5194/amt-5-329-2012 .

^ Kroto, H. W. (1975).

Molecular Rotation Spectra . Wiley.

ISBN 9780471508533 .

OCLC 793428 .

^ Philip R. Bunker and Per Jensen (1998), Molecular Symmetry and Spectroscopy , 2nd ed.  NRC Research Press, Ottawa [1] ISBN 9780660196282 ^ Papoušek, Dušan; Aliev, Mamed Ragimovich (1982).

Molecular Vibrational-rotational Spectra: Theory and Applications of High Resolution Infrared, Microwave, and Raman Spectroscopy of Polyatomic Molecules . Amsterdam: Elsevier Scientific Publishing Company.

ISBN 9780444997371 .

OCLC 7278301 .

^ Wilson, Edgar B.; Decius, John C.; Cross, Paul C. (1980-03-01).

Molecular Vibrations: The Theory of Infrared and Raman Vibrational Spectra . Courier Corporation.

ISBN 9780486639413 .

OCLC 1023249001 .

^ Evans, C. L.; Xie, X. S. (2008). "Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Scattering Microscopy: Chemical Imaging for Biology and Medicine".

Annual Review of Analytical Chemistry .

1 : 883– 909.

Bibcode : 2008ARAC....1..883E .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.anchem.1.031207.112754 .

PMID 20636101 .

^ W. Demtröder , Laser Spectroscopy , 3rd Ed. (Springer, 2003).

^ Brian Orr ; J. G. Haub; Y. He; R. T. White (2016). "Spectroscopic Applications of Pulsed Tunable Optical Parametric Oscillators". In F. J. Duarte (ed.).

Tunable Laser Applications (3rd ed.). Boca Raton: CRC Press . pp.

17– 142.

ISBN 978-1-4822-6106-6 .

^ Backman, V.; Wallace, M. B.; Perelman, L. T.; Arendt, J. T.; Gurjar, R.; Müller, M. G.; Zhang, Q.; Zonios, G.; Kline, E.; McGillican, T.; Shapshay, S.; Valdez, T.; Badizadegan, K.; Crawford, J. M.; Fitzmaurice, M. (July 2000).

"Detection of preinvasive cancer cells" .

Nature .

406 (6791): 35– 36.

doi : 10.1038/35017638 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMID 10894529 .

S2CID 4383575 .

^ Murray, Kermit K.; Boyd, Robert K.; Eberlin, Marcos N.; Langley, G. John; Li, Liang; Naito, Yasuhide (2013).

"Definitions of terms relating to mass spectrometry (IUPAC Recommendations 2013)" .

Pure and Applied Chemistry .

85 (7): 1.

doi : 10.1351/PAC-REC-06-04-06 .

ISSN 0033-4545 .

^ N. A. Sinitsyn; Y. V. Pershin (2016). "The theory of spin noise spectroscopy: a review".

Reports on Progress in Physics .

79 (10): 106501.

arXiv : 1603.06858 .

Bibcode : 2016RPPh...79j6501S .

doi : 10.1088/0034-4885/79/10/106501 .

PMID 27615689 .

S2CID 4393400 .

^ Solli, D. R.; Chou, J.; Jalali, B. (2008). "Amplified wavelength–time transformation for real-time spectroscopy".

Nature Photonics .

2 (1): 48– 51.

Bibcode : 2008NaPho...2...48S .

doi : 10.1038/nphoton.2007.253 .

^ Chou, Jason; Solli, Daniel R.; Jalali, Bahram (2008). "Real-time spectroscopy with subgigahertz resolution using amplified dispersive Fourier transformation".

Applied Physics Letters .

92 (11): 111102.

arXiv : 0803.1654 .

Bibcode : 2008ApPhL..92k1102C .

doi : 10.1063/1.2896652 .

S2CID 53056467 .

^ "Media advisory: Press Conference to Announce Major Result from Brazilian Astronomers" .

ESO Announcement . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ Brian Bowers (2001).

Sir Charles Wheatstone FRS: 1802–1875 (2nd ed.). IET. pp.

207– 208.

ISBN 978-0-85296-103-2 .

^ Brand, John C. D. (1995).

Lines of Light: The Sources of Dispersive Spectroscopy, 1800 – 1930 . Gordon and Breach Publishers. p. 57.

ISBN 978-2884491624 .

^ Wang, Xiping; Wacker, James P. (2006).

"Using NIR Spectroscopy to Predict Weathered Wood Exposure Times" (PDF) .

WTCE 2006 – 9th World Conference on Timber Engineering . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-03-01 . Retrieved 2009-06-22 .

^ Sher, D. (1968). "The Relativistic Doppler Effect".

Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada .

62 : 105.

Bibcode : 1968JRASC..62..105S .

^ "Germany and France Will Stop Chick Culling" . 22 July 2021.

^ Grau-Luque, Enric; Guc, Maxim; Becerril-Romero, Ignacio; Izquierdo-Roca, Víctor; Pérez-Rodríguez, Alejandro; Bolt, Pieter; Van den Bruele, Fieke; Ruhle, Ulfert (March 2022).

"Thickness evaluation of AlO x barrier layers for encapsulation of flexible PV modules in industrial environments by normal reflectance and machine learning" .

Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications .

30 (3): 229– 239.

doi : 10.1002/pip.3478 .

ISSN 1062-7995 .

^ a b c Andrew Fraknoi ; David Morrison (October 13, 2016).

"OpenStax Astronomy" .

^ "DIY Webcam Diffraction Grating Spectrometer" .

PhysicsOpenLab . Retrieved 2025-03-04 .

^ "Spectroscope" .

App Store . 2025-02-27 . Retrieved 2025-03-04 .

^ "Spectroscope - Apps on Google Play" .

play.google.com . Retrieved 2025-03-04 .

^ Wright, Les (2025-02-16), leswright1977/PySpectrometer2 , retrieved 2025-03-04 ^ "Project Spectra!" .

Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics . Retrieved 2025-03-04 .

References [ edit ] John M. Chalmers; Peter Griffiths, eds. (2006).

Handbook of Vibrational Spectroscopy . New York: Wiley.

doi : 10.1002/0470027320 .

ISBN 978-0-471-98847-2 .

Jerry Workman; Art Springsteen, eds. (1998).

Applied Spectroscopy . Boston: Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-08-052749-9 .

Peter M. Skrabal (2012).

Spectroscopy - An interdisciplinary integral description of spectroscopy from UV to NMR (e-book) . ETH Zurich: vdf Hochschulverlag AG.

doi : 10.3218/3385-4 .

ISBN 978-3-7281-3385-4 .

S2CID 244026324 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Spectroscopy .

Look up spectroscopy in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Spectroscopy .

NIST Atomic Spectroscopy Databases MIT Spectroscopy Lab's History of Spectroscopy Timeline of Spectroscopy Spectroscopy: Reading the Rainbow v t e Analytical chemistry Instrumentation Atomic absorption spectrometer Flame emission spectrometer Gas chromatograph High-performance liquid chromatograph Infrared spectrometer Mass spectrometer Melting point apparatus Microscope Optical spectrometer Spectrophotometer Techniques Calorimetry Chromatography Electroanalytical methods Gravimetric analysis Ion mobility spectrometry Mass spectrometry Spectroscopy Titration Sampling Coning and quartering Dilution Dissolution Filtration Masking Pulverization Sample preparation Separation process Sub-sampling Calibration Chemometrics Calibration curve Matrix effect Internal standard Standard addition Isotope dilution Prominent publications Analyst Analytica Chimica Acta Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry Analytical Chemistry Analytical Biochemistry Category Commons Portal WikiProject v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject v t e Concepts in organic chemistry Aromaticity Covalent bonding Functional groups Nomenclature Organic compounds Organic reactions Organic synthesis Publications Spectroscopy Stereochemistry List of organic compounds v t e Lasers List of laser articles List of laser types List of laser applications Laser acronyms Types of lasers Chemical laser Dye laser Bubble Liquid-crystal Gas laser Carbon dioxide Excimer Helium–neon Ion Nitrogen Free-electron laser Laser diode Solid-state laser Er:YAG Nd:YAG Raman Ruby Ti-sapphire X-ray laser Laser physics Active laser medium Amplified spontaneous emission Continuous wave Laser ablation Laser linewidth Lasing threshold Population inversion Ultrashort pulse Laser optics Beam expander Beam homogenizer Chirped pulse amplification Gain-switching Gaussian beam Injection seeder Laser beam profiler M squared Mode locking Multiple-prism grating laser oscillator Optical amplifier Optical cavity Optical isolator Output coupler Q-switching Category v t e Spectroscopy Vibrational (IR) FT-IR Raman Resonance Raman Rotational Rotational–vibrational Vibrational Vibrational circular dichroism Nuclear resonance vibrational spectroscopy Vibrational spectroscopy of linear molecules Thermal infrared spectroscopy UV–Vis–NIR "Optical" Ultraviolet–visible Fluorescence Cold vapour atomic Vibronic Near-infrared Resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI) Raman Coherent anti-Stokes Raman optical activity Laser-induced breakdown Atomic emission Glow-discharge optical absorption Cavity ring-down spectroscopy Saturated absorption spectroscopy X-ray and Gamma ray X-ray Energy-dispersive Emission Extended X-ray absorption fine structure Gamma Mössbauer Conversion electron Electron Photoelectron/photoemission X-ray UV Angle-resolved Two-photon Auger phenomenological paramagnetic Beta spectroscopy Nucleon Alpha Inelastic neutron scattering Neutron spin echo Radiowave NMR 2D Terahertz ESR/EPR Ferromagnetic resonance Others Data collection, processing Fourier-transform spectroscopy Hyperspectral imaging Spectrophotometry Time-stretch Time-resolved spectroscopy Video spectroscopy Measured phenomena Acoustic resonance spectroscopy Circular dichroism spectroscopy Deep-level transient spectroscopy Dual-polarization interferometry Hadron spectroscopy Inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy Scanning tunneling spectroscopy Photoacoustic spectroscopy Photothermal spectroscopy Pump–probe spectroscopy Applications Astronomical spectroscopy Force spectroscopy (a misnomer) Category Commons v t e Molecules detected in outer space Molecules Diatomic Aluminium monochloride Aluminium monofluoride Aluminium(II) oxide Argonium Carbon cation Carbon monophosphide Carbon monosulfide Carbon monoxide Cyano radical Diatomic carbon Fluoromethylidynium Helium hydride ion Hydrogen chloride Hydrogen fluoride Hydrogen (molecular) Hydroxyl radical Imidogen Iron(II) oxide Magnesium monohydride Methylidyne radical Nitric oxide Nitrogen (molecular) Oxygen (molecular) Phosphorus monoxide Phosphorus mononitride Potassium chloride Silicon carbide Silicon monoxide Silicon monosulfide Sodium chloride Sodium iodide Sulfanyl Sulfur mononitride Sulfur monoxide Titanium(II) oxide Triatomic Aluminium(I) hydroxide Aluminium isocyanide Amino radical Carbon dioxide Carbonyl sulfide CCP radical Chloronium Diazenylium Dicarbon monoxide Disilicon carbide Ethynyl radical Formyl radical Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) Hydrogen isocyanide (HNC) Hydrogen sulfide Hydroperoxyl Iron cyanide Isoformyl Magnesium cyanide Magnesium isocyanide Methylene Methylidynephosphane N 2 H + Nitrous oxide Nitroxyl Ozone Potassium cyanide Sodium cyanide Sodium hydroxide Silicon carbonitride c-Silicon dicarbide SiNC Sulfur dioxide Thioformyl Thioxoethenylidene Titanium dioxide Tricarbon Trihydrogen cation Water Four atoms Acetylene Ammonia Cyanoethynyl Formaldehyde Fulminic acid HCCN Hydrogen peroxide Hydromagnesium isocyanide Isocyanic acid Isothiocyanic acid Ketenyl Methyl cation Methyl radical Methylene amidogen Propynylidyne Protonated carbon dioxide Protonated hydrogen cyanide Silicon tricarbide Thiocyanic acid Thioformaldehyde Tricarbon monosulfide Tricarbon monoxide Five atoms Ammonium ion Butadiynyl Carbodiimide Cyanamide Cyanoacetylene Cyanoformaldehyde Cyanomethyl Cyclopropenylidene Formic acid Isocyanoacetylene Ketene Methane Methoxy radical Methylenimine Propadienylidene Protonated formaldehyde Silane Silicon-carbide cluster Six atoms Acetonitrile Cyanobutadiynyl radical Cyclopropenone Diacetylene E-Cyanomethanimine Ethylene Formamide HC 4 N Ketenimine Methanethiol Methanol Methyl isocyanide Pentynylidyne Propynal Protonated cyanoacetylene Seven atoms Acetaldehyde Acrylonitrile Vinyl cyanide Cyanodiacetylene Ethylene oxide Glycolonitrile Hexatriynyl radical Methyl isocyanate Methylamine Propyne Vinyl alcohol Eight atoms Acetic acid Acrolein Aminoacetonitrile Cyanoallene Ethanimine Glycolaldehyde Hexapentaenylidene Methyl formate Methylcyanoacetylene Nine atoms Acetamide Cyanohexatriyne Dimethyl ether Ethanethiol Ethanol Methyldiacetylene N-Methylformamide Octatetraynyl radical Propene Propionitrile Ten atoms or more Acetone Benzene Benzonitrile Buckminsterfullerene (C 60 , C 60 + , fullerene, buckyball) Butyronitrile C 70 fullerene Cyanodecapentayne Ethyl formate Ethylene glycol Heptatrienyl radical Methyl acetate Methyl-cyano-diacetylene Methyltriacetylene Propionaldehyde Pyrimidine Deuterated molecules Ammonia Ammonium ion Formaldehyde Formyl radical Heavy water Hydrogen cyanide Hydrogen deuteride Hydrogen isocyanide N 2 D + Propyne Trihydrogen cation Unconfirmed Anthracene Dihydroxyacetone Glycine Graphene H 2 NCO + Hemolithin Linear C 5 Methoxyethane Naphthalene cation Phosphine Pyrene Silylidyne Related Abiogenesis Astrobiology Astrochemistry Atomic and molecular astrophysics Chemical formula Circumstellar dust Circumstellar envelope Cosmic dust Cosmic ray Cosmochemistry Diffuse interstellar band Earliest known life forms Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial liquid water Forbidden mechanism Homochirality Intergalactic dust Interplanetary medium Interstellar medium Iron–sulfur world theory Kerogen Molecules in stars Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Organic compound Outer space PAH world hypothesis Photodissociation region Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) Pseudo-panspermia RNA world hypothesis Spectroscopy Tholin Category:Astrochemistry Outer space portal Astronomy portal Chemistry portal Portals : Physics Mathematics Science Stars Spaceflight Science Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐rdcpf
Cached time: 20250816001431
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.896 seconds
Real time usage: 1.091 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4350/1000000
Revision size: 44696/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 227089/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4036/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 202711/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.546/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8719408/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  838.520      1 -total
 39.89%  334.514      1 Template:Reflist
 17.79%  149.142     12 Template:Cite_book
 17.49%  146.641      8 Template:Navbox
 12.23%  102.518     11 Template:Cite_journal
 10.30%   86.376      1 Template:Analytical_chemistry
  7.16%   60.057      1 Template:Short_description
  7.04%   59.044      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  6.98%   58.497      2 Template:Ambox
  6.79%   56.932      3 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:27752:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816001431 and revision id 1302445281. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spectroscopy&oldid=1302445281 " Categories : Spectroscopy Observational astronomy Scattering, absorption and radiative transfer (optics) Scientific techniques Concepts in astronomy Gustav Kirchhoff Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles needing cleanup from April 2016 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from April 2016 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2020 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 12:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spectroscopy 79 languages Add topic

