Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Japan 1.2 United Kingdom 1.3 France 1.4 Webcomics 2 Graphic novels 3 List of science fiction comic books 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Science fiction comics 7 languages Català Español Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Comic genre This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Science fiction comics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: redundancy is rampant in this article, and it should probably include some redirects to the styles of writing. the article does a good job at explaining the various styles, but there are main articles written about them that render this redundant.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( November 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Science fiction comics Subgenres Biopunk comics Cyberpunk comics Military science fiction comics Post-apocalyptic comics Steampunk comics Related topics Science fiction magazine Publication of comic strips and comic books focusing on science fiction became increasingly common during the early 1930s in newspapers published in the United States. They have since spread to many countries around the world.

History [ edit ] The first science fiction comic was the gag cartoon Mr. Skygack, from Mars by A.D. Condo , which debuted in newspapers in 1907.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The first non-humorous science fiction comic strip, Buck Rogers , appeared in 1929, [ 3 ] and was based on a story published that year in Amazing Stories . It was quickly followed by others in the genre, such as Flash Gordon , Brick Bradford , and the British strip Dan Dare . This influence spread to comic books , in which science fiction themes became increasingly more popular; one  title was Planet Comics . With the introduction of Superman , the superhero genre was born, which often included science fiction elements.

EC Comics had  success and popularity in publishing science fiction comics of increasing complexity. However, a wave of anti-comic feeling stirred-up among parents and educators by Dr. Fredric Wertham 's book Seduction of the Innocent threatened to drive them out of business.

[ citation needed ] In spite of opposition, science fiction in comics continued in the U.S. through the 1960s with stories for children and teenagers, and began to return to the adult market again in the late 1960s with the wave of hippy underground comics .

Japan [ edit ] Japanese manga also featured science fiction elements. In the 1950s, Osamu Tezuka 's Astro Boy was one of the first major manga that centered around science fiction. In the following decades, many other creators and works would follow, including Leiji Matsumoto (e.g.

Galaxy Express 999 ), Katsuhiro Otomo (e.g.

Akira ) and Masamune Shirow (e.g.

Appleseed and Ghost in the Shell ).

United Kingdom [ edit ] In the UK, the publication of Eagle gave a platform for the launch of Dan Dare in 1950. Dan Dare and other comics in Briton at this time were aimed at children and they were printed on newsprint. Magazines on the other hand were aimed at adults and were printed on better glossier paper these magazines were mostly in black and white.

[ 4 ] Starting in the mid-sixties, The Trigan Empire , drawn by Don Lawrence (who would later go on to create Storm ) was featured in Look and Learn .

In the 1970s, publications, such as 2000 AD , featured a selection of regular stories putting a science fiction spin on popular themes, [ 5 ] like sports or war. Its success spawned a number of spin-offs in imitators like Tornado , Starlord , and Crisis , none of which lasted more than a few years, with the earlier titles being merged back into 2000 AD .

France [ edit ] The first French comic with a science fiction theme was Zig et Puce au XXIème Siècle (Zig & Puce In The 21st Century), originally serialized in a French Sunday newspaper before being published as an album in 1935; this was one of the many adventures of the teenage characters Zig and Puce first created in 1925. The first French science fiction comics story that was not geared toward the adolescent audience was Futuropolis , serialized in the comics magazine Junior in 1937-1938; the pseudo-sequel Electropolis followed in 1940. When the Nazi occupation forces banned the import of Flash Gordon into France, Le Rayon U (The U Ray) was created as replacement in the magazine Bravo which had been running the former. Other French science fiction comics which debuted in 1943 include Otomox , featuring a powerful robot, serialized in Pic et Nic , and L'Épervier Bleu (The Blue Hawk), serialized in Spirou magazine. The first French comics magazine exclusively featuring a science fiction hero was in 1947 with the relatively short-lived Radar . A far longer lasting French comics magazine would be the small-format Meteor , published from 1953 through 1964; its main feature was Les Connquerants de l'espace (The Conquerors of Space). Subsequent notable French science fiction include publications like Métal Hurlant and authors like Enki Bilal (e.g.

The Nikopol Trilogy ) and Moebius .

Webcomics [ edit ] With the invention of the Internet, a number of science fiction comics have been published primarily online. Among the earliest science fiction webcomics was Polymer City Chronicles , which first appeared in 1994. Other notable comics include Schlock Mercenary , and Starslip Crisis .

[ citation needed ] Graphic novels [ edit ] A science fiction graphic novel is a full-length book that uses images necessarily to depict a story of a fictional nature that explores different/future time lines, theoretical societies, technology and/or both.

[ citation needed ] The first recorded usage of the term, according to the Oxford English Dictionary (OED), is in 1978 by Will Eisner : "A contract with God: and other tenement stories... A graphic novel", though graphic novels existed for years prior. While predating the term,  a graphic novel based on science fiction, Astro Boy , by Osamu Tezuka , was published in 1951, starring a childlike robot Astro Boy who was activated in the year 2003.

List of science fiction comic books [ edit ] The following list is based on A complete history of American comic books .

[ 6 ] Planet Comics (1940) Weird Fantasy (1950) Weird Science (1950) Strange Adventures (1950) Strange Worlds (1950) Flying Saucers (1950) Mystery in Space (1951) House of Mystery (1951) Weird Thrillers (1951) Earthman on Venus (1951) Space Detective (1951) Space Adventures (1952) Space Busters (1952) Space Western Comics (1952) Mysteries and Unexplored Words (1956) Alarming Tales (1957) Outer Space (1958) Race for the Moon (1958) Tales to Astonish (1959) Space Man (1962) Outer Limits (1964) The Trigan Empire (1965) Star Trek (1967) Outer Space (1968) UFO Flying Saucers (1968) Planet of the Apes (1968) Worlds Unknown (1973) Unknown Worlds of Science Fiction (1975) Space: 1999 (1975) Doomsday + 1 (1975) Star Reach (1975) Imagine (1976) Starstream (1976) 2001: A Space Odyssey (1976) 2000 AD (1977) Heavy Metal (1977) Star Wars (1977) Space War (1978) Micronauts (1979) Starblazer (1979) Alien Encounters (1981) Alien Worlds (1985) Men in Black (1990) References [ edit ] ^ Veach, Michael (2010-09-28).

"Mr. Skygack, From Mars" . The Filson Historical Society . Retrieved 16 September 2013 .

^ Holmes! (2012-08-31).

"MR. SKYGACK: SCI-FI COMICS START HERE!" . Barnacle Press . Retrieved 16 September 2013 .

^ Roberts, Garyn G. (2001). "Buck Rogers". In Browne, Ray B.; Browne, Pat (eds.).

The Guide To United States Popular Culture . Bowling Green, Ohio: Bowling Green State University Popular Press. p. 120.

ISBN 978-0-87972-821-2 .

^ Wade, John. The Golden Age of Science Fiction. Pen & Sword History, 2019.

^ Gravett, Paul (2005).

"Great British Comics: Nostalgia Ain't What It Used To Be" .

Comics International . Archived from the original on 20 February 2009.

Action 's topicality and extreme images sparked a media furore and distributor crackdown, but from its ashes arose 2000AD , the same themes transposed into the 'fantasy' future of science fiction but as dark and disturbing as ever.

^ Rhoades, Shirrel (2008).

A complete history of American comic books . New York. pp.

50– 51.

ISBN 9781433101076 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Further reading [ edit ] Benton, Mike (1992).

Science Fiction Comics: The Illustrated History . Taylor History of Comics. Taylor Publishing. p. 153.

ISBN 0-87833-789-X .

External links [ edit ] Comics on The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction v t e Comics Glossary of comics terminology Formats Comic book Ashcan comic Limited series One-shot Ongoing series Minicomic Trade paperback Comic strip Comic strip formats Daily comic strip Lianhuanhua Sunday comics Topper Yonkoma Digital comics Mobile comic Webcomic Webtoon Gag cartoon Graphic novel Political cartoon Techniques Film comic Motion comic Photo comics Silent comics Text comics Creators Cartoonists list Colorists Editors Inkers Letterers Publishing companies Writers By format Editorial list Minicomics Webcomics By country American Jewish American Australian Canadian Cuban Filipino Japanese (manga) Macedonian Other Female comics creators list History Years in comics Comics historiography American Golden Age Silver Age Bronze Age Modern Age events Japanese (manga) Webcomics Comics studies and narratology Genres Abstract Adult Alternative Ambiguous Anthropomorphic Autobiographical Celebrity Comics in education Comics journalism Comics poetry Crime Dystopian Erotic Fantasy list Gekiga Graphic medicine Horror Non-fiction Romance list Science fiction Superhero Teen humor Tijuana bible Underground War Western Wrestling Tropes Antihero Decompression Talking animals Masking Rogue Superhero Supervillain Widescreen comics Themes Ethnic stereotypes Feminist Gender and webcomics LGBT American mainstream Portrayal of black people African characters Portrayal of women The Hawkeye Initiative Women in Refrigerators By country Africa South Africa Americas Argentina Brazil Canada Quebec Mexico United States list Asia China and Taiwan list Hong Kong India list Japan lists Korea list Malaysia Pakistan Philippines list Thailand Turkey Vietnam Europe Czech Republic Croatia France and Belgium list Belgium Germany Hungary Ireland Italy list Netherlands Poland Portugal Serbia Spain list United Kingdom Wales Oceania Australia Lists By format Comic books Comic strips Manga magazines Webcomics By source Based on fiction Based on films Based on television programs Based on video games Other lists Awards Best-selling comic series manga manga magazines Comic books on CD/DVD Comics and comic strips made into feature films Comics solicited but never published Limited series Collections and museums Belgian Comic Strip Center Billy Ireland Cartoon Library & Museum National Cartoon Museum British Cartoon Archive Caricature & Cartoon Museum Basel Cartoon Art Museum The Cartoon Museum Fred Waring's Cartoon Collection Gibiteca Antonio Gobbo Michigan State University Comic Art Collection Museum of Comic and Cartoon Art ToonSeum Words & Pictures Museum Schools Center for Cartoon Studies The Kubert School Organizations Professional Academy of Comic Book Arts Association of Canadian Cartoonists Association of Comics Magazine Publishers Australian Cartoonists' Association Comic Art Professional Society National Cartoonists Society Samahang Kartunista ng Pilipinas Critical and academic Association des Critiques et des journalistes de Bande Dessinée Canadian Comic Book Creator Awards Association Canadian Society for the Study of Comics Comic & Fantasy Art Amateur Press Association Comics Studies Society Sequart Organization Svenska Serieakademien Charitable and outreach Academy of Comic-Book Fans and Collectors British Amateur Press Association (comics) Club des bandes dessinées Comic Book Legal Defense Fund Comic Legends Legal Defense Fund Finnish Comics Society Friends of Lulu The Hero Initiative Xeric Foundation Comics portal Category v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Science_fiction_comics&oldid=1289938095 " Categories : Science fiction comics Comics genres Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles needing cleanup from November 2016 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from November 2016 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from November 2016 Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2016 This page was last edited on 11 May 2025, at 20:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Science fiction comics 7 languages Add topic

