Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 Notable examples 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Syncline 43 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Български Boarisch Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Synform ) Structural geology term for a fold with younger layers closer to the center of the structure A syncline is a fold of rocks with younger rock layers closer to the center of the structure, whereas an anticline is the inverse of a syncline.

In structural geology , a syncline is a fold with younger layers closer to the center of the structure, whereas an anticline is the inverse of a syncline.   A synclinorium (plural synclinoriums or synclinoria ) is a large syncline with superimposed smaller folds.

[ 1 ] Synclines are typically a downward fold ( synform ), termed a synformal syncline (i.e. a trough), but synclines that point upwards can be found when strata have been overturned and folded (an antiformal syncline).

Characteristics [ edit ] On a geologic map, synclines are recognized as a sequence of rock layers , with the youngest at the fold's center or hinge and with a reverse sequence of the same rock layers on the opposite side of the hinge.  If the fold pattern is circular or elongate, the structure is a basin .  Folds typically form during crustal deformation as the result of compression that accompanies orogenic mountain building.

Notable examples [ edit ] Powder River Basin , Wyoming , US Sideling Hill roadcut along Interstate 68 in western Maryland , US, where the Rockwell Formation and overlying Purslane Sandstone are exposed Forêt de Saou syncline in Saou , France Southland Syncline in the southeastern corner of the South Island of New Zealand, including The Catlins and the Hokonui Hills Strathmore Syncline, Scotland Wilpena Pound , Flinders Ranges , South Australia Fort Valley , Shenandoah County, Virginia Hondo Syncline in the Picuris Mountains of New Mexico , an example of an overturned syncline [ 2 ] Afikpo syncline, Nigeria Gallery [ edit ] Syncline exposed in Sideling Hill roadcut Snow-dusted syncline in Provo Canyon , Utah Road cut near Fort Davis, Texas showing a syncline Rainbow Basin Syncline in the Barstow Formation near Barstow, California Syncline in the lower parking lot of Calico Ghost Town ; the ductile folding is at the base and the brittle is above.

Synclinal fold in Silurian Wills Creek Formation or Bloomsburg Formation at Roundtop Hill (Maryland) East wall of Bear Valley Strip Mine , near Shamokin, Pennsylvania Syncline in Navajo Sandstone , Upheaval Dome , Canyonlands National Park , Utah Satellite view of part of New Zealand's Southland Syncline , showing parallel folds running northwest–southeast Wilpena Pound , a synclinal basin in the Flinders Ranges of South Australia See also [ edit ] Anticline Homocline Monocline Ridge-and-Valley Appalachians Structural basin References [ edit ] ^ Synclinorium. (2008). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved May 03, 2008, from Encyclopædia Britannica Online: http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/578375/synclinorium ^ Bauer, Paul W.; Williams, Michael L. (August 1989).

"Stratigraphic nomenclature ol proterozoic rocks, northern New Mexico-revisions, redefinitions, and formalization" (PDF) .

New Mexico Geology .

11 (3): 45– 52.

doi : 10.58799/NMG-v11n3.45 . Retrieved 15 April 2020 .

v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category This article about structural geology is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Syncline&oldid=1273092588 " Categories : Structural geology Structural geology stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 31 January 2025, at 17:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Syncline 43 languages Add topic

