Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Background 3 Economic theory Toggle Economic theory subsection 3.1 Private property 3.2 Redistribution of wealth and productive assets 3.3 Guild system 3.4 Banks 4 Social theory Toggle Social theory subsection 4.1 Human family 4.2 Subsidiarity 4.3 Social security 5 Politics 6 Influence Toggle Influence subsection 6.1 E. F. Schumacher 6.2 Mondragon Corporation 6.3 Guild of St Joseph and St Dominic 6.4 Big Society 7 List of distributist parties Toggle List of distributist parties subsection 7.1 Current 7.2 Historical 8 Notable distributists Toggle Notable distributists subsection 8.1 Historical 8.2 Contemporary 9 Key texts 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Distributism 29 languages العربية Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic theory promoting local control "Distributivism" redirects here. For the algebraic concept, see Distributivity .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Distributism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Christian democracy Principles Catholic social teaching Christian corporatism Christian ethics Christian humanism Common good Communitarianism Conservatism Christian Compassionate Liberal Progressive Social Consistent life ethic Cultural mandate Culture of life Dignity of labor Distributism Economic progressivism Familialism Human dignity Just war theory Liberalism Christian Catholicism Conservative Ordo Social Mixed economy Multiculturalism Neo-Calvinism Neo-Thomism Option for the poor Pan-European identity Person Dignity Theory Popularism Public morality Religious liberty Friendly separation of church and state Religious pluralism Social Gospel Social justice Social market economy Solidarity Sphere sovereignty Stewardship Environmentalism Environmental protection Subsidiarity in Catholicism Welfare State Philosophers Arizmendiarrieta Baader Barth Belloc Benedict XV Berggrav Blond Bonhoeffer Brague Cardijn Chesterton Day Dooyeweerd Escrivá Gebhardt Gilson Görres Groen Guardini Habsburg John XXIII John Paul II Ketteler De Koninck Korfanty Lamennais Leo XIII Leo XIV Lewis Manning Maritain Merton Milani Mounier Müller-Armack Murray Nell-Breuning Newman Ozanam Paul VI Pesch Pieper Pius XI Pottier Röpke Sheen Spaemann Stein Stomma Sturzo Tawney Tischner Toniolo Vogelsang Weigel Williams Politicians Adenauer Andreotti Antall Aznar Bayrou Beel Bidault Biden Bondevik Busch Buzek Caldera Clerides Cosgrave Daul De Gasperi Dehaene Donnelly Dzurinda Erhard Erzberger Fenech Adami Field Frei Gemayel Groen Haller Joseph Juncker Kaas Ketteler Klausener Kohl Komorowski Korfanty Kramp-Karrenbauer Kurz Kuyper Lacalle Pou Laschet Letta Leuger Lipinski Lubbers Martens Mattarella Mazowiecki Merkel Merz Metsola Mikołajczyk Moro Nile Quadros Pastrana Peterle Pethrus Popiel Portas Pöttering Prodi Raab Schäffer Schuman Schüssel Seipel Söder Stegerwald Stomma Strauss Sturzo Tajani Tindemans Vogelsang von der Leyen Wałęsa Weber Werner Windthorst Parties American Solidarity Party Austrian People's Party Christian Democracy Christian Democratic Appeal Christian Democratic and Flemish Christian Democratic Party Christian Democratic Party of Uruguay Christian Democratic People's Party Christian-Democratic Rebirth Party Christian Democratic Union of Germany Christian Social People's Party Christian Social Union in Bavaria Christian Union Centre Party Centrists for Europe Civic Platform Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Rally Democrats Fianna Fáil Fine Gael Kataeb Party National Action Party National Party Nationalist Party New Democracy Patriotic Union People's Party Polish People's Party Popular Republican Movement Prohibition Party VMRO-DPMNE Organizations Catholic Action Centrist Democrat International Christian Democrat Organization of America European People's Party European Christian Political Party Konrad Adenauer Foundation Conservative Christian Fellowship Centre for European Studies European Ideas Network Schuman Foundation Center for Public Justice Paneuropean Union World Movement of Christian Workers SIPDIC Documents Rerum novarum Populorum progressio Graves de communi re Quadragesimo anno Laborem exercens Sollicitudo rei socialis Centesimus annus Laudato si' Related topics Catholic Church and politics Christian left Christian anarchism Christian communism Christian socialism Christian right Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Theoconservatism Clerical philosophers Ethical socialism Integralism Illiberal democracy Progressive Christianity Religious democracy Buddhist Islamic Jewish Mormon Social democracy Traditionalist Catholicism Christianity portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Catholic social teaching Emblem of the Holy See Overview Social teachings of the papacy Distributism Solidarity Subsidiarity Tranquillitas ordinis Pope Leo XIII Rerum novarum Pope Pius XI Divini Redemptoris Mit brennender Sorge Non abbiamo bisogno Quadragesimo anno Pope Pius XII Social teachings Pope John XXIII Mater et magistra Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Dignitatis humanae Gaudium et spes Pope Paul VI Octogesima adveniens Populorum progressio Pope John Paul II Laborem exercens Sollicitudo rei socialis Centesimus annus Evangelium vitae Pope Benedict XVI Caritas in veritate Pope Francis Evangelii gaudium Laudato si' Fratelli tutti Other figures Gaspard Mermillod René de La Tour du Pin Heinrich Pesch Dorothy Day Óscar Romero Joseph Bernardin Hilaire Belloc G. K. Chesterton Catholic Church portal v t e Part of the Politics series Basic forms of government List of forms · List of countries Source of power Democracy ( rule by many ) Demarchy Direct Economic Liberal Representative Social Socialist Others Oligarchy (rule by few) Anocracy Aristocracy Broligarchy Gerontocracy Kleptocracy Kritarchy Meritocracy Noocracy Particracy Plutocracy Stratocracy Technocracy Theocracy Autocracy ( rule by one ) Despotism Dictatorship Military dictatorship Tyranny Anarchy (rule by none) Anarchism Free association Stateless Power ideology Monarchy Republic (socio-political ideologies) Absolute Communist Constitutional Directorial Legalist Parliamentary Presidential Semi-presidential Authoritarian Libertarian (socio-economic ideologies) Anarchism Colonialism Communism Despotism Distributism Fascism Feudalism Islamism Socialism Totalitarianism Tribalism Religious Secular State religion Secular state Separation of church and state State atheism Global Local (geo-cultural ideologies) City-state Intergovernmental organisation National government World government Nationalism Internationalism Globalism Power structure Unitarism Unitary state Empire Principality Client state Associated state Dependent territory Dominion Protectorate Puppet state Puppet monarch Satellite state Self-governing colony Tributary state Buffer state Vassal state Viceroyalty Federalism Confederation Devolution Federation Superstate Supranational union International relations Small power Middle power Regional power Emerging power Great power Superpower Related Administrative division Democracy indices Democratic transition Autocratization Democratisation Hybrid regimes Politics portal v t e Distributism is an economic theory asserting that the world's productive assets should be widely owned rather than concentrated.

[ 1 ] Developed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, distributism was based upon Catholic social teaching principles, especially those of Pope Leo XIII in his encyclical Rerum novarum (1891) and Pope Pius XI in Quadragesimo anno (1931).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] It has influenced Anglo Christian Democratic movements, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and has been recognized as one of many influences on the social market economy .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Distributism views laissez-faire capitalism and state socialism as equally flawed and exploitative, due to their extreme concentration of ownership. Instead, it favours small independent craftsmen and producers; or, if that is not possible, economic mechanisms such as cooperatives and member-owned mutual organisations , as well as small to medium enterprises and vigorous anti-trust laws to restrain or eliminate overweening economic power.

Christian democratic political parties such as the American Solidarity Party have advocated distributism alongside social market economy in their economic policies and party platform.

[ 5 ] Overview [ edit ] According to distributists, the right to property is a fundamental right, [ 9 ] and the means of production should be spread as widely as possible rather than being centralised under the control of the state ( statocracy ), a few individuals ( plutocracy ), or corporations ( corporatocracy ). Therefore, distributism advocates a society marked by widespread property ownership.

[ 1 ] Cooperative economist Race Mathews argues that such a system is key to creating a just social order .

[ 10 ] Distributism has often been described in opposition to both laissez-faire capitalism and state socialism [ 11 ] [ 12 ] which distributists see as equally flawed and exploitative.

[ 13 ] Furthermore, some distributists argue that state capitalism and state socialism are the logical conclusion of capitalism as capitalism's concentrated powers eventually capture the state.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Thomas Storck argues: "Both socialism and capitalism are products of the European Enlightenment and are thus modernising and anti-traditional forces. In contrast, distributism seeks to subordinate economic activity to human life as a whole, to our spiritual life, our intellectual life, our family life." [ 16 ] A few distributists, including Dorothy Day , [ 17 ] were influenced by the economic ideas of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and his mutualist economic theory.

[ 18 ] The lesser-known anarchist branch of distributism of Day and the Catholic Worker Movement can be considered a form of free-market libertarian socialism due to their opposition to state capitalism and state socialism.

[ 19 ] Some have seen it more as an aspiration, successfully realised in the short term by the commitment to the principles of subsidiarity and solidarity (built into financially independent local cooperatives and small family businesses ). However, proponents also cite such periods as the Middle Ages as examples of the long-term historical viability of distributism.

[ 20 ] Particularly influential in the development of distributist theory were Catholic authors G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc , [ 13 ] two of distributism's earliest and strongest proponents.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Background [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The mid-to-late 19th century witnessed an increase in the popularity of political Catholicism across Europe .

[ 24 ] According to historian Michael A. Riff, a common feature of these movements was opposition to secularism , capitalism, and socialism.

[ 22 ] In 1891 Pope Leo XIII promulgated Rerum novarum , in which he addressed the "misery and wretchedness pressing so unjustly on the majority of the working class" and spoke of how "a small number of very rich men" had been able to "lay upon the teeming masses of the laboring poor a yoke little better than that of slavery itself".

[ 25 ] Affirmed in the encyclical was the right of all men to own property, [ 26 ] the necessity of a system that allowed "as many as possible of the people to become owners", [ 27 ] the duty of employers to provide safe working conditions [ 28 ] and sufficient wages, [ 29 ] and the right of workers to unionise .

[ 30 ] Common and government property ownership was expressly dismissed as a means of helping the poor.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Around the start of the 20th century, G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc drew together the disparate experiences of the various cooperatives and friendly societies in Northern England, Ireland, and Northern Europe into a coherent political theory which specifically advocated widespread private ownership of housing and control of industry through owner-operated small businesses and worker-controlled cooperatives. In the United States in the 1930s, distributism was treated in numerous essays by Chesterton, Belloc and others in The American Review , published and edited by Seward Collins . Pivotal among Belloc's and Chesterton's other works regarding distributism are The Servile State [ 33 ] and Outline of Sanity .

[ 34 ] Economic theory [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e Private property [ edit ] Self-portrait of Chesterton based on the distributist slogan " Three acres and a cow " In Rerum novarum , Leo XIII states that people are likely to work harder and with greater commitment if they possess the land on which they labour, which in turn will benefit them and their families as workers will be able to provide for themselves and their household. He puts forward the idea that when men have the opportunity to possess property and work on it, they will "learn to love the very soil which yields in response to the labor of their hands, not only food to eat, but an abundance of the good things for themselves and those that are dear to them".

[ 35 ] He also states that owning property is beneficial for a person and his family and is, in fact, a right due to God having "given the earth for the use and enjoyment of the whole human race".

[ 36 ] G. K. Chesterton presents similar views in his 1910 book, What's Wrong with the World . Chesterton believes that whilst God has limitless capabilities, man has limited abilities in terms of creation. Therefore, man is entitled to own property and treat it as he sees fit, stating: "Property is merely the art of the democracy. It means that every man should have something that he can shape in his own image, as he is shaped in the image of heaven. But because he is not God, but only a graven image of God, his self-expression must deal with limits; properly with limits that are strict and even small." [ 37 ] According to Belloc, the distributive state (the state which has implemented distributism) contains "an agglomeration of families of varying wealth, but by far the greater number of owners of the means of production". This broader distribution does not extend to all property but only to productive property; that is, that property which produces wealth, namely, the things needed for man to survive. It includes land, tools, and so on.

[ 38 ] Distributism allows society to have public goods such as parks and transit systems. Distributists accept that wage labour will remain a small part of the economy, with small business owners hiring employees, usually young, inexperienced people.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Redistribution of wealth and productive assets [ edit ] Distributism requires either direct or indirect distribution of the means of production (productive assets)⁠—in some ideological circles including the redistribution of wealth —to a wide portion of society instead of concentrating it in the hands of a minority of wealthy elites (as seen in its criticism of certain varieties of capitalism ) or the hands of the state (as seen in its criticism of certain varieties of communism and socialism ).

[ 1 ] [ 9 ] More capitalist-oriented supporters support distributism-influenced social capitalism (also known as a social market economy) , [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] while more socialist-oriented supporters support distributism-influenced libertarian socialism .

[ 44 ] Examples of methods of distributism include direct productive property redistribution, taxation of excessive property ownership, and small-business subsidization.

[ 45 ] Guild system [ edit ] See also: Gremialismo Distributists advocate in favour of the return of a guild system to help regulate industries to promote moral standards of professional conduct and economic equality among members of a guild. Such moral standards of professional conduct would typically focus on business conduct, working conditions and other issues in relation to industry specific matters such as workplace training standards.

[ 46 ] Banks [ edit ] Distributism favours cooperative and mutual banking institutions such as credit unions, building societies and mutual banks. This is considered to be the preferred alternative to private banks .

[ 47 ] Social theory [ edit ] Human family [ edit ] G. K. Chesterton considered one's home and family the centrepiece of society. He recognized the family unit and home as centrepieces of living and believed that every man should have his property and home to enable him to raise and support his family. Distributists recognize that strengthening and protecting the family requires that society be nurturing.

[ 48 ] Subsidiarity [ edit ] Main article: Subsidiarity Distributism puts great emphasis on the principle of subsidiarity. This principle holds that no larger unit (whether social, economic, or political) should perform a function that a smaller unit can perform. In Quadragesimo anno , Pope Pius XI provided the classical statement of the principle: "Just as it is gravely wrong to take from individuals what they can accomplish by their own initiative and industry and give it to the community, so also it is an injustice and at the same time a grave evil and disturbance of right order to assign to a greater and higher association what lesser and subordinate organizations can do".

[ 49 ] Social security [ edit ] The Democratic Labour Party of Australia espouses distributism and does not hold the view of favouring the elimination of social security who, for instance, wish to "[r]aise the level of student income support payments to the Henderson poverty line".

[ 50 ] The American Solidarity Party has a platform of favouring an adequate social security system, stating: "We advocate for social safety nets that adequately provide for the material needs of the most vulnerable in society".

[ 51 ] Politics [ edit ] Distributism's relation to socialism and capitalism William Cobbett 's social views influenced G. K. Chesterton .

The position of distributists, when compared to other political philosophies, is somewhat paradoxical and complicated (see triangulation ). Firmly entrenched in an organic but very English Catholicism , advocating culturally traditional and agrarian values, directly challenging the precepts of Whig history —Belloc was nonetheless an MP for the Liberal Party, and Chesterton once stated, "As much as I ever did, more than I ever did, I believe in Liberalism. But there was a rosy time of innocence when I believed in Liberals".

[ 52 ] Distributism does not favour one political order over another (political accidentalism). While some distributists such as Dorothy Day have been anarchists , it should be remembered that most Chestertonian distributists are opposed to the mere concept of anarchism. Chesterton thought that distributism would benefit from the discipline that theoretical analysis imposes and that distributism is best seen as a widely encompassing concept inside of which any number of interpretations and perspectives can fit. This concept should fit a political system broadly characterized by widespread ownership of productive property.

[ 53 ] In the United States, the American Solidarity Party generally adheres to Distributist principles as its economic model.

Ross Douthat and Reihan Salam view their Grand New Party , a roadmap for revising the Republican Party in the United States , as "a book written in the distributist tradition".

[ 54 ] The Brazilian political party, Humanist Party of Solidarity , was a distributist party, alongside the National Distributist Party in England, [ 55 ] and the Democratic Labour Party in Australia.

In the first round of the 2024 Romanian presidential election , candidate Călin Georgescu , a independent candidate who advocates for a system based on distributism and sovereigntism received 23% of votes and qualified for the second round.

[ 56 ] Influence [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Toryism Principles Agrarianism Classicism Counterrevolution High Church Anglicanism High culture Interventionism Loyalism Monarchism Noblesse oblige Royalism Traditionalism Unionism Variants Blue High Pink Red Socialist General topics Cavaliers Cavalier Parliament Château Clique Conservative corporatism Divine right of kings Family Compact Jacobitism Oxford Movement Powellism Intellectuals Chesterton Bolingbroke Filmer Grant Johnson L'Estrange Scott Politicians Baldwin Bolingbroke Bute Churchill Clarendon Powell Rochester Wellington Related topics Carlism Chouans Cristeros Conservatism Distributism Legitimism Loyalism Miguelism Reactionism Spanish American royalism Sanfedismo Traditionalist conservatism Ultra-Tories Vendéens Viva Maria Veronese Easter Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e E. F. Schumacher [ edit ] Distributism is known to have influenced the economist E. F. Schumacher , [ 57 ] a convert to Catholicism.

[ 58 ] Mondragon Corporation [ edit ] The Mondragon Corporation , based in the Basque Country in a region of Spain and France, was founded by a Catholic priest, Father José María Arizmendiarrieta , who seems to have been influenced by the same Catholic social and economic teachings that inspired Belloc, Chesterton, Father Vincent McNabb , and the other founders of distributism.

[ 59 ] Guild of St Joseph and St Dominic [ edit ] Distributist ideas were put into practice by The Guild of St Joseph and St Dominic , a group of artists and craftsmen who established a community in Ditchling , Sussex, England, in 1920, with the motto "Men rich in virtue studying beautifulness living in peace in their houses". The guild sought to recreate an idealised medieval lifestyle in the manner of the Arts and Crafts Movement . It survived for almost 70 years until 1989.

Big Society [ edit ] The Big Society was the flagship policy idea of the 2010 UK Conservative Party general election manifesto . Some distributists claim that the rhetorical marketing of this policy was influenced by aphorisms of the distributist ideology and promotes distributism.

[ 60 ] It purportedly formed a part of the legislative programme of the Conservative – Liberal Democrat Coalition Agreement .

[ 61 ] List of distributist parties [ edit ] Current [ edit ] Australia – Democratic Labour Party [ 62 ] Romania – Pirate Party Romania United Kingdom – National Distributist Party , [ 63 ] British National Party , [ 64 ] National Front [ 65 ] United States – American Solidarity Party [ 66 ] Mexico - Nationalist Front of Mexico Historical [ edit ] United Kingdom – Distributist League (1926–1940), Third Way (1990–2006) Brazil – Humanist Party of Solidarity (1995–2019) Notable distributists [ edit ] Historical [ edit ] Herbert Agar Hilaire Belloc L. Brent Bozell Jr.

Charles Coughlin Cecil Chesterton G. K. Chesterton Seward Collins Gustavo Corção [ 67 ] Dorothy Day [ 68 ] Adam Doboszyński Horacio de la Costa J. P. de Fonseka Eric Gill Douglas Hyde Saunders Lewis Peter Maurin [ 69 ] Vincent McNabb Arthur Penty Hilary Pepler Óscar Romero Dorothy L. Sayers William Purcell Witcutt Contemporary [ edit ] Dale Ahlquist [ 70 ] Albert Bikaj [ 71 ] Phillip Blond [ 72 ] Allan C. Carlson David W. Cooney [ 73 ] Charles A. Coulombe Sean Domencic [ 74 ] Călin Georgescu [ 75 ] Bill Kauffman Race Mathews John C. Médaille John Papworth Joseph Pearce Juan Manuel de Prada [ es ; fr ; it ; pt ] [ 76 ] Douglas Rushkoff [ 77 ] John Sharpe Richard Williamson [ 78 ] Key texts [ edit ] Rerum novarum (1891) , papal encyclical by Pope Leo XIII.

Quadragesimo anno (1931) , papal encyclical by Pope Pius XI.

Centesimus Annus (1991) , papal encyclical by Pope John Paul II.

Evangelii gaudium (2013) , apostolic exhortation by Pope Francis.

What's Wrong with the World (1910) by G. K. Chesterton ISBN 0-89870-489-8 – eText .

The Outline of Sanity (1927) by G. K. Chesterton.

Utopia of Usurers (1917) by G. K. Chesterton.

The Servile State (1912) by Hilaire Belloc.

An Essay on The Restoration of Property (1936) by Hilaire Belloc ISBN 0-9714894-4-0 .

Jobs of Our Own (1999) by Race Mathews ISBN 978-1871204179 .

See also [ edit ] Related concepts Agrarianism – Philosophy supporting rural society Bioregionalism – Ecological philosophy Catholic social teaching – Social doctrine Distributed economy – Concept in network theory Distributive justice – Concept relating to distribution of rewards to group members Localism (politics) – Political philosophy Market socialism – Economic system based on social ownership of the means of production in a market economy Mutual aid (organization theory) – Voluntary exchange of resources and services for mutual benefit Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Predistribution – Fiscal policy idea; holds that government should prevent rather than remedy inequalities Subsidiarity – Principle of social organization Similar positions Anarcho-syndicalism – Anarchist organisational model for trade unions Jeffersonian democracy – American political persuasion of the 1790s until the 1820s Christian democracy – Christian socioeconomic model Gandhian economics – Economic system of Mahatma Gandhi Georgism – Economic philosophy centred on common ownership of land Guild socialism – Political labor movement Mutualism (economic theory) – Anarchist school of thought and socialist economic theory Non-conformists of the 1930s – Avantgarde movement during the inter-war period in France Ownership society – Slogan Pages displaying short descriptions with no spaces Property-owning democracy – Political economy system where state intervention allows fair possession distribution Social Credit – Distributive economic theory Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Traditionalist conservatism – Political ideology advocating traditional morals and social order Ujamaa – Socialist system in 1960s Tanzania References [ edit ] ^ a b c Zwick, Mark and Louise (2004).

The Catholic Worker Movement: Intellectual and Spiritual Origins .

Paulist Press . p. 156.

ISBN 978-0-8091-4315-3 ^ Coulter, Michael (2007).

Encyclopedia of Catholic Social Thought, Social Science and Social Policy .

Scarecrow Press . p. 85.

ISBN 978-0-8108-5906-7 ^ McConkey, Dale; Lawler, Peter (2003).

Faith, Morality, and Civil Society .

Lexington Books . p. 50.

ISBN 978-0-7391-0483-5 ^ Allitt, Patrick (2000).

Catholic Converts: British and American Intellectuals Turn to Rome .

Cornell University Press . p. 206.

ISBN 978-0-8014-8663-0 ^ a b "Platform" . American Solidarity Party. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021 . Retrieved 14 October 2020 .

The American Solidarity Party believes that political economy (economics) is a branch of political ethics, and therefore rejects models of economic behavior that undermine human dignity with greed and naked self-interest. We advocate for an economic system which focuses on creating a society of wide-spread ownership (sometimes referred to as 'distributism') rather than having the effect of degrading the human person as a cog in the machine.

^ Caldecott, Stratford (1991).

"Distributism and Christian Democracy" .

The Chesterton Review .

17 (1): 141– 142.

doi : 10.5840/chesterton199117151 .

^ Belloc, Hillarie (1982). "The Restoration of Property". In Wünsche, Horst Friedrich; Stützel, Wolfgang; Watrin, Christian; Willgerodt, Hans; Hohmann, Karl (eds.).

Standard Texts on the Social Market Economy: Two Centuries of Discussion . Ludwif-Ehard-Stiftung. pp.

331– 334.

^ Corrin, Jay P. (1988).

"The Neo-Distributism of Friedrich A. Hayek and Wilhelm Röpke" .

Thought .

63 (251): 397– 412.

doi : 10.5840/thought198863429 .

^ a b Shiach, Morag (2004).

Modernism, Labour and Selfhood in British Literature and Culture, 1890–1930 .

Cambridge University Press . p. 224.

ISBN 978-0-521-83459-9 ^ Gibson-Graham, J.K. (2006).

A Postcapitalist Politics .

University of Minnesota Press . p. 224.

ISBN 978-0-8166-4804-7 .

^ Boyle, David; Simms, Andrew (2009).

The New Economics .

Routledge . p. 20.

ISBN 978-1-84407-675-8 ^ Novak, Michael; Younkins, Edward W. (2001).

Three in One: Essays on Democratic Capitalism, 1976–2000 .

Rowman and Littlefield . p. 152.

ISBN 978-0-7425-1171-2 ^ a b Prentiss, Craig R. (2008).

Debating God's Economy: Social Justice in America on the Eve of Vatican II .

Penn State University Press . p. 77.

ISBN 978-0-271-03341-9 ^ "Why Isn't Romania Rich?" .

Front Porch Republic . 5 December 2012 . Retrieved 8 August 2017 .

^ "Distributism as an equalitarian economic policy" .

Humanist Society of New South Wales Inc . Retrieved 8 August 2017 .

^ Storck, Thomas. "Capitalism and Distributism: two systems at war," in Beyond Capitalism & Socialism . Tobias J. Lanz, ed. IHS Press, 2008. p. 75 ^ Dorothy, Day.

On Pilgrimage . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1999. p. 40.

^ McKay, Iain.

An Anarchist FAQ Volume One . AK Press, 2007. p. 75 ^ McKay, Iain.

An Anarchist FAQ Volume One . AK Press, 2007. p. 23 ^ Hilaire Belloc, "The Servile Institution Dissolved," The Servile State , (1913; reprint, Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund, 1977), 71–83.

^ Fitzgerald, Ross et al. (2003).

The Pope's Battalions: Santamaria, Catholicism and the Labor Split .

University of Queensland Press . p. 21.

ISBN 978-0-7022-3389-0 ^ a b Riff, Michael A. (1990).

Dictionary of Modern Political Ideologies .

Manchester University Press . p. 35.

ISBN 978-0-7190-3289-9 ^ Schulz, Jr., William Patric (2017).

Dorothy Day's Distributism and Her Vision for Catholic Politics (PhD thesis).

Louisiana State University .

^ Adams, Ian (1993).

Political Ideology Today . Manchester University Press. pp. 59–60.

ISBN 978-0-7190-3347-6 ^ Leo XIII, Rerum novarum , 3.

^ Leo XIII, Rerum novarum , 6.

^ Leo XIII, Rerum novarum , 46.

^ Leo XIII, Rerum novarum , 42.

^ Leo XIII, Rerum novarum , 45.

^ Leo XIII, Rerum novarum , 49.

^ Leo XIII, Rerum novarum , 4.

^ Leo XIII, Rerum novarum , 15.

^ Hilaire Belloc, The Servile State , The Liberty Fund, originally published 1913.

^ G. K. Chesterton, The Outline of Sanity , IHS Press, 2002, originally published 1927.

^ Pope Leo XIII, Rerum novarum : 47, 1891 ^ Pope Leo XIII, Rerum novarum :  8, 1891.

^ Chesterton, Gilbert Keith, What's Wrong with the World (1920), p. 59.

^ Hilaire Belloc, The Servile State , 1913.

^ Baccelli, Zebulon.

"Practical Policies for a Distributist Economy: Part Two" .

imagodeipolitics.org . Archived from the original on 25 December 2019 . Retrieved 25 December 2019 .

^ Aleman, Richard.

"INDUSTRY: THE DISTRIBUTIST SOLUTION" .

distributistreview.com . Retrieved 25 December 2019 .

^ "Platform" .

American Solidarity Party . Retrieved 12 April 2018 .

^ "Christian Democracy" .

American Solidarity Party . Archived from the original on 16 November 2018 . Retrieved 18 July 2018 .

^ "Did you know there's a third party based on Catholic teaching?" .

Catholic News Agency . 12 October 2016 . Retrieved 1 January 2020 .

We believe in the economic concept of distributism as taught by GK Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc.

^ McKay, Iain.

An Anarchist FAQ: AFAQ Volume One.

AK Press: Oakland, CA. (2008) pp 22.

^ "A Misunderstanding About Method" .

Society of Gilbert Keith Chesterton . 20 November 2010 . Retrieved 10 May 2022 .

^ Penty, Arthur (21 October 2019).

Distributism: A Manifesto . The Real Press.

ISBN 9781912119820 .

^ Staff, T. S. I. (30 August 2017).

"G K CHESTERTON, HILAIRE BELLOC AND DISTRIBUTISM DOWN UNDER" .

The Sydney Institute . Retrieved 27 May 2023 .

^ "G.K. Chesterton's Distributism" .

The Distributist Review . Retrieved 23 March 2022 .

^ Pope Pius XI, Quadragesimo anno , 1931.

^ Cath (11 September 2015).

"Policy: Students" . Democratic Labour Party. Archived from the original on 24 February 2019 . Retrieved 23 February 2019 .

^ "Solidarity Party Platform" . American Solidarity Party. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021 . Retrieved 1 January 2020 .

^ Chesterton, G. K. (2008).

Orthodoxy . BiblioBazaar. p. 49.

ISBN 978-0-554-33475-2 .

^ G. K. Chesterton, The Outline of Sanity (Norfolk, Va.: IHS Press, 2001), p. 90 ^ Ross Douthat (27 March 2013).

"Twitter post" .

^ "View registration – The Electoral Commission" .

search.electoralcommission.org.uk .

^ "Călin Georgescu și Elena Lasconi, în turul doi al alegerilor prezidenţiale 2024" . 25 November 2024.

^ Opdebeeck, Hendrik, ed. Frontiers of Business Ethics, Volume 11 : Responsible Economics : E. F. Schumacher and His Legacy for the 21st Century. Oxford, GBR: Peter Lang AG, 2013. p. 12.

^ Phillips, Leigh (30 October 2015).

Austerity Ecology & the Collapse-Porn Addicts: A Defence Of Growth, Progress, Industry And Stuff . John Hunt Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-78279-961-0 .

^ Mathews, Race.

Jobs of Our Own: Building a Stakeholder Society.

Fernwood Publishing. 1999.

^ A Potential Step in the Right Direction Archived 21 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine 21 July 2010 ^ Cameron and Clegg set out 'big society' policy ideas BBC News 18-May-2010 ^ "Distributism" .

Democratic Labour Party . Retrieved 10 September 2022 .

^ "National Distributist Party" .

National Distributist Party . Retrieved 10 September 2022 .

^ Eatwell, Roger (2004).

Western democracies and the new extreme right challenge . Routledge. p. 69.

ISBN 978-0-415-36971-8 .

^ Sykes, Alan (2005).

The Radical Right in Britain: Social Imperialism to the BNP . Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "Platform" .

American Solidarity Party . Retrieved 10 September 2022 .

^ Corção, Gustavo (1946).

Três alqueires e uma vaca: Capa com desenho de G. K. Chesterton (in Brazilian Portuguese). Livraria AGIR.

^ "Articles on Distributism – 2" Archived 26 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine by Dorothy Day.

The Catholic Worker , July–August 1948, 1, 2, 6 ^ "Dorothy Day, Peter Maurin, & Distributism" , in The Hound of Distributism .

^ "The Distributist Review – Dale Ahlquist" . Distributistreview.com. Archived from the original on 6 June 2014 . Retrieved 5 June 2014 .

^ Bikaj, Albert (19 February 2022).

"Not Everything is for Sale: A Critique of Neoliberalism" .

The European Conservative . Retrieved 5 May 2024 .

^ Allan Carlson (12 July 2009).

" "A Distributist View of the Global Economic Crisis": A Report" . Front Porch Republic . Retrieved 5 June 2014 .

^ "About" .

Practical distributism . 2 February 2023 . Retrieved 5 May 2024 .

^ "What is Integralism?" . 9 September 2020.

^ Programul economic al lui Călin Georgescu, câștigătorul primului tur al alegerilor prezidențiale: Prin acest program se ridică Steagul Adevărului, al Iubirii, al Trezirii conștiinței Binelui și frumosului în noi toți!

, hotnews.ro, 25 November 2024 ^ "Alfa y Omega, nº 775 / 1-III-2012, En portada" .

alfayomega.es . 27 May 2013. Archived from the original on 27 May 2013.

^ Mark Stahlman.

"Rocking the Bus" . Strategy+Business . Retrieved 29 July 2018 .

^ Richard Williamson, Mgr; Peter Chojnowski, Dr; McCann, Christopher (April 2004).

he+rural+solution+williamson "The Rural Solution: Modern Catholic Voices on Going 'Back to the Land'" . IHS Press.

ISBN 9781605700212 .

Further reading [ edit ] Boyle, David.

Back to the Land: Distributism and the politics of life Steyning: The Real Press, 2019.

ISBN 978-1912119899 Cooney, Anthony.

Distributism .

ISBN 0-9535077-2-6 Kurland, Norman.

The Just Third Way: Basic Principles of Economic and Social Justice , Center for Economic and Social Justice Sagar, S.

Distributism .

ISBN 0-905109-20-1 Saltter, Alexander William.

The Political Economy of Distributism: Property, Liberty, and the Common Good.

Washington, DC.

Catholic University of America Press , 2023.

Shaw v Chesterton: a Debate between George Bernard Shaw and G. K. Chesterton .

ISBN 0-9679707-7-6 "Union Square Speech" by Dorothy Day Distributism as a means of achieving third way economics , a paper for the Secular Party of Australia written by Richard Howard of the Humanist Society of New South Wales Pabst, Adrian.

"Pope Benedict's call for a civil economy" .

The Guardian , 20 July 2009.

External links [ edit ] The Distributist Review v t e Christian democracy Principles Catholic social teaching Christian corporatism Christian ethics Christian humanism Common good Communitarianism Conservatism Christian Compassionate Liberal Progressive Social Consistent life ethic Cultural mandate Culture of life Dignity of labor Distributism Economic progressivism Familialism Human dignity Just war theory Liberalism Christian Catholicism Conservative Ordo Social Mixed economy Multiculturalism Neo-Calvinism Neo-Thomism Option for the poor Pan-European identity Person Dignity Theory Popularism Public morality Religious liberty Friendly separation of church and state Religious pluralism Social Gospel Social justice Social market economy Solidarity Sphere sovereignty Stewardship Environmentalism Environmental protection Subsidiarity in Catholicism Welfare State Philosophers Arizmendiarrieta Baader Barth Belloc Benedict XV Berggrav Blond Bonhoeffer Brague Cardijn Chesterton Day Dooyeweerd Escrivá Gebhardt Gilson Görres Groen Guardini Habsburg John XXIII John Paul II Ketteler De Koninck Korfanty Lamennais Leo XIII Leo XIV Lewis Manning Maritain Merton Milani Mounier Müller-Armack Murray Nell-Breuning Newman Ozanam Paul VI Pesch Pieper Pius XI Pottier Röpke Sheen Spaemann Stein Stomma Sturzo Tawney Tischner Toniolo Vogelsang Weigel Williams Politicians Adenauer Andreotti Antall Aznar Bayrou Beel Bidault Biden Bondevik Busch Buzek Caldera Clerides Cosgrave Daul De Gasperi Dehaene Donnelly Dzurinda Erhard Erzberger Fenech Adami Field Frei Gemayel Groen Haller Joseph Juncker Kaas Ketteler Klausener Kohl Komorowski Korfanty Kramp-Karrenbauer Kurz Kuyper Lacalle Pou Laschet Letta Leuger Lipinski Lubbers Martens Mattarella Mazowiecki Merkel Merz Metsola Mikołajczyk Moro Nile Quadros Pastrana Peterle Pethrus Popiel Portas Pöttering Prodi Raab Schäffer Schuman Schüssel Seipel Söder Stegerwald Stomma Strauss Sturzo Tajani Tindemans Vogelsang von der Leyen Wałęsa Weber Werner Windthorst Parties American Solidarity Party Austrian People's Party Christian Democracy Christian Democratic Appeal Christian Democratic and Flemish Christian Democratic Party Christian Democratic Party of Uruguay Christian Democratic People's Party Christian-Democratic Rebirth Party Christian Democratic Union of Germany Christian Social People's Party Christian Social Union in Bavaria Christian Union Centre Party Centrists for Europe Civic Platform Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Rally Democrats Fianna Fáil Fine Gael Kataeb Party National Action Party National Party Nationalist Party New Democracy Patriotic Union People's Party Polish People's Party Popular Republican Movement Prohibition Party VMRO-DPMNE Organisations Catholic Action Centrist Democrat International Christian Democrat Organization of America European People's Party European Christian Political Party Konrad Adenauer Foundation Conservative Christian Fellowship Centre for European Studies European Ideas Network Schuman Foundation Center for Public Justice Paneuropean Union World Movement of Christian Workers SIPDIC Documents Rerum novarum Populorum progressio Graves de communi re Quadragesimo anno Laborem exercens Sollicitudo rei socialis Centesimus annus Laudato si' Related topics Catholic Church and politics Christian left Christian anarchism Christian communism Christian socialism Christian right Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Theoconservatism Clerical philosophers Ethical socialism Integralism Illiberal democracy Progressive Christianity Religious democracy Buddhist Islamic Jewish Mormon Social democracy Traditionalist Catholicism Links to related articles v t e Schools of economic thought Pre-modern Ancient schools Medieval Islamic Scholasticism Modern era Early modern Cameralism Mercantilism Physiocrats School of Salamanca Late modern American (National) Austrian Birmingham Classical Ricardian Distributist English historical Freiwirtschaft French liberal Georgism German historical Malthusian Manchester Marginalism Marxist economics Marxian critique of political economy Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne Socialist Contemporary (20th and 21st centuries) Behavioral Buddhist Capability approach Carnegie Chartalism Modern Monetary Theory Chicago Constitutional Cracovian Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiburg Geneva Institutional Keynesian Neo- Neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis New Post- Circuitism Keynes–Marx synthesis Monetarism Market Neo-Malthusian Neo-Marxian Neo-Ricardian Neo-Schumpeterian Neoliberalism New classical Rational expectations theory Real business-cycle theory New institutional New neoclassical synthesis Organizational Public choice Regulation Saltwater/freshwater Stockholm Structuralist Supply-side Technocracy movement Thermoeconomics Virginia Social credit Related Critique of political economy History of economic thought History of macroeconomic thought Economics Political economy Mainstream economics Heterodox economics Post-autistic economics Degrowth World-systems theory Economic systems v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Political ideologies The Establishment Anti Hardline Moderate Political spectrum Far-left Left-wing Centre-left Centrism Centre-right Right-wing Far-right Radical Reactionary Revolutionary Accelerationism Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Communalism Communism Bolshevism Marxism-Leninism National Bolshevism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Social credit Environmentalism Familialism Fascism Nazism Third Position Feminism Fundamentalism Green Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Marxism Monarchism Royalism Nationalism Republicanism Classical Modern Social democracy Socialism Third Way Zionism See also Authoritarianism Anti Collectivism Colonialism Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Extremism Federalism Confederalism Confederatism Globalism Ideological repression Imperialism Individualism Internationalism Localism Masculism Militarism Nihilism Pacifism Pluralism Populism Progressivism Reformism Regionalism Separatism Statism Syncretism Totalitarianism Portals : Economics Politics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Distributism&oldid=1302231539 " Categories : Distributism Anti-capitalism Economic ideologies Mixed economies Political theories Pope Leo XIII Power sharing Social justice Syncretic political movements Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from March 2021 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from March 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from June 2023 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles needing additional references from February 2023 Articles containing French-language text Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Pages displaying short descriptions with no spaces via Module:Annotated link Articles with excerpts Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 04:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Distributism 29 languages Add topic

