Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Other uses Toggle Other uses subsection 2.1 Collegiate halls 2.2 Meeting hall 2.3 Religious halls 2.4 Public buildings 3 Types 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Hall 36 languages العربية Aragonés 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Magyar Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Large room used for meetings, social affairs or events This article is about the meeting room. For the corridor, see Hallway . For the etymology of "hall", see Hall (concept) . For other uses, see Hall (disambiguation) .

"Meeting Hall" redirects here. For the building in Utah, see Meeting Hall (Beaver, Utah) .

Prayer hall of the Great Mosque of Kairouan , in Kairouan , Tunisia In architecture , a hall is a relatively large space enclosed by a roof and walls.

[ 1 ] In the Iron Age and the Early Middle Ages in northern Europe , a mead hall was where a lord and his retainers ate and also slept. Later in the Middle Ages , the great hall was the largest room in castles and large houses, and where the servants usually slept.  As more complex house plans developed, the hall remained a large room for dancing and large feasts, often still with servants sleeping there. It was usually immediately inside the main door.  In modern British houses, an entrance hall next to the front door remains an indispensable feature, even if it is essentially merely a corridor.

Today, the (entrance) hall of a house is the space next to the front door or vestibule leading to the rooms directly and/or indirectly. Where the hall inside the front door of a house is elongated, it may be called a passage , corridor (from Spanish corredor used in El Escorial and 100 years later in Castle Howard ), or hallway .

History [ edit ] In warmer climates, the houses of the wealthy were often built around a courtyard , but in northern areas manors were built around a great hall . The hall was home to the hearth and was where all the residents of the house would eat, work, and sleep. One common example of this form is the longhouse . Only particularly messy tasks would be done in separate rooms on the periphery of the hall.

[ 2 ] Still today the term hall is often used to designate a country house such as a hall house , or specifically a Wealden hall house , and manor houses .

In later medieval Europe, the main room of a castle or manor house was the great hall . In a medieval building, the hall was where the fire was kept. As heating technology improved and a desire for privacy grew, tasks moved from the hall to other rooms. First, the master of the house withdrew to private bedrooms and eating areas. Over time servants and children also moved to their own areas, while work projects were also given their own chambers leaving the hall for special functions. With time, its functions as dormitory , kitchen , parlour , and so on were divided into separate rooms or, in the case of the kitchen, a separate building.

[ 2 ] Until the early modern era that majority of the population lived in houses with a single room. In the 17th century, even lower classes began to have a second room, with the main chamber being the hall and the secondary room the parlor. The hall and parlor house was found in England and was a fundamental, historical floor plan in parts of the United States from 1620 to 1860.

[ 3 ] In Europe, as the wealthy embraced multiple rooms initially the common form was the enfilade , with rooms directly connecting to each other. In 1597 John Thorpe is the first recorded architect to replace multiple connected rooms with rooms along a corridor each accessed by a separate door.

[ 2 ] Other uses [ edit ] Collegiate halls [ edit ] Founders Hall at Haverford College in Pennsylvania Many institutions and buildings at colleges and universities are formally titled "_______ Hall", typically being named after the person who endowed it, for example, King's Hall, Cambridge . Others, such as Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford , commemorate respected people. Between these in age, Nassau Hall at Princeton University began as the single building of the then college . In medieval origin, these were the halls in which the members of the university lived together during term time. In many cases, some aspect of this community remains.

Some of these institutions are titled "Hall" instead of "College" because at the time of their foundation they were not recognised as colleges (in some cases because their foundation predated the existence of colleges) and did not have the appropriate Royal Charter . Examples at the University of Oxford are: St Edmund Hall Hart Hall (now Hertford College ) Lady Margaret Hall The (currently six) Permanent private halls .

In colleges of the universities of Oxford and Cambridge , the term "Hall" is also used for the dining hall for students, with High Table at one end for fellows. Typically, at " Formal Hall ", gowns are worn for dinner during the evening, whereas for "informal Hall" they are not. The medieval collegiate dining hall, with a dais for the high table at the upper end and a screen passage at the lower end, is a modified or assimilated form of the Great hall .

Meeting hall [ edit ] Socialist Hall , a former meeting hall in Butte, Montana A hall is also a building consisting largely of a principal room, that is rented out for meetings and social affairs.  It may be privately or government-owned, such as a function hall owned by one company used for weddings and cotillions (organized and run by the same company on a contractual basis) or a community hall available for rent to anyone, such as a British village hall .

Religious halls [ edit ] In religious architecture, as in Islamic architecture , the prayer hall is a large room dedicated to the practice of worship.

[ 4 ] (example: the prayer hall of the Great Mosque of Kairouan in Tunisia ). A hall church is a church with a nave and side aisles of approximately equal height.

[ 5 ] Many churches have an associated church hall used for meetings and other events.

Public buildings [ edit ] Following a line of similar development, in office buildings and larger buildings ( theatres , cinemas etc.), the entrance hall is generally known as the foyer (the French for fireplace). The atrium , a name sometimes used in public buildings for the entrance hall, was the central courtyard of a Roman house.

Types [ edit ] Firehall (London, Ontario) in 1923 In architecture, the term "double-loaded" describes corridors that connect to rooms on both sides.  Conversely, a single-loaded corridor only has rooms on one side (and possible windows on the other).  A blind corridor does not lead anywhere.

Billiard hall City hall, town hall or village hall Concert hall Concourse (at a large transportation station) Convention center (exhibition hall) Dance hall Dining hall Firehall Great room or great hall Moot hall Prayer hall, such as the sanctuary of a synagogue Reading room Residence hall Trades hall (also called union hall, labour hall, etc.) Waiting room (in large transportation stations) See also [ edit ] Hall of fame References [ edit ] ^ Oxford English Dictionary ^ a b c Judith Flanders (8 September 2015).

The Making of Home: The 500-Year Story of How Our Houses Became Our Homes . St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-1-4668-7548-7 .

^ Foster, Gerald L..

American houses: a field guide to the architecture of the home . Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2004. 90.

ISBN 0618387994 ^ Stanford Anderson and Colin St. John Wilson, The Oxford companion to architecture, Volume 1 , Oxford University Press, 2009, page 477 . OUP Oxford. 23 July 2009.

ISBN 978-0-19-860568-3 .

^ Sturgis, Russell. Sturgis' illustrated dictionary of architecture and building: an unabridged reprint of the 1901-2 edition. VOl. II. Mineola, N.Y.: Dover, 1989. 346-347 External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Hall ".

The dictionary definition of hall at Wiktionary Media related to Halls at Wikimedia Commons v t e Rooms and spaces of a house Shared rooms Bonus room Common room Den Dining room Family room Garret Great room Home cinema Keeping room Kitchen dirty kitchen kitchenette Living room Gynaeceum harem Andron man cave Recreation room billiard room Shrine Study Sunroom Private rooms Bathroom toilet Bedroom closet Bedsit Boudoir Cabinet Nursery Spaces Atrium Balcony Breezeway Conversation pit Cubby-hole Deck Elevator dumbwaiter Entryway / Genkan Fireplace hearth Foyer Hall Hallway Inglenook Lanai Loft Loggia Overhang Patio Porch screened sleeping Ramp Secret passage Stairs / Staircase Terrace Veranda Vestibule Technical , utility and storage Attic Basement Carport Cloakroom Closet Crawl space Electrical room Equipment room Furnace room / Boiler room Garage Janitorial closet Larder Laundry room / Utility room / Storage room Mechanical room / floor Pantry Root cellar Semi-basement Storm cellar / Safe room Studio Wardrobe Wine cellar Wiring closet Workshop Great house areas Antechamber Ballroom Kitchen-related butler's pantry buttery saucery scullery spicery still room Conservatory / Orangery Courtyard Drawing room Great chamber Great hall Library Long gallery Lumber room Parlour Sauna Servants' hall Servants' quarters Smoking room Solar State room Swimming pool Turret Undercroft Other Furniture Hidden room House house plan styles types Multi-family residential Secondary suite Duplex Terraced Detached Semi-detached Townhouse Studio apartment Architectural elements Arch Balconet Baluster Belt course Bressummer Ceiling Chimney Colonnade / Portico Column Cornice / Eaves Dome Door Ell Floor Foundation Gable Gate Portal Lighting Molding Ornament Plumbing Quoins Roof shingles Roof lantern Sill plate Style list Skylight Threshold Transom Vault Wall Window Related Backyard Driveway Front yard Garden roof garden Home Home improvement Home repair Shed Tree house Category: Rooms Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hall&oldid=1279764614 " Category : Rooms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 March 2025, at 13:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hall 36 languages Add topic

