Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Construction and use 2 Prior devices 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Filar micrometer 8 languages Español Français Italiano Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Specialized eyepiece A filar micrometer attached to a telescope A filar micrometer is a specialized eyepiece used in astronomical telescopes for astrometry measurements, in microscopes for specimen measurements, and in alignment and surveying telescopes for measuring angles and distances on nearby objects. "Filar" derives from the Latin filum ("thread"). It refers to the fine threads or wires used in the device.

Construction and use [ edit ] Filar micrometer A typical filar micrometer consists of a reticle that has two fine parallel wires or threads that can be moved by the observer using a micrometer screw mechanism. The wires are placed in the focal image plane of the eyepiece so they remain sharply superimposed over the object under observation, while the micrometer motion moves the wires across the focal plane.  Other designs employ a fixed reticle, against which one wire or a second reticle moves. By rotating the eyepiece assembly in the eyetube, the measurement axis can be aligned to match the orientation of the two points of observation.

At one time, it was common to use spider silk as a thread.

[ 1 ] By placing one wire over one point of interest and moving the other to a second point, the distance between the two wires can be measured with the micrometer portion of the instrument. Given this precise distance measurement at the image plane, a trigonometric calculation with the objective focal length yields the angular distance between the two points seen in a telescope. In a microscope, a similar calculation yields the spatial distance between two points on a specimen.

In an alignment telescope, the precise micrometric measurement of the eyepiece image directly indicates the real distance of a nearby observed point from the line of sight. This absolute measurement is independent of the distance to the object, due to the telecentricity principle.

A common use of filar micrometers in astronomical telescopes was measuring the distance between double stars.

Filar micrometers are little used in modern astronomy, having been replaced by digital photographic techniques where digital pixels provide a precise reference for image distance. Filar eyepieces are still used in teaching astronomy and by some amateur astronomers.

Prior devices [ edit ] The precursor to the filar micrometer was the micrometer eyepiece , invented by William Gascoigne .

Earlier measures of angular distances relied on inserting into the eyepiece a thin metal sheet cut in the shape of a narrow, isosceles triangle . The sheet was pushed into the eyepiece until the two adjacent edges of the metal sheet simultaneously occulted the two objects of interest. By carefully measuring the position where the objects were extinguished and knowing the focal length of the objective lens, the angular distance could be calculated.

Christiaan Huygens used such a device.

See also [ edit ] Micrometer Notes [ edit ] ^ Berenbaum, May R., Field Notes — Spin Control , The Sciences, The New York Academy Of Sciences, September/October 1995 References [ edit ] George O. Abell, Exploration of the Universe , fourth edition, Saunders College Publishing, 1982, ISBN 0-03-058502-3 External links [ edit ] Photographs of the Filar micrometer circa 1930 used at the Lick Observatory from the Lick Observatory Records Digital Archive, UC Santa Cruz Library's Digital Collection Archived 2015-05-20 at the Wayback Machine Wikimedia Commons has media related to Filar micrometers .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Filar_micrometer&oldid=1184524593 " Categories : Measuring instruments Astronomical instruments Scientific instruments Surveying instruments Historical scientific instruments History of astronomy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 November 2023, at 23:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Filar micrometer 8 languages Add topic

