Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 United Kingdom Toggle United Kingdom subsection 2.1 Model minority 3 United States 4 Scholarly views 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Anti-Sikh sentiment Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fear or prejudice against Sikhs This article cites its sources but does not provide page references .

Please help improve it by providing page numbers for existing citations.

( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A 1906 article from the San Francisco Sunday Call which condemns Sikh immigration to the United States , conflating them with Hindus .

Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-Sikh sentiment (also known as Sikhophobia [ 1 ] ) is fear or prejudice against Sikhs . Anti-Sikh sentiment can be motivated by an ethnic hatred of Sikhs or religious hatred of Sikhism , but in Western countries (especially the US and UK [ 2 ] ) it can also be fuelled by Islamophobia , stemming from a conflation of Sikhs and Muslims due to the racialization of Islamophobia, with Sikhs sharing the same racial background with many Muslims.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 2 ] Sikhs have been targets of hate crimes and discrimination due to various reasons such as appearance (turban, baptized Sikh, having uncut hair) language and the colour of their skin. Therefore, both Sikh men and women are at an increased risk of suffering from racism because of these intersectional ways of oppression that can impact the way Sikhs are treated in society.

Historically, anti-Sikh discrimination began in the roots of India. With a prominent Hindu government and institutions, Sikh's were looked down upon due to the differences with class (Sikhs being farmers), culture, and religious practices. This being said, in the 1980s, Sikh separatists in Punjab demanded an independent homeland, called Khalistan. In 1984, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi ordered a massive military action against those who were sheltering in Amritsar's Golden Temple , the faith's holiest shrine.

[ 5 ] In modern times it is not just the cultural and religious difference, there is overlapping forms of oppression that hatred is fuelled, such as anti-immigration, appearance, class, religious practices and the misdirected islamophobia.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Attacks on Sikhs have increased in the aftermath of Islamic terrorist attacks or major political/military events in the Middle East, as Sikhs are often mistakenly perceived as being Muslims.

[ 2 ] Since 2020, anti-Sikh racism has grown online, in-person, and systematically across the world.

[ 2 ] Sikh gurdwaras when targeted are often vandalized by spray-painting Islamophobic or white-supremacist messages or imagery.

[ 2 ] In present times, Sikhs are being attacked and hate crimes. In particular, suburban areas where there is a less dense Sikh communities may be more prone to hate crimes.

[ 8 ] These hate crimes can be associated with their appearance, religion and language barriers in a Western societies that are not accepting of the community. Sikhs have claimed that anti-Sikh hatred has been ignored by local governments and policy-makers despite recent rises in anti-Sikh crimes and incidents.

[ 2 ] Sikhs have increased educational awareness campaigns worldwide on who Sikhs are to decrease the incidence of mistargeted Islamophobic attacks on Sikhs.

[ 2 ] Definitions [ edit ] The APPG for British Sikhs in its 2020 report defines anti-Sikh hate as "any incident or crime which is perceived by the victim or any other person to be religiously or racially motivated by hostility, hatred or prejudice against Sikhs or those perceived to be Sikh people, Gurdwaras, organisations or property".

[ 2 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Sikhs started immigrating to the UK in notable numbers in the 1950s onwards via direct migration from India or by twice-migration (such as by via East Africa), with them experiencing racism from the onset of arrival.

[ 2 ] Racism against South Asians, including Sikhs, peaked during the 1970s and early '80's in the United Kingdom, with all South Asians being referred to as "Pakis" by racists.

[ 2 ] The anti-immigration movement in the UK later specialized into being hostile towards Muslims rather than all South Asians in-general, being tied to the Salman Rushdie affair in 1989 and First Gulf War .

[ 2 ] However, Islamophobia is tied with attacks and discrimination against Sikhs, as racists cannot or do not bother to differentiate between Muslims and Sikhs in their hate, conflating religion with race.

[ 2 ] After 9/11, images of Ayatollah Khomeini , Osama bin Laden , and the Taliban, all of whom don a turban and have long-beards just like Sikhs, began to be circulated.

[ 2 ] By the early 2000s, this reinforced the view that turbans and beards were associated with terrorism and being an enemy, with Sikh men in-particular being targeted as a result result due to the Sikh turban being conflated with the Muslim kaffiyeh and both groups tending to grow long beards.

[ 2 ] For example, in 2009 there was an incident in Luton where an Islamic extremist group made provocative remarks and in-return, the Sikh mayor of Luton who wore a turban, Lakhbir Singh, was kicked to the ground in a retaliatory attack.

[ 2 ] In 1996, a Sikh pupil named Vijay Singh from Manchester committed suicide due to bullying at his predominantly-white school over his turban, with teachers and administration being oblivious to the issue.

[ 2 ] In recent years, anti-Sikh racism in British schools has been increasing.

[ 2 ] After the 2005 London bombings , two gurdwaras in Kent and Leeds were firebombed.

[ 2 ] Sikh gurdwaras have been vandalized with Islamophobic and white-supremacist graffiti.

[ 2 ] The same year, a Sikh man in Northampton had his turban removed in a racist attack on 16 August 2005.

[ 2 ] In the aftermath of the Charlie Hedbo incident, a British-Sikh dentist named Sarandev Bhambra was attacked by a machete-wielding assailant in Wales, who wanted enact revenge for the killing of Lee Rigby .

[ 2 ] On 14 May 2016, a football match of Manchester United against Bournemouth at Old Trafford was cancelled due to a bomb-scare, with an image of a Sikh attendant of the match being uploaded to Twitter by an Arsenal fan accusing the Sikh man of being the bomber.

[ 2 ] In 2020, taxi driver Vaneet Singh was attacked by four white-men and forced to remove his turban in Reading, with the attackers accusing him of being a Taliban member.

[ 2 ] In the past, it tended to be Sikh males who were victims of racism, however since the E.U. referendum in 2016, more Sikh women, including those who choose to wear a turban, have also been victims of anti-Sikh racism.

[ 2 ] However, the narrative on the gendered dimension in anti-Sikh racism is not at the same level as in Islamophobia, where Muslim females wearing burqas or hijabs tend to be targeted.

[ 2 ] In 2016, the Network of Sikh Organisations (NSO) and other Sikh bodies lobbied for police forces across England and Wales to report religiously biased hate-crimes in their jurisdictions.

[ 2 ] Thus, all police forces began to compile this data from 2017 onwards by introducing the "religion" category to hate-crime data.

[ 2 ] The Home Office admitted it does not know if the increased number of apparent incidents over the years is due to an increased number of hate-crimes or rather better reporting and recording.

[ 2 ] However, hate-crimes against Sikhs in the UK are still relatively low when compared to the rates for the Jewish and Muslim communities.

[ 2 ] However, Sikh organizations in the UK have claimed the true number of anti-Sikh hate-crimes is higher than what the official stats show, as some incidents are not reported and therefore not recorded, or incidents that are reported have been categorized incorrectly (i.e. an incident involving a victim of Sikh-heritage not being marked as a religiously biased hate-crime against Sikhs, such as homophobia or racially biased instead of religiously biased) and thus are missed in the total annual tallies of anti-Sikh hate-crimes.

[ 2 ] The 2016 UK Sikh Survey (published by The Sikh Network, 2016) and A Report into Anti-Sikh Hate Crimes (published by the All-Party Parliamentary Group [APPG] for British Sikhs, October 2020) both claimed that Sikhophobia was a growing issue but that the government was ignoring the problem.

[ 2 ] Furthermore, the reports argued that anti-Sikh hatred had to be treated as serious as Islamophobia and anti-semitism.

[ 2 ] However, the 2016 UK Sikh Survey claimed a large percentage and number of British-Sikhs had been victimized in anti-Sikh hate crimes and incidents, some of which have been scrutinized, such as one claim of there being "Over 100,000 hate crimes against Sikhs aged 16 and over in the last 12 months".

[ 2 ] Yet, the figures released by Sikh bodies are higher than the official crime states released by the British government and police.

[ 2 ] Home Office statistics for anti-Sikh hate-crimes: [ 2 ] April 2017 – March 2018: 117 anti-Sikh hate-crimes out of all the religiously biased hate-crime offences (2%) [ 2 ] 2018 – 2019: 188 anti-Sikh hate-crimes out of all the religiously biased hate-crime offences (3%) [ 2 ] 2019 – 2020: 202 anti-Sikh hate-crimes out of all the religiously biased hate-crime offences (3%) [ 2 ] 2020 – 2021: 112 anti-Sikh hate-crimes out of all the religiously biased hate-crime offences (2%) [ note 1 ] [ 2 ] 2021 – March 2022: 301 anti-Sikh hate-crimes out of all the religiously biased hate-crime offences (4%) [ 2 ] In the UK, there has been a 169% in anti-Sikh attacks in 2021–22 compared to the previous year.

[ 9 ] Some of these attacks involved the forced removal of turbans worn by Sikhs.

[ 9 ] The Sikh Council UK developed a website called Sikh Aware UK to improve the reporting of anti-Sikh hate crimes and incidents, however it was not successful.

[ 2 ] In January 2022, Sikhguard was set up to encourage Sikhs to report hate crimes and took-over the role that the former website Sikh Aware UK had been set-up for.

[ 9 ] [ 2 ] However, Sikh reporting mechanisms are not as integrated with local police bodies when compared to Muslim (Tell MAMA) and Jewish (CST), which have data-sharing agreements with police departments, leading to increased self-reporting by Muslim and Jewish victims when compared to Sikh ones, alongside more professional advocacy for them.

[ 2 ] Model minority [ edit ] Sikhs have in recent decades become a " model-minority " in the UK, being viewed as integrating into the pluralistic British identity and having been diligent workers since they began arriving in the country, contributing to Britain through their labour and charity.

[ 2 ] Also, Sikhs are viewed as successfully using legal means to achieve recognition of their religion, such as with their legal battles with employers and the government to win the right to wear a kara , kirpan , or dastar (turban).

[ 2 ] There are reports commissioned by the British government expounding on the Sikh community's success, such as the British Sikh Reports or the Contribution of Sikhs to the UK – UK Parliament (House of Commons Library, 2019), and local Sikhs have been elected to public-office.

[ 2 ] Furthermore, Sikhs are represented in British popular culture, such as in films.

[ 2 ] In the late 1990s, Sikhs were praised for their contributions to the British military causes during both World Wars.

[ 2 ] United States [ edit ] Since the early 1900s, Sikhs in America have been victims of racism and prejudice.

[ 2 ] After the 9/11 terrorist attacks, anti-Sikh hatred has increased but mostly it is fuelled by mistaken identity by those who conflate Sikhs as being Muslims.

[ 2 ] On 15 September 2001, Balbir Singh Sodhi was murdered after being mistaken for an Arab Muslim.

[ 2 ] In 2012, a white supremacist committed a massacre at a Sikh temple in Oak Creek, Wisconsin , with six Sikhs being killed.

[ 2 ] In August 2014, a Sikh man named Sandeep Singh was murdered in New York City after being called a terrorist by being run-over and dragged 30-feet.

[ 2 ] In 2015 in Chicago,  Inderjit Singh Mukker was called a "terrorist" and "Bin Laden" during a racist attack.

[ 2 ] Since 2020, there have been a number of attacks on Sikhs in the US, such as four Sikhs who were shot and killed at a FedEx facility in Indianapolis, and a number of individual Sikh men being targeted in separate attacks in 2021.

[ 2 ] There have been instances of American gurdwaras being vandalized as well.

[ 2 ] The Sikh Coalition has lobbied the US government to track hate-crime stats regarding Sikhs, which the FBI began doing so in 2015, however the Sikh body claims the data undercounts the actual amount of hate-crimes against Sikhs and the true number is higher.

[ 2 ] The Sikh Coalition in the US has developed a website called Report Hate to improve the reporting of anti-Sikh crimes and incidents.

[ 2 ] According to FBI stats, hate-crimes against Sikhs have been rising since 2015: [ 2 ] 2015: six anti-Sikh offences (0.4%) out of all hate-crimes involving religious-bias [ 2 ] 2016: seven anti-Sikh offences (0.5%) out of all hate-crimes involving religious-bias [ 2 ] 2017: twenty-four anti-Sikh offences (1.4%) out of all hate-crimes involving religious-bias [ 2 ] 2018: sixty anti-Sikh offences (4.1%) out of all hate-crimes involving religious-bias [ note 2 ] [ 2 ] 2019: forty-nine anti-Sikh offences (3.0%) out of all hate-crimes involving religious-bias [ 2 ] 2020: eighty-nine anti-Sikh offences out of all hate-crimes involving religious-bias [ 2 ] Scholarly views [ edit ] This section relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Anti-Sikh sentiment" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2025 ) Jagbir Jhutti-Johal stresses that instead of blanket-labelling all racist attacks against Sikhs as being "anti-Sikh", it is important to consider the intent of the attacker and if they actually were targeting Sikhs or rather mistook Sikhs for Muslims and intended to target Muslims.

[ 2 ] Thus, according to them there is a difference between actual anti-Sikh hatred and Islamophobic hatred where Sikhs are victims due to mistaken identity.

[ 2 ] Jhutti-Johal also criticized official anti-Sikh hate-crime statistics as likely being inaccurate, as many incidents are not reported due to a lack of trust some Sikh communities have in the local police, under-reporting (some Sikhs do not know what a hate-crime or hate-incident is and therefore do not report them), or anti-Sikh crimes are labelled as Islamophobic incidents instead.

[ 2 ] Furthermore, they argue that the apparent rise in anti-Sikh hate-crimes in stats may be due to increased reporting and awareness due to campaigning by Sikh bodies rather than a genuine increase in the number of anti-Sikh incidents.

[ 2 ] Furthermore, the official definition of anti-Sikh hate proposed by the APPG for British Sikhs in its 2020 report does not describe incidents where the attacker had Islamophobic motivations but due to mistaken identity, a Sikh was vicitimized by them rather than an actual Muslim.

[ 2 ] Jhutti-Johal concludes by stating that current systems and mechanisms of reporting do not address the issue of the conflation of race and religion, nor intended/perceived victim (Muslim) and actual victim (Sikh), and also raises the legal complexity of Sikhs being classified as both a race and religion in certain jurisdictions and how it could impact crime-reporting (thus, would an anti-Sikh crime be classified as a race-biased or a religiously biased one, or both at the same time?).

[ 2 ] Therefore, "anti-Sikh" is a reference to the actual victim (a Sikh) and not to the perceived target (Muslims), thus anti-Sikh hatred may not be proper Sikhophobia, that being actual hatred for Sikhs and being anti-Sikhism, rather it is misdirected Islamophobia.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-Sikh sentiment in Canada Notes [ edit ] ^ Jhutti-Johal explains the decline of anti-Sikh hates crimes in 2020–21 as being due to COVID-19 lockdowns.

^ A 200% increase compared to the previous year, making Sikhs the third most victimized religious-group in the US, after Muslims and Jews.

References [ edit ] ^ "Pluralism Project Archive: Sikhophobia" .

Harvard University . Retrieved 30 January 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al am an ao ap aq ar as at au av aw ax ay az ba bb bc bd be bf bg bh bi bj bk bl bm bn bo bp bq br bs bt Jhutti-Johal, Jagbir (May 1, 2023). "37: Racism or Mistaken Identity? Anti-Sikh Hate Crimes and the Need for Better Recording and Monitoring".

The Sikh World . Taylor & Francis. pp.

450– 462.

ISBN 9780429848384 .

^ Singh, Simran Jeet (2012-09-10).

"Islamophobia, Sikhophobia and Media Profiling" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on 2024-08-16 . Retrieved 2024-10-30 .

^ Jhutti-Johal & Singh 2019 , p. 142.

^ "In pictures: Forty years of Delhi's anti-Sikh riots" .

www.bbc.com . 2024-10-31 . Retrieved 2025-05-20 .

^ Choongh, Gagandeep (2020-05-26).

"Sikhism: A Targeted Religion" .

Culture, Society, and Praxis .

12 (1).

ISSN 1544-3159 .

^ Singh, Pashaura (2023).

The Sikh World . Routledge Worlds Series. Arvind-Pal Mandair. Milton: Taylor & Francis Group.

ISBN 978-0-429-84838-4 .

^ "How the Sikh community's experiences with hate crimes shows why data collection is so important" .

PBS News . 2021-06-21 . Retrieved 2025-05-20 .

^ a b c Singh, Hardeep (21 October 2022).

"Explainer: Anti-Sikh hate crime" .

Religion Media Centre . Retrieved 30 January 2025 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Jhutti-Johal, Jagbir; Singh, Hardeep (2019-08-16).

Racialization, Islamophobia and Mistaken Identity: The Sikh Experience (1 ed.). Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781351138864 .

ISBN 978-1-351-13886-4 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Sikh_sentiment&oldid=1304513993 " Categories : Prejudice and discrimination by type Anti-Sikh sentiment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking page references from May 2025 Articles with excerpts Articles needing additional references from May 2025 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 13:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Sikh sentiment Add languages Add topic

