Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Military career 3 Marine geology 4 Marine archaeology Toggle Marine archaeology subsection 4.1 RMS Titanic 4.2 Other wrecks 4.2.1 Bismarck 4.2.2 Lusitania 4.2.3 Battle of Guadalcanal 4.2.4 USS Yorktown 4.2.5 PT-109 4.3 Institute for Exploration 4.4 Center for Ocean Exploration and Archaeological Oceanography 4.5 Black Sea 5 Awards and honors 6 Other works Toggle Other works subsection 6.1 Academics 6.2 Television 6.3 Education 7 Personal life 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Robert Ballard 32 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Retired US Navy officer and professor of oceanography For other people named Robert Ballard, see Robert Ballard (disambiguation) .

This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Robert Ballard" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Robert Ballard Ballard in 2023 Born Robert Duane Ballard ( 1942-06-30 ) June 30, 1942 (age 83) Wichita, Kansas , U.S.

Education University of California, Santa Barbara ( BS ) University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa ( MS ) University of Rhode Island ( PhD ) Employer University of Rhode Island (Graduate School of Oceanography) Known for Ocean exploration and underwater archaeology; discoveries of the wrecks of the RMS Titanic , the battleship Bismarck , the aircraft carrier USS Yorktown , and John F. Kennedy's PT-109 Awards Kilby International Awards (1994) The Explorer Medal (1995) Hubbard Medal (1996) Caird Medal (2002) Military career Allegiance United States Branch United States Army United States Navy Years of service 1965–1995 Rank Commander Robert Duane Ballard (born June 30, 1942) is an American retired Navy officer and a professor of oceanography at the University of Rhode Island who is noted for his work in underwater archaeology ( maritime archaeology and archaeology of shipwrecks ) and marine geology . He is best known by the general public for the discoveries of the wrecks of the RMS Titanic in 1985, the battleship Bismarck in 1989, and the aircraft carrier USS Yorktown in 1998. He discovered the wreck of John F. Kennedy 's PT-109 in 2002 and visited Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana , who saved its crew.

Ballard discovered hydrothermal vents , where life goes on powered by nutrient chemicals emitted by the vents rather than the sunlight that drives most life on Earth; he said "finding hydrothermal vents beats the hell out of finding the Titanic ", and his mother commented "It's too bad you found that rusty old boat... they're only going to remember you for finding [it]".

[ 1 ] Ballard also established the JASON Project , and leads ocean exploration on the research vessel E/V Nautilus .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Early life and education Robert Duane Ballard was born on June 30, 1942 [ 5 ] : 192 in Wichita, Kansas .

[ 6 ] He had an older brother, Richard, and a younger sister, Nancy Ann. When Ballard was two years old, his family moved to southern California , where his father worked as a flight test engineer.

[ 5 ] : 15 [ 7 ] He has attributed his early interest in underwater exploration to watching the 1954 film 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea , an adaptation of Jules Verne 's 1870 novel .

[ 5 ] : 19–20 While he was a high school student, his father connected him with oceanographers at Scripps Institution of Oceanography , and he participated in several short research expeditions.

[ 5 ] : 21–24 Ballard enrolled at University of California, Santa Barbara , and joined the Army Reserve Officer Training Corps .

[ 5 ] : 27–30 Beginning in 1962, Ballard worked part-time with Andreas Rechnitzer 's Ocean Systems Group at North American Aviation , where his father was the chief engineer of North American's Minuteman missile program. At North American, Ballard worked on its failed proposal to build the submersible Alvin for the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution .

[ citation needed ] In 1965, Ballard graduated from the University of California, Santa Barbara , earning undergraduate degrees in chemistry and geology. While a student in Santa Barbara, California , he joined Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity, and also completed the US Army 's ROTC program, giving him an Army officer's commission in Army Intelligence. His first graduate degree ( MS , 1966) was in geophysics from the University of Hawaiʻi 's Institute of Geophysics where he trained porpoises and whales. Subsequently, he returned to Andreas Rechnitzer's Ocean Systems Group at North American Aviation .

[ citation needed ] Ballard was working towards a PhD in marine geology at the University of Southern California in 1967 when he was called to active duty. Upon his request, he was transferred from the Army into the US Navy as an oceanographer . The Navy assigned him as a liaison between the Office of Naval Research and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Woods Hole, Massachusetts .

[ citation needed ] After leaving active duty and entering the Naval Reserve in 1970, Ballard continued working at Woods Hole persuading organizations and people, mostly scientists, to fund and use Alvin for undersea research. Four years later he received a PhD in marine geology and geophysics at the University of Rhode Island .

[ citation needed ] Military career Ballard joined the United States Army Reserve in 1965 through the Reserve Officers Training program . He was commissioned as a second lieutenant and assigned to army intelligence . When called to active duty in 1967, he asked to fulfill his obligation in the United States Navy . His request was approved, and he was transferred to the Navy Reserve .

[ 8 ] After completing his active-duty obligation in 1970, he was returned to reserve status, where he remained for much of his military career, being called up only for mandatory training and special assignments. He retired from the Navy as a commander in 1995 after reaching the statutory service limit.

[ citation needed ] Marine geology Ballard's first dive in a submersible was in the Ben Franklin (PX-15) in 1969 off the coast of Florida during a Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution expedition. In the summer of 1970, he began a field mapping project of the Gulf of Maine for his doctoral dissertation . It used an air gun that sent sound waves underwater to determine the underlying structure of the ocean floor and the submersible Alvin , which was used to find and recover a sample from the bedrock .

[ citation needed ] Ballard was geologist diver in Alvin during Project FAMOUS , which explored the median rift valley of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge in 1974.

[ 9 ] During the summer of 1975, Ballard participated in a joint French-American expedition called Phere searching for hydrothermal vents over the Mid-Atlantic Ridge , but the expedition did not find any active vents.

[ citation needed ] On the Galapagos spreading center east of the islands a 1977 exploration by Alvin found deep-sea hydrothermal vents surrounded by communities of living organisms with energy derived by chemosynthesis . Ballard was a participating diver.

[ 10 ] While the discovery was of immense biological significance, the expedition's scientists were all geologists, with no biologists, as it was thought certain there would be no life to study, let alone forms unknown to science.

[ 1 ] The 1979 RISE project expedition on the East Pacific Rise west of Mexico at 21°N was aided by deep-towed still camera sleds that were able to take pictures of the ocean floor, making it easier to find hydrothermal vent locations. When Alvin inspected one of the sites the deep tow located, the scientists observed black "smoke" billowing out of the vents, something not observed at the Galápagos Rift.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Ballard and geophysicist Jean Francheteau went down in Alvin the day after the black smokers were first observed. They were able to take an accurate temperature reading of the active vent (the previous dive's thermometer had melted) and recorded a temperature of 350 °C (623 K; 662 °F).

[ 11 ] They continued searching for more vents along the East Pacific Rise between 1980 and 1982.

[ citation needed ] Marine archaeology While Ballard had been interested in the sea since an early age, his work at Woods Hole and his scuba diving experiences off Massachusetts spurred his interest in shipwrecks and their exploration. His work in the Navy involved developing small, unmanned submersibles that could be tethered to and controlled from a surface ship and were outfitted with lighting, cameras, and manipulator arms. As early as 1973, he saw this as a way of searching for the wreck of the Titanic . In 1977, he led his first expedition, which was unsuccessful.

[ citation needed ] RMS Titanic Ballard in 1999 with a VHS copy of the film Titanic In the summer of 1985, Ballard was aboard the French research ship Le Suroît , which was using the side scan sonar SAR to search for the Titanic 's wreck. When the French ship was recalled, he transferred onto a ship from Woods Hole , the R/V Knorr . Unbeknownst to some, this trip was financed by the U.S. Navy for secret reconnaissance of the wreckage of two Navy nuclear powered attack submarines , the USS Scorpion and the USS Thresher , which sank in the 1960s, and not for the Titanic .

[ 12 ] In 1982, Ballard had approached the Navy about his new deep sea underwater robot craft, the Argo , and his search for the Titanic .

[ 13 ] The Navy, while not interested in funding Ballard's Titanic search on its own, ultimately concluded that Argo was their best chance to locate their missing submarines, and agreed to finance his expedition on the condition that he first investigated the two submarines, assessed the state of their nuclear reactors, and determined if their long submergence had cause any radioactive environmental impact.

[ 13 ] He was placed on temporary active duty in the Navy, in charge of finding and investigating the wrecks, after which he would be free to use any remaining time and resources to hunt for the Titanic .

[ 13 ] After their missions for the Navy, Knorr arrived on site on August 22, 1985, [ 14 ] and deployed Argo . When they searched for the two submarines, Ballard and his team discovered they had imploded from the immense pressure at depth. It littered thousands of pieces of debris all over the ocean floor. Following the large trail of debris led them directly to the remnants of both vessels and made them significantly easier to locate than if they were to search for the hulls directly. He already knew that the Titanic imploded from pressure, much like the two submarines, and concluded that it too must have left a scattered debris trail. Using that lesson, they had Argo sweep back and forth across the ocean floor looking for the Titanic's debris trail.

[ 14 ] They took shifts monitoring the video feed from Argo as it searched the ocean floor two miles below.

[ citation needed ] In the early morning of September 1, 1985, observers noted anomalies on the smooth ocean floor. At first, it was pockmarks, like small craters from impacts. Eventually, debris was sighted as the rest of the team was awakened. Finally, a boiler was sighted, and soon after that, the hull was found.

[ 15 ] Ballard's team made a general search of the Titanic's exterior, noting its condition. Most significantly, they confirmed that it had split in two and that the stern was in far worse shape than the bow. They did not have much time to explore, as others were waiting to take Knorr on other scientific pursuits, but his fame was now assured. He originally planned to keep the location secret to prevent anyone from claiming prizes. He considered the site a cemetery and refused to desecrate it by removing artifacts.

[ citation needed ] On July 12, 1986, Ballard and his team returned on board Atlantis II [ 14 ] to make the first detailed study of the wreck. This time, he brought Alvin . It was accompanied by Jason Junior , a small remotely operated vehicle that could fit through small openings to see into the ship's interior. Although the first dive (taking over two hours) encountered technical problems, subsequent ones were far more successful and produced a detailed photographic record of the wreck's condition.

[ citation needed ] In 1988, Ballard published a book, Discovery Of The Titanic: Exploring The Greatest Of All Lost Ships , ISBN 0-446-51385-7 and he later recounted the specifics of the expedition for National Geographic in a video.

[ 16 ] Many of the relics retrieved by various groups, not including Ballard, from RMS Titanic were owned by Premier Exhibitions which filed for bankruptcy in 2016. In late August 2018, the groups vying for ownership of the 5,500 relics included one by museums in England and Northern Ireland with assistance from filmmaker James Cameron and some financial support from National Geographic .

[ 17 ] Ballard told the news media that he favored this bid since it would ensure that the memorabilia would be permanently displayed in Belfast and in Greenwich . A decision as to the outcome was to be made by a United States district court judge.

[ 18 ] Other wrecks Bismarck Ballard undertook an even more daunting task when he and his team searched off the coast of France for the German Battleship Bismarck in 1989, using an ocean-crawling robot. The 15,000 foot deep water in which it sank [ 19 ] is 4,000 feet deeper than that where the Titanic sank. He attempted to determine whether it had been sunk by the British or was scuttled by its crew. Three weeks after the expedition however, personal tragedy struck him when his 21-year-old son, Todd, who had aided him in the search, was killed in a car accident.

[ 20 ] Ballard later published a book about the quest, The Discovery of the Bismarck (1990) [ 21 ] The discovery was also documented for National Geographic in a 1989 James Cameron video Search for the Battleship Bismarck which indicated that the ship had been damaged by torpedoes and shells from British ships.

[ 22 ] The actual cause of the sinking, however, was sabotage of the underwater valves by the onboard crew, according to Ballard, who said, "we found a hull that appears whole and relatively undamaged by the descent and impact". Filmmaker Cameron, however, said that his crew's examination of the wreckage indicated that the Bismarck would have sunk eventually even if it had not been scuttled.

[ 23 ] Lusitania In 1993, Ballard investigated the wreck of RMS Lusitania off the Irish coast. It had been struck by a torpedo, whose explosion was followed by a second, much larger one. The wreck had been depth charged by the Royal Navy several years after the sinking and had also been damaged by other explorers, making a forensic analysis difficult. He found no evidence of boiler explosion and he speculated the ignition of coal dust inside the ship caused a "massive, uncontrollable [second] explosion".

[ 24 ] Others have questioned this hypothesis, some suggesting that the ship had been sabotaged by the British. Ballard found no evidence to support this claim.

[ 24 ] Some experts have indicated that it was, in fact, boiler explosions that caused the ship to sink so quickly, in a mere 18 minutes.

[ 25 ] Ballard published a book about the discovery, Exploring the Lusitania: Probing the Mysteries of the Sinking that Changed History , also titled Robert Ballard's Lusitania in some markets, with co-author Spencer Dunmore.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Battle of Guadalcanal In 1992, Ballard and his team visited the sites of many wrecks of World War II in the Pacific . Doing so, he discovered the wreck of the IJN Kirishima .

[ 28 ] His book Lost Ships of Guadalcanal locates and photographs many of the vessels sunk at Ironbottom Sound , the strait between Guadalcanal Island and the Floridas in the Solomon Islands .

[ citation needed ] USS Yorktown On May 19, 1998, Ballard found the wreck of Yorktown , sunk at the Battle of Midway . Found three miles (5 km) beneath the surface, it was photographed.

[ 29 ] PT-109 In 2002, the National Geographic Society and Ballard fielded a ship with remote vehicles to the Solomon Islands . They succeeded in finding a torpedo tube and the forward section from the shipwreck of John F. Kennedy 's PT-109 which was rammed in 1943 by the Japanese destroyer Amagiri off Ghizo Island .

[ 30 ] The visit also brought to light the identity of islanders Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana who had received little recognition for finding the shipwrecked crew after searching for days in their dugout canoe . A TV special and a book were produced, and Ballard spoke at the John F. Kennedy Library in 2005.

[ citation needed ] Institute for Exploration In the 1990s Ballard founded the Institute for Exploration , which specializes in deep-sea archaeology and geology. It joined forces in 1999 with the Mystic Aquarium in Mystic, Connecticut . They are a part of the non-profit Sea Research Foundation, Inc.

[ citation needed ] Center for Ocean Exploration and Archaeological Oceanography In 2003, Ballard started the Center for Ocean Exploration and Archaeological Oceanography , a research program at the University of Rhode Island's Graduate School of Oceanography.

[ 31 ] Black Sea In 1976, Willard Bascom suggested that the deep, anoxic waters of the Black Sea might have preserved ships from antiquity because typical wood-devouring organisms could not survive there. At a depth of 150 m, it contains insufficient oxygen to support most familiar biological life forms.

[ citation needed ] Originally a land-locked freshwater lake, the Black Sea was flooded with salt water from the Mediterranean Sea during the Holocene . The influx of salt water essentially smothered the freshwater below it because a lack of internal motion and mixing meant that no fresh oxygen reached the deep waters, [ 32 ] creating a meromictic body of water. The anoxic environment, which is hostile to many biological organisms that destroy wood in the oxygenated waters, provides an excellent testing site for deep-water archaeological surveys.

[ citation needed ] In a series of expeditions, a team of marine archaeologists led by Ballard identified what appeared to be ancient shorelines, freshwater snail shells, and drowned river valleys in roughly 300 feet (100 m) of water off the Black Sea coast of modern Turkey .

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Radiocarbon dating of freshwater mollusk remains indicated an age of about 7,000 years.

[ citation needed ] The team discovered three ancient wrecks west of the town of Sinop at depths of 100 m. Wreck A and Wreck C probably date to the late Roman period (2nd–4th century A.D.), while Wreck B probably dates to the Byzantine period (5th to 7th century A.D.).

[ citation needed ] To the east of Sinop, the team discovered a remarkably well-preserved wreck at a 320 m depth, in the Black Sea's deep anoxic waters. The vessel's entire hull and cargo are intact, buried in sediments. Its deck structures are also intact, including a mast rising 11 m into the water column. Radiocarbon dating of wood from the wreck provides a date of 410–520 A.D. It has been named "Sinop D" by the Ballard team.

[ citation needed ] In 2000, the team conducted an expedition that focused on exploration of the seabed about 15–30 km west of Sinop, and an additional deep-water survey east and north of the peninsula. Their project had several goals. They sought to discover whether human habitation sites could be identified on the ancient submerged landscape, they examined the sea-bed for shipwrecks (where they found Sinop A-D), to test the hypothesis that the anoxic waters below 200 m would protect shipwrecks from the expected biological attacks on organic components, and to seek data about an ancient trade route between Sinop and the Crimea indicated by terrestrial archaeological remains.

[ citation needed ] Although Sinop served as a primary trade center in the Black Sea, the wrecks were located west of the trade route predicted by the prevalence of Sinopian ceramics on the Crimean peninsula. On wrecks A-C, mounds of distinctive carrot-shaped shipping jars, called amphorae , were found. They were of a style associated with Sinop and retained much of their original stacking pattern on the sea floor. The jars may have carried a variety of archetypal Black Sea products such as olive oil, honey, wine, or fish sauce. The contents are unknown because no artifacts were recovered from these wreck sites in 2000.

[ citation needed ] The wreck provided the team with vast information about the technological changes and trade in the Black Sea during political, social, and economic transition through their study of the ship's construction techniques. Studies show that in Sinop during the Byzantine era, they had developed long-distance trading as early as 4500 BC. Sea-trading on the Black Sea was most intense during the period of late antiquity, between the 2nd and 7th centuries AD.

[ 35 ] The examination of the four shipwrecks found by Ballard and his team provide the direct evidence for Black Sea maritime trade so well attested by the distribution of ceramics on land.

[ citation needed ] The video images of Shipwreck A show a wall of shipping jars standing about 2 m above the seabed. The amphorae highest on the mound had fallen over without displacing those still standing in the rows beneath them, and, likely, the ship settled upright on the seabed gradually being both buried in and filled with sediment as exposed wood was devoured by the larva or the shipworm .

[ citation needed ] Shipwreck B also consisted of a large pile of amphorae but several types are visible, as are multiple timbers protruding from within the mound and on it. In addition to the Sinop-style jars, several amphorae similar to examples excavated on the Yassiada Byzantine shipwreck and dating from the 5th to late 6th century AD are present.

[ 36 ] Two discrete and mostly buried piles of carrot-shaped shipping jars comprise shipwreck C. The team's visit to the site was short and was intended primarily to test survey methodology for deep-water procedures.

[ citation needed ] Shipwreck D provided the team with an unprecedented opportunity to document hull construction during a time of transition. When observing the sonar signature of Shipwreck D, a long, slender upright feature on the seabed, transformed itself into a wooden mast. Elements rarely present on shallower shipwreck sites are beautifully preserved 200 m below the surface. Disappointingly for ship scholars and historians of technology, there are few indications of how the planks of Sinop D are held together. There are no mortise and tenon fastenings and no sewing. Shipwreck D may be one of the earliest lateen -rigged ships to be studied by archaeologists. The angle of the mast and the lack of fittings on it suggest that a lateen sail is the most likely configuration for such a small vessel.

[ citation needed ] The Institute for Exploration Black Sea expeditions relied on remote sensing with side-scan sonar in shallow and deep water to identify potential archaeological sites examined by ROVs . The hypothesis that the anoxic waters of the Black Sea would allow extraordinary organic preservation is borne out by the discovery of Sinop D, the 1,500-year-old shipwreck with excellent preservation of features above the sediment layer.

[ 37 ] According to a report in New Scientist magazine (May 4, 2002, p. 13), the researchers found an underwater delta south of the Bosporus . There was evidence of a strong flow of fresh water out of the Black Sea in the 8th millennium BC . Ballard's research has contributed to the debate over the Black Sea deluge theory .

[ citation needed ] Awards and honors In 1988, he was awarded an honorary degree (Doctor of Science) by the University of Bath .

[ 38 ] In 1990, he received the American Academy of Achievement 's Golden Plate Award.

[ 39 ] Kilby International Awards recipient in 1994 [ 40 ] In 1995, he was awarded with the Explorers Club Medal of The Explorers Club [ 41 ] In 1996 the U.S. Navy Memorial Foundation awarded Ballard its Lone Sailor Award for his naval service and his work on underwater archaeology.

[ 42 ] The Caird Medal of the National Maritime Museum in 2002 [ citation needed ] Asteroid 11277 Ballard , discovered by Carolyn and Eugene Shoemaker at Palomar Observatory , was named in his honor in 2002.

[ 43 ] The National Humanities Medal for 2003.

[ 44 ] Other works Academics In 2004, Ballard was appointed professor of oceanography , and currently serves as Director of the Institute for Archaeological Oceanography, at the University of Rhode Island 's Graduate School of Oceanography. He was the first speaker to give the Charles and Marie Fish Lecture in Oceanography at the University of Rhode Island in 2002.

[ 45 ] Television Ballard served as the technical consultant on the science fiction series seaQuest DSV during its first season from September 1993 until May 1994. During the closing credits, he would speak about the scientific elements present in any given episode and place them in a contemporary context. Although he exited the series in the second season, he was referenced in the third season, with the "Ballard Institute" being named after him.

[ citation needed ] Education In 1989, Ballard founded the JASON Project , a distance education program designed to excite and engage middle school students in science and technology. He began the JASON Project in response to the thousands of letters he received from students following his discovery of the wreck of the Titanic .

[ 46 ] Personal life Ballard married Marjorie Jacobsen in 1966 and divorced in 1990. He remarried in 1991 to Barbara Earle. Ballard has three sons and one daughter.

[ 5 ] : 200 See also Center for Ocean Exploration and Archaeological Oceanography German battleship Bismarck – German battleship of World War II JASON Project – American science education organization Mystic Aquarium – Aquarium in Mystic, Connecticut, US USS Yorktown – Yorktown-class aircraft carrier of the U.S. Navy Wreck of the RMS Titanic – Shipwreck in the North Atlantic Ocean References ^ a b Weston, Phoebe (May 9, 2024).

"I discovered hydrothermal vents, but I'm only known for finding the Titanic" .

The Guardian .

^ Sea Research Foundation (2011).

"About Robert Ballard" . nautiluslive.org.

Archived from the original on May 19, 2019 . Retrieved April 27, 2012 .

^ "Our Mission" .

JASON Learning .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2022 . Retrieved November 18, 2022 .

^ "Sulfur" .

Elements . BBC. October 11, 2014.

Archived from the original on December 26, 2021 . Retrieved December 26, 2021 .

. Download here Archived February 6, 2023, at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b c d e f Ballard, Robert (2021).

Into the Deep . Washington, D.C.: National Geographic.

ISBN 978-1-4262-2099-9 .

^ "Robert Ballard" . Encyclopedia Britannica. 2021.

Archived from the original on September 28, 2020 . Retrieved February 6, 2023 .

^ "Crew of Bismarck may have sunk her" .

The New York Times .

Associated Press . June 23, 1989.

Archived from the original on February 2, 2009 . Retrieved February 6, 2023 .

^ Ballard, Robert D.; McConnell, Malcolm (1998).

Explorations: A Life of Underwater Adventure . New York: Hyperion. pp.

23– 29.

ISBN 0-7868-8389-8 .

^ Ballard, R. D.; Bryan, W. B.; Heirtzler, J. R.; Keller, G.; Moore, J. G.; Andel, Tj. van (1975). "Manned Submersible Observations in the FAMOUS Area: Mid-Atlantic Ridge".

Science .

190 (4210): 103– 108.

Bibcode : 1975Sci...190..103B .

doi : 10.1126/science.190.4210.103 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

JSTOR 1740930 .

S2CID 128755348 .

^ a b Corliss, John B.; Dymond, Jack; Gordon, Louis I.; Edmond, John M.; von Herzen, Richard P.; Ballard, Robert D.; Green, Kenneth; Williams, David; Bainbridge, Arnold (March 16, 1979). "Submarine Thermal Springs on the Galápagos Rift".

Science .

203 (4385): 1073– 1083.

Bibcode : 1979Sci...203.1073C .

doi : 10.1126/science.203.4385.1073 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 17776033 .

S2CID 39869961 .

^ a b Spiess, F. N.; Macdonald, K. C.; Atwater, T.; Ballard, R.; Carranza, A.; Cordoba, D.; Cox, C.; Garcia, V. M. D.; Francheteau, J. (March 28, 1980). "East Pacific Rise: Hot Springs and Geophysical Experiments".

Science .

207 (4438): 1421– 1433.

Bibcode : 1980Sci...207.1421S .

doi : 10.1126/science.207.4438.1421 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 17779602 .

S2CID 28363398 .

^ Levenson, Eric (December 14, 2018).

"Inside the secret US military mission that located the Titanic" .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2018 . Retrieved January 7, 2018 .

^ a b c Smith, Lewis (May 24, 2008).

"Titanic search was cover for secret Cold War subs mission" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on June 4, 2010 . Retrieved May 26, 2008 .

^ a b c "Discovery Of Titanic" .

Archived from the original on May 29, 2006 . Retrieved December 7, 2008 .

^ Ballard, Robert D.; Archbold, Rick (October 1, 1999).

Return to Midway . p. 27.

ISBN 9780792275008 .

^ Dawn McCarty; Jef Feeley; Chris Dixon (November 24, 2017).

"How Did the 'Unsinkable' Titanic End Up at the Bottom of the Ocean?" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on January 6, 2021 . Retrieved September 2, 2018 .

^ Dawn McCarty; Jef Feeley; Chris Dixon (July 24, 2018).

"James Cameron: Getting Titanic Artifacts to U.K. Would Be 'a Dream' " .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on September 2, 2018 . Retrieved September 2, 2018 .

^ Dawn McCarty; Jef Feeley; Chris Dixon (August 31, 2018).

"Bankrupt Titanic exhibitor sets biggest sale of ship relics" .

Bloomberg.com . Bloomberg.

Archived from the original on September 2, 2018 . Retrieved September 2, 2018 .

^ Broad, William J (1990).

"Undersea Robots Open a New Age of Exploration" .

New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 2, 2018 . Retrieved September 2, 2018 .

^ "Son of explorer, another man killed in car crash" . 1989.

Archived from the original on October 20, 2016 . Retrieved April 21, 2021 .

^ Ballard Robert D and Rick Archbold. 1990.

The Discovery of the Bismarck.

New York N.Y: Warner Books.

^ "National Geographic: Search for the Battleship Bismarck (1989)" .

Alibris . 1990.

Archived from the original on September 2, 2018 . Retrieved September 2, 2018 .

^ World War 2 In Review No. 9: Warships . Merriam Press. August 1, 2017.

ISBN 978-1-387-10543-4 .

Archived from the original on February 6, 2023 . Retrieved October 28, 2020 .

^ a b "Text excerpted from Lost Liners, courtesy of Madison Press Books" .

PBS .

Archived from the original on August 30, 2018 . Retrieved September 2, 2018 .

previous visitors had already tampered with the evidence...we found nothing to suggest the ship was sabotaged.

^ Schmidt, Donald E (May 31, 2005).

The Folly of War: American Foreign Policy, 1898-2005 . Algora. p. 74.

ISBN 978-0-87586-382-5 .

Archived from the original on February 6, 2023 . Retrieved October 28, 2020 .

^ Ballard, Robert D. (1995).

Exploring the Lusitania: probing the mysteries of the sinking that changed history . New York: Warner Books.

ISBN 0-446-51851-4 .

LCCN 95002771 .

^ Ballard, Robert D. (2007).

Robert Ballard's Lusitania: probing the mysteries of the sinking that changed history . Edison, N.J.: Chartwell Books.

ISBN 978-0-7858-2207-3 .

^ "Kirishima Damage Analysis" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on November 5, 2015.

^ Ballard, Robert D.; Archbold, Rick (October 1, 1999).

Return to Midway . pp. 14, 151– 155.

ISBN 9780792275008 .

^ "JFK's PT-109 Found, U.S. Navy Confirms" Archived August 19, 2012, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Institute for Archaeological Oceanography" . University of Rhode Island. June 1, 2004. Archived from the original on June 26, 2012 . Retrieved March 17, 2010 .

^ Oğuz, T., Latun, V.S., Latif, M.A., Vladimirov, V. L., Sur, H. I., Markov, A. A., Ozsoy, E. Kotovschichkov, B. B., Eremeev, V.N., and Unluata, U., 1993, Circulation in the surface and intermediate layers, Deep-Sea Research 1.40: 1597–612.

^ Radford, Tim (September 14, 2000).

"Evidence found of Noah's ark flood victims" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on August 21, 2022 . Retrieved August 21, 2022 .

^ "Evidence of Human Habitation in the Black Sea @ nationalgeographic.com" .

National Geographic .

Archived from the original on July 6, 2021 . Retrieved August 21, 2022 .

^ Hiebert, F., 2001, Black Sea coastal cultures: trade and interaction, Expedition 43: 11–20 ^ van Doorninck, F. H. Jr., 2002, Byzantine shipwrecks, in A. Laiou (ed.), The Economic History of Byzantium from the Seventh through the Fifteenth Century I, 899–905. Dumbarton Oaks Studies 30, Washington, DC.

^ Ballard, Robert D., and Ward, Cheryl, 2004, Deep-water Archaeological Survey in the Black Sea; 2000 Season, The International Journal of Nautical Archaeology , 33.1: 2–13, ( online Archived May 22, 2013, at the Wayback Machine ).

^ "Honorary Graduates 1989 to present" .

bath.ac.uk .

University of Bath . Archived from the original on December 19, 2015 . Retrieved February 18, 2012 .

^ "Robert D. Ballard, Ph.D. Biography and Interview" .

www.achievement.org .

American Academy of Achievement .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2019 . Retrieved April 8, 2019 .

^ "The Kilby International Awards Foundation" .

www.kilby.org .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2011 . Retrieved August 31, 2009 .

^ "The Explorers Club Medal" .

www.explorers.org . Archived from the original on June 16, 2020 . Retrieved May 26, 2020 .

^ "Lone Sailor Award Recipients" .

navymemorial.org . United States Navy Memorial . Retrieved January 24, 2025 .

^ "11277 Ballard (1988 TW2)" .

Minor Planet Center .

Archived from the original on March 8, 2021 . Retrieved September 25, 2018 .

^ "Robert Ballard, Ph.D." NEH.gov . National Endowment for the Humanities . Retrieved January 24, 2025 .

^ "The Charles and Marie Fish Lecture in Oceanography" .

The Charles and Marie Fish Lecture in Oceanography . University of Rhode Island.

Archived from the original on February 6, 2023 . Retrieved April 22, 2018 .

^ "The JASON Project - History" .

jason.org . Archived from the original on September 17, 2008 . Retrieved August 14, 2008 .

Further reading R. D. Ballard, F, T. Hiebert, D. F. Coleman, C. Ward, J. Smith, K. Willis, B. Foley, K. Croff, C. Major, and F. Torre, "Deepwater Archaeology of the Black Sea: The 2000 Season at Sinop, Turkey" American Journal of Archaeology Vol. 105 No. 4 (October 2001).

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Robert Ballard .

Robert Ballard 's faculty page at the Graduate School of Oceanography at the University of Rhode Island .

Institute for Exploration at the Mystic Aquarium .

NOAA, Ocean Explorer OceanAGE Careers -  Video profiles, biographies, and background materials related to Oceanexplorer Robert Ballard at TED TED Talk: The astonishing hidden world of the deep ocean (TED2008) National Geographic Photo Gallery: Discovering the Titanic University of Rhode Island Inner Space Center Bob Ballard, The Great Explorer , Laura Logan 's story on 60 Minutes broadcast on November 29, 2009 v t e PT-109 Craft PT boat PT-109 PT-59 Japanese destroyer Amagiri People John F. Kennedy Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana Reg Evans Andrew Kirksey and Harold Marney Media 1962 Song 1963 Film 1987 Video game The Search for Kennedy's PT 109 (2002 film) PT 109: An American Epic of War, Survival, and the Destiny of John F. Kennedy (2015 book) Related Kasolo Island (Kennedy Island) v t e Titanic First class facilities Second and Third class facilities Grand Staircase Animals aboard Sinking Iceberg that sank the Titanic Changes in safety practices Lifeboats Lifeboat No. 1 British inquiry United States inquiry Wreck of the Titanic Legends and myths Conspiracy theories Officers Edward J. Smith (Captain) Henry Tingle Wilde (Chief Officer) William McMaster Murdoch (First Officer) Charles H. Lightoller (Second Officer) Herbert Pitman (Third Officer) Joseph G. Boxhall (Fourth Officer) Harold G. Lowe (Fifth Officer) James Paul Moody (Sixth Officer) Hugh McElroy (Chief Purser) Joseph Bell (Chief Engineer) Crew members Frederick Barrett Harold Bride William Denton Cox Sid Daniels Frank Oliver Evans Frederick Fleet Luigi Gatti Robert Hichens Violet Jessop Archie Jewell Charles Joughin Reginald Lee Evelyn Marsden William Mintram Jack Phillips Frank Winnold Prentice Arthur John Priest George Symons Musicians Wallace Hartley John Wesley Woodward Passengers Fatalities Allison family Thomas Andrews John Jacob Astor IV David John Bowen Archibald Butt Thomas Byles Roderick Chisholm Walter Donald Douglas Annie Funk Jacques Futrelle Sidney Leslie Goodwin Benjamin Guggenheim John Harper Henry B. Harris Wallace Hartley Charles Melville Hays Ann Elizabeth Isham Edward Austin Kent Joseph Philippe Lemercier Laroche Francis Davis Millet Harry Markland Molson Clarence Moore Eino Viljami Panula W. T. Stead Ida Straus Isidor Straus John B. Thayer Frank M. Warren Sr.

George D. Wick George Dunton Widener Harry Elkins Widener Duane Williams George Henry Wright Survivors Rhoda Abbott Trevor Allison Lillian Asplund Madeleine Astor Ruth Elizabeth Becker Lawrence Beesley Karl Behr Dickinson Bishop Mauritz Håkan Björnström-Steffansson Elsie Bowerman Francis Browne Margaret "Molly" Brown Helen Churchill Candee Charlotte Drake Cardeza Lucile Carter Gladys Cherry Millvina Dean Sir Cosmo Duff-Gordon Lucy, Lady Duff-Gordon Dorothy Gibson Archibald Gracie IV Frank John William Goldsmith Edith Haisman Henry S. Harper Eva Hart Margaret Bechstein Hays Masabumi Hosono J. Bruce Ismay Eleanor Ileen Johnson Louise Kink Louise Laroche Margaret Mannion Michel Marcel Navratil Alfred Nourney Arthur Godfrey Peuchen Jane Quick Winnifred Quick Edith Rosenbaum Noël Leslie, Countess of Rothes Emily Ryerson Agnes Sandström Beatrice Sandström Frederic Kimber Seward Eloise Hughes Smith Douglas Spedden Jack Thayer Marian Thayer Barbara West Ella Holmes White Eleanor Elkins Widener R. Norris Williams Marie Grice Young Monuments and memorials Australia Bandstand (Ballarat) United Kingdom Engine Room Heroes (Liverpool) Engineers (Southampton) Musicians (Southampton) Titanic (Belfast) Orchestra (Liverpool) United States Straus Park (New York City) Titanic (New York City) Titanic (Washington, D.C.) Butt–Millet Memorial Fountain (Washington, D.C.) Popular culture (cultural legacy) Books The Wreck of the Titan: Or, Futility (1898) A Night to Remember (1955) Polar the Titanic Bear (1995) Films Saved from the Titanic (1912) In Nacht und Eis (1912) La hantise (1912) Atlantic (1929) Atlantik (1929) Titanic (1943) Titanic (1953) A Night to Remember (1958) The Unsinkable Molly Brown (1964) Raise the Titanic (1980) Secrets of the Titanic (1986) Titanica (1992) Titanic (1997) The Chambermaid on the Titanic (1997) The Legend of the Titanic (1999) Titanic: The Legend Goes On (2000) The Boy Who Saw the Iceberg (2000) Ghosts of the Abyss (2003) Tentacolino (2004) Titanic II (2010) The Six (2021) Titanic 666 (2022) Unsinkable (2024) Television " A Night to Remember " (1956) S.O.S. Titanic (1979) Titanic: The Complete Story (1994) Titanic (1996 miniseries) No Greater Love (1996) "A Flight to Remember" ( Futurama ) (1999) "The Mutants Are Revolting" ( Futurama ) (2010) Titanic (2012 miniseries) Titanic: Blood and Steel (2012) Saving the Titanic (2012) Titanic: The Aftermath (2012) Theater The Berg (1929) The Unsinkable Molly Brown (1960 musical) Titanic (1974) Titanic (1997 musical) Music " The Titanic (It Was Sad When That Great Ship Went Down) " (folk song) The Sinking of the Titanic (music composition) Titanic (soundtrack album) Back to Titanic (soundtrack album) " My Heart Will Go On " (song) " Nearer, My God, to Thee " (song) Titanique (musical parody) " Dance Band on the Titanic " (song) " Titanic " (song) Titanic Requiem (music composition) " Tempest " (song) Titanic Rising (album) Video games Search for the Titanic (1989) Titanic: Adventure Out of Time (1996) Titanic: Honor and Glory (TBA) Museums and exhibitions SeaCity Museum (Southampton) Titanic Museum (Branson, Missouri) Titanic Museum (Pigeon Forge, Tennessee) Maritime Museum of the Atlantic (Halifax) Titanic Belfast Places Titanic (Canada) Titanic Canyon Titanic Quarter, Belfast Cape Race, Newfoundland Fairview Lawn Cemetery Mount Olivet Cemetery (Halifax, Nova Scotia) Arrol Gantry Titanic, Oklahoma Related Ships RMS Baltic RMS Olympic HMHS Britannic SS Mount Temple RMS Carpathia SS Californian CS Mackay-Bennett SS Birma SS Frankfurt Replica Titanic Titanic II Romandisea Titanic Law RMS Titanic Maritime Memorial Act Agreement Concerning the Shipwrecked Vessel RMS Titanic Others White Star Line David Blair James Cameron Harold Cottam Herbert Haddock Stanley Lord Arthur Rostron Titanic Historical Society Titanic International Society Encyclopedia Titanica Halomonas titanicae Women and children first Robert Ballard La Circassienne au Bain Titan submersible implosion The Big Piece Category v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robert_Ballard&oldid=1303158994 " Categories : 1942 births American oceanographers American underwater divers Living people Maritime archaeology Military personnel from California National Humanities Medal recipients Military personnel from San Diego Academics from San Diego RMS Titanic Sigma Alpha Epsilon members Underwater archaeologists United States Army officers United States Navy officers University of California, Santa Barbara alumni University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa alumni University of Rhode Island alumni University of Rhode Island faculty University of Southern California alumni Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected biographies of living people BLP articles lacking sources from June 2023 All BLP articles lacking sources Use mdy dates from January 2023 Use American English from May 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Pages using infobox military person with embed Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2019 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 11:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Robert Ballard 32 languages Add topic

