Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Database 2 Variation 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Radius of outermost closed isobar Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from ROCI ) Measurement of tropical cyclone size Size descriptions of tropical cyclones ROCI Type Less than 2 degrees latitude Very small/midget 2 to 3 degrees of latitude Small 3 to 6 degrees of latitude Medium/Average 6 to 8 degrees of latitude Large Over 8 degrees of latitude Very large [ 1 ] The radius of outermost closed isobar ( ROCI ) is one of the quantities used to determine the size of a tropical cyclone .  It is determined by measuring the radii from the center of the storm to its outermost closed isobar in four quadrants, which is then averaged to come up with a scalar value.  It generally delimits the outermost extent of a tropical cyclone's wind circulation.

[ 2 ] Use of this measure has objectively determined that tropical cyclones in the northwest Pacific Ocean are the largest on Earth on average, with North Atlantic tropical cyclones roughly half their size.

[ 3 ] Active databases of ROCI are maintained by the National Hurricane Center for systems tracked in the eastern north Pacific and north Atlantic basins.

Database [ edit ] Hurricane Sandy at peak intensity.

A global once-daily dataset was compiled for a 1984 research paper, which covered global tropical cyclones between 1957 and 1977.

[ 3 ] Previously, a database was created to determine ROCI values for the western north Pacific Ocean in 1972, using data from 1945 to 1968.

[ 4 ] Another database with additional ROCI information is currently being modified at the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center for use in matching ongoing tropical cyclones to past systems for the purposes of finding rainfall analogs to an ongoing event, [ 5 ] which has fairly continuous data running back to 1959 for the north Atlantic Ocean .

[ 6 ] Variation [ edit ] Tropical cyclones tend to be smaller during the mid-summer, and largest in October in the Northern Hemisphere .  As tropical cyclones initially develop, the size of their ROCI initially contracts.

[ 7 ] Once tropical cyclones reach maturity, their isobaric patterns increase in size.  During the mature stage, the broadening pressure pattern leads to some reduction in their maximum sustained wind , but the extent of their tropical storm and hurricane-force winds is the most extensive within the storm's life cycle.

[ 8 ] An increase in size is also noted as a tropical cyclone gains latitude.

[ 7 ] As tropical cyclones weaken, their ROCI values diminish.  In general, the size of a tropical cyclone shows little relation to its intensity.  Use of this measure has objectively determined that tropical cyclones in the northwest Pacific Ocean are the largest on earth on average, with North Atlantic tropical cyclones roughly half their size.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Radius of maximum wind References [ edit ] ^ Joint Typhoon Warning Center.

Q: What is the average size of a tropical cyclone?

Archived 2013-09-01 at the Wayback Machine United States Navy . Retrieved on 2007-07-04.

^ FRÉDÉRIC MOUTON and OLA NORDBECK.

Cyclone Database Manager.

Archived 2011-07-18 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 2008-07-14.

^ a b c Robert T. Merrill.

A Comparison of Large and Small Tropical Cyclones.

Retrieved on 2008-07-14.

^ K. S. Liu and Johnny C. L. Chan.

Size of Tropical Cyclones as Inferred from ERS-1 and ERS-2 Data.

Retrieved on 2008-07-14.

^ David M. Roth and Kyle S. Griffin (2009-06-07).

Cliqr Rainfall Analog.

Hydrometeorological Prediction Center . Retrieved on 2009-06-14.

^ David M. Roth (2013).

"CLIQR Database" .

Hydrometeorological Prediction Center . Retrieved 2013-01-04 .

^ a b Edward Morgan Brooks (1945).

An Analysis of an Unusual Rainfall Distribution in a Hurricane.

Archived 2015-04-03 at the Wayback Machine Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Retrieved on 2008-12-31.

^ Gordon E. Dunn and Banner I. Miller (1960).

Atlantic Hurricanes .

Louisiana State University Press . p. 32.

ASIN B0006BM85S .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Radius_of_outermost_closed_isobar&oldid=1248657727 " Categories : Tropical cyclone meteorology Tropical cyclones Radii Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 September 2024, at 19:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Radius of outermost closed isobar Add languages Add topic

