Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Decrees of the League 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Citations 4.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents Epirote League 9 languages Български Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Shqip Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek coalition Coin of the Epirote League, depicting Zeus (left) and a lighting with the word "ΑΠΕΙΡΩΤΑΝ" – Epirotes (right) The Epirote League ( Epirote : Κοινὸν Ἀπειρωτᾶν , Koinòn Āpeirōtân ; Attic : Κοινὸν Ἠπειρωτῶν , Koinòn Ēpeirōtôn ) was an ancient Greek coalition, or koinon , [ 1 ] of Epirote tribes.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Depicting Dioni and Zeus (left) and a bull (right) The coalition was established between 370 and 320 BC (firstly as the Molossian League in 370 BC), which helped unify the three main Greek tribes of Epirus (i.e., Molossians , Thesprotians , and Chaonians ).

[ 3 ] The oracle of Dodona was the religious, political and cultural centre of the Molossian League and later of the Epirote League. In 297 BC, Pyrrhus of Epirus became leader of the League.

[ 4 ] When King Agathocles of Syracuse conquered Corcyra, he offered the island as dowry to his daughter Lanassa on her marriage to Pyrrhus of Epirus in 295 BC.

[ 5 ] The island then became a member of the Epirote League. It was then perhaps that the settlement of Cassope was founded to serve as a base for the king of Epirus' expeditions. The island remained in the Epirote League until 255 BC when it became independent after the death of Alexander II of Epirus . The league was defeated by the Illyrians during the Battle of Phoenice , which forced it to enter into an alliance with Teuta to prevent further attacks. This alliance made the Epirotes hostile to the Achaeans and Aetolians, but it presumably ended following the Illyrian defeat in the First Illyrian War .

Although the Epirote League remained neutral in the first two Macedonian Wars , it was ultimately dismantled in the Third Macedonian War (171–168 BC), with the Molossians siding with the Macedonians and the Chaonians and Thesprotians supporting the Roman Republic .

[ 6 ] Decrees of the League [ edit ] Copies of the decrees ( proxeny and citizenship decrees, manumission records) of the Molossian and Epirote League were set up in Dodona . All members had common citizenship.

[ 7 ] Regarding the dialect of the Epirote League, it was not Corinthian Doric and even the alphabet was not Corinthian; it was probably Northwest Doric, as some recorded inquiries at Dodona appear to indicate.

[ 8 ] The first epigraphical evidence of the Molossian League goes back to 370 BC under the king (or basileus ) Neoptolemus .

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Epirote League .

Epirus (ancient state) References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ The full range of meanings can be found under κοινός in Liddell & Scott 1940 .

^ Boatwright, Gargola & Talbert 2004 , p. 92: "Pyrrhus matched this model. His power base was his kingship over the Molossians, a traditional office with customary limitations. To this he added the post of hegemon, or commander, of the Epirote League, an alliance of Epirote communities to which each contributed forces and funds toward common goals." ^ Franke 1989 , p. 459: "As king of the Molossians – he never styled himself king of the Epirotes and certainly never king of Epirus, a title found especially in the Roman tradition – Pyrrhus was at the same time the hegemon of the Epirote League which was founded around 325/20 and describes itself as the ΣΥΜΜΑΧΟΙ ΤΩΝ ΑΠΕΙΡΩΤΑΝ ('the Epirote allies') on inscriptions. The League united the three main peoples of Epirus (Map 9) – the Molossians, the Thesprotians, and the Chaonians, who were evidently the last to join; each of these in turn consisted of numerous sub-groups." ^ Koester 1995 , p. 33: "After a variety of experiences Pyrrhos had become king of the Molossians and leader of the Epirote league in northwestern Greece (297 BCE)." ^ Chamoux 2002 , p. 59; Franke 1989 , p. 458.

^ "Epirus" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc . Retrieved 16 November 2013 .

^ Eidinow 2007 , p. 59: "[...] to the gradual weakening of the Molossian monarchy and the formation of the Epirote League, in which the members had common citizenship (233/2–168 BCE)." ^ Hammond 1994 , p. 434.

^ Cabanes 1976 , p. 534: Appendice Epigraphique, 1 .

Sources [ edit ] Boatwright, Mary Taliaferro; Gargola, Daniel J.; Talbert, Richard J. A. (2004).

The Romans: From Village to Empire . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-511876-6 .

Cabanes, Pierre (1976).

"L'Épire, de la mort de Pyrrhos à la conquête romaine (272–167 av. J.C.)" .

Collection de l'Institut des Sciences et Techniques de l'Antiquité . Annales Littéraires de l'Université de Besançon (in French).

186 (1). Paris: Les Belles Lettres.

doi : 10.3406/ista.1976.2208 .

Chamoux, François (2002).

Hellenistic Civilization . Oxford: Blackwell Publishing .

ISBN 0-631-22241-3 .

Eidinow, Esther (2007).

Oracles, Curses, and Risk among the Ancient Greeks . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-927778-0 .

Franke, P. R. (1989). "CHAPTER 10 PYRRHUS". In Astin, A. E.; Walbank, F. W.; Frederiksen, M. W.; Ogilvie, R. M.; Drummond, A. (eds.).

The Cambridge Ancient History: The Rise of Rome to 220 BC . Vol. VII, Part 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

456– 485.

ISBN 0-521-23446-8 .

Hammond, Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprière (1994). "CHAPTER 9d. ILLYRIANS AND NORTH-WEST GREEKS". In Lewis, David Malcolm; Boardman, John; Hornblower, Simon; Ostwald, M. (eds.).

The Cambridge Ancient History: The Fourth Century B.C.

Vol. VI (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

422– 443.

ISBN 0-521-23348-8 .

Hansen, Mogens Herman; Nielsen, Thomas Heine (2004).

An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-814099-1 .

Koester, Helmut (1995).

Introduction to the New Testament, Volume 1: History, Culture, and Religion of the Hellenistic Age . New York and Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

ISBN 3-11-014692-4 .

Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert (1940).

A Greek-English Lexicon . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Epirote_League&oldid=1256389904 " Categories : Epirus (ancient state) Leagues in Greek Antiquity Ancient Corcyra States and territories established in the 4th century BC 370 BC Late Classical Greece 370s BC establishments Greek city-state federations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link from Wikidata CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1: long volume value Use dmy dates from March 2017 This page was last edited on 9 November 2024, at 18:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Epirote League 9 languages Add topic

