Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Underwater Toggle Underwater subsection 1.1 Depth range 2 The liquid environment Toggle The liquid environment subsection 2.1 Liquids other than water 3 Type and profile of substrate 4 Water conditions Toggle Water conditions subsection 4.1 Motion and flow of the medium 4.2 Visibility and illumination 4.3 Water temperatures 4.3.1 Air temperatures 5 High altitude 6 Hazardous materials 7 Aquatic and marine organisms 8 Confined spaces and overheads Toggle Confined spaces and overheads subsection 8.1 Caves and caverns 8.2 Sunken shipwrecks and other submerged structures 8.3 Floating vessels and structures 8.4 Interior of engineering or built structures 8.5 Under ice 9 Arbitrary geographical and legal distinctions Toggle Arbitrary geographical and legal distinctions subsection 9.1 Offshore 9.2 Inshore 9.3 Inland 9.4 Open ocean 9.5 Underwater worksites 9.5.1 Scenes of crimes, accidents and disasters 9.6 Recreational dive sites 9.7 Diver training sites 10 See also 11 References Toggle the table of contents Underwater diving environment Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The underwater environment to which a diver may be exposed See also: List of diving environments by type and Underwater environment Divers over the reef at Dalgleish bank P2010598 The underwater diving environment , or just diving environment is the natural or artificial surroundings in which a dive is done. It is usually underwater , but professional diving is sometimes done in other liquids.

Underwater diving is the human practice of voluntarily descending below the surface of the water to interact with the surroundings, for various recreational or occupational reasons, but the concept of diving also legally extends to immersion in other liquids, and exposure to other hyperbaric pressurised environments.

[ 1 ] The diving environment is limited by accessibility and risk, but includes water and occasionally other liquids. Most underwater diving is done in the shallower coastal parts of the oceans, and inland bodies of fresh water, including lakes, dams, quarries, rivers, springs, flooded caves , reservoirs, tanks, swimming pools, and canals , but may also be done in large bore ducting and sewers, power station cooling systems, cargo and ballast tanks of ships, and liquid-filled industrial equipment. The environment may affect equipment configuration: for instance, freshwater is less dense than saltwater, so less added weight is needed to achieve diver neutral buoyancy in freshwater dives.

[ 2 ] Water temperature, visibility and movement also affect the diver and the dive plan.

[ 3 ] Diving in liquids other than water may present special problems due to density, viscosity and chemical compatibility of diving equipment, as well as possible environmental hazards to the diving team.

[ 4 ] Benign conditions, sometimes also referred to as confined water , are environments of low risk, where it is extremely unlikely or impossible for the diver to get lost or entrapped, or be exposed to hazards other than the basic underwater environment. These conditions are suitable for initial training in the critical survival skills, and include swimming pools , training tanks, aquarium tanks and some shallow and protected shoreline areas.

[ 5 ] Open water is unrestricted water such as a sea, lake or flooded quarry , where the diver has unobstructed direct vertical access to the surface of the water in contact with the atmosphere.

[ 6 ] Open-water diving implies that if a problem arises, the diver can directly ascend vertically to the atmosphere to breathe the ambient air.

[ 7 ] Wall diving is done along a near vertical face.

Blue-water diving is done in good visibility in mid-water where the bottom is out of sight of the diver and there may be no fixed visual reference.

[ 8 ] Black-water diving is mid-water diving at night, particularly on a moonless night.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] An overhead or penetration diving environment is where the diver enters a region from which there is no direct, purely vertical ascent to the safety of breathable atmosphere at the surface.

Cave diving , wreck diving , ice diving and diving inside or under other natural or artificial underwater structures or enclosures are examples. The restriction on direct ascent increases the risk of diving under an overhead, and this is usually addressed by adaptations of procedures and use of equipment such as redundant breathing gas sources and guide lines to indicate the route to the exit.

[ 11 ] [ 4 ] [ 3 ] Night diving can allow the diver to experience a different underwater environment , because many marine animals are nocturnal .

[ 12 ] Altitude diving , for example in mountain lakes, requires modifications to the decompression schedule because of the reduced atmospheric pressure.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] : Ch.9 Underwater [ edit ] Main article: Underwater environment Great Barrier Reef , Australia An underwater environment is a environment of, and immersed in, liquid water in a natural or artificial feature (called a body of water ), such as an ocean , sea , lake , pond , reservoir , river , canal , or aquifer . Some characteristics of the underwater environment are universal, but many depend on the local situation.

[ 15 ] A number of human activities are conducted in the more accessible parts of the underwater environment. These include research, underwater diving for work or recreation, and underwater warfare with submarines. This environment is hostile to humans in many ways and often inaccessible, and therefore relatively little explored.

[ 15 ] An immediate obstacle to human activity under water is that human lungs cannot naturally function in this environment. Any penetration into the underwater environment for more than a few minutes requires artificial aids to maintain life. The raised ambient pressure is a problem for any gas-filled spaces like the mouth , ears , paranasal sinuses and lungs. and can cause barotrauma . The raised pressure also affects the solution of breathing gases in the tissues over time, and can lead to a range of adverse effects, such as inert gas narcosis , and oxygen toxicity .

Decompression must be controlled to avoid bubble formation in the tissues and the consequent symptoms of decompression sickness . With a few exceptions, the underwater environment tends to cool the unprotected human body. This heat loss will generally lead to hypothermia eventually. Entrainment of a diver by moving water can cause injury by impacting the diver against hard objects or moving them to inappropriate depths.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Depth range [ edit ] See also: Deep diving A technical diver using a closed circuit rebreather with open circuit bailout cylinders returns from a 600-foot (180 m) dive.

One of the more obvious environmental constraints on diving is the ambient pressure, which is a function of depth and density.

[ 14 ] The recreational diving depth limit set by the EN 14153-2 / ISO 24801-2 level 2 " Autonomous Diver " standard is 20 metres (66 ft).

[ 16 ] The recommended depth limit for more extensively trained recreational divers ranges from 30 metres (98 ft) for PADI divers, [ 17 ] (this is the depth at which nitrogen narcosis symptoms generally begin to be noticeable in adults), to 40 metres (130 ft) specified by Recreational Scuba Training Council , [ 17 ] 50 metres (160 ft) for divers of the British Sub-Aqua Club and Sub-Aqua Association breathing air, [ 18 ] and 60 metres (200 ft) for teams of 2 to 3 French Level 3 recreational divers, breathing air.

[ 19 ] For technical divers, the recommended maximum depths are greater on the understanding that they will use less narcotic gas mixtures. 100 metres (330 ft) is the maximum depth authorised for divers who have completed Trimix Diver certification with IANTD [ 20 ] or Advanced Trimix Diver certification with TDI .

[ 21 ] 332 metres (1,089 ft) is the world record depth on scuba (2014).

[ 22 ] Commercial divers using saturation techniques and heliox breathing gases routinely exceed 100 metres (330 ft), but they are also limited by physiological constraints.

Comex Hydra 8 experimental dives reached a record open water depth of 534 metres (1,752 ft) in 1988.

[ 23 ] Atmospheric pressure diving suits are mainly constrained by the technology of the articulation seals, and a US Navy diver has dived to 610 metres (2,000 ft) in one.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Greater depths can be achieved with submersibles , some of which are capable of " full ocean depth ", the greatest underwater depth known on Earth.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] The liquid environment [ edit ] Most diving is done in fresh water , sea water , and brack water , but brines , low density silts , drilling mud , petrochemical liquids, crude and refined oils , alcohol mixtures and other liquids may be dived in for special reasons.

[ 28 ] Liquids other than water [ edit ] Density and viscosity of the medium are of primary importance, as it must be possible for the diver to sink and move around in the medium. Chemical compatibility with the diving equipment is also essential to some extent, though provided the equipment protects the diver adequately for the duration of the dive, it may be acceptable to dispose of it after the dive. Health risks due to possible contamination of the diver are also a concern, and some of these environments may classify as hazardous materials and require formal decontamination after diving.

[ 28 ] Type and profile of substrate [ edit ] The diving environment can be strongly influenced by the substrate, as most diving activities are conducted near the substrate. Recreational diving sites are commonly chosen by what can be seen there, and that often depends on the geographical location and the bottom structure. Tropical coral reef is the most popular environment among recreational diving tourists , with rocky reefs and shipwrecks also popular, as they tend to both provide scenic topography and support ecological diversity . Rocky substrates can support high profile structure, like walls , overhangs, talus caves, pinnacles and steep sided gullies.

Caves are also sought after for their mystery and sometimes spectacular topography, and may also be dived as a way to explore the underwater extent of flooded areas, or to penetrate beyond sumps . Unconsolidated material such as shingle , pebbles, gravel, sand and silt tend to be relatively flat, and topographically dull, and the ecology in finer grained substrates tends to be largely infauna , but there are also regions known for high biodiversity of colourful and exotic animals and muck diving [ 29 ] When the substrate is out of visual range for the diver, the mid-water with no fixed visual depth reference can be of interest for pelagic fauna. Diving in this environment in good visibility is known as blue-water diving during the day, and black-water diving during the night.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Water conditions [ edit ] Physical conditions of the water or other diving medium influence the safety and practicability of a dive and can affect the choice of equipment used. These include motion of the medium, visibility and illumination, temperature, and pressure. These conditions are affected by weather, season and climate.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Motion and flow of the medium [ edit ] Motion of the water affects the diver's ability to move around and hold a position while performing an activity. Types of water motion include Ocean currents , river currents , tides , waves , surge , upwellings , overfalls , turbulence , springs , and sinks . Motion of water is generally caused by surface wind, gravity and localised pressure differentials .

[ 31 ] A high energy underwater environment is one in which the water can move large particles around. Small particles tend to remain in suspension. The turbidity is likely to be high and visibility likely to be relatively poor, but the actions of divers are unlikely to have much influence on these characteristics. A low energy environment encourages deposition of small and relatively light particles, which can produce clear water, with silt deposits on the substrate, easily disturbed by divers to cause a silt-out , and sudden deterioration of visibility.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Visibility and illumination [ edit ] Main article: Underwater vision Visibility, the distance at which objects can be seen in a medium, and illumination, the level of ambient natural of artificial light, are environmental factors which influence the ability of a diver to perform the goal of a dive, and can also strongly affect the safety of the dive. They can be independent of many of the other factors, and dependent on others.

Low visibility and zero visibility are usually associated with poor illumination, but visibility can be good even at low light levels, and artificial lighting is available to increase illumination.

[ 34 ] Water temperatures [ edit ] Hot water is usually found in industrial environments or natural hot springs. Hot water can cause overheating of divers, and this can be difficult to prevent. Professional divers diving with surface-supplied equipment may use a flow of cooling water analogous to a hot water suit .

Tropical water is the natural temperature of bodies of water in tropical regions, due to heating by the sun and cooling by wind. Maximum sea surface temperature can reach about 35 °C (95 °F).

[ 35 ] Temperate water is water cooler than tropical, and warmer than "cold water". For diving purposes this can be considered the temperature range in which a full wetsuit is acceptable thermal protection for most divers for most diving activities. The range of 10 to 25 °C (50 to 77 °F) could generally be considered temperate water for diving.

Cool water is water at temperatures which are tolerable for a short to moderate time unprotected, and in which heat loss can be managed without difficulty by passive insulation alone. A long-distance swimmer might find the temperature acceptable for a long  but active immersion.

Cold water is generally considered as temperatures below 10 °C (50 °F) where regulator freeze becomes a significant possibility.

[ 36 ] Under ice, the temperature of fresh water is limited to 0 °C (32 °F) at the surface or directly under the ice, and up to 4 °C (39 °F)in deeper water. In sea water the temperatures can be a few degrees lower, the minimum recorded temperature for Antarctic bottom water is −2.6 °C (27.3 °F).

[ 37 ] Colder than normal water can be encountered  as a consequence of upwellings Air temperatures [ edit ] Ambient air temperatures at a dive site can differ considerably from the water conditions. It is common to find that the air temperature is more extreme than the water temperature, as in polar diving, where the water temperature can be several degrees warmer than the air, [ 38 ] or tropical and temperate waters where the air can be several degrees hotter than the water.

Wind chill can also affect the comfort and safety of the diving team, as it accelerates heat loss.

[ 39 ] High altitude [ edit ] Main article: Altitude diving SCUBA Diver in the mountain lake Lai da Marmorera 1,680 metres (5,510 ft) above sea level) Altitude is significant in diving because it affects the decompression requirement for a dive, so that the stop depths and decompression times used for dives at altitude are different from those used for the same dive profile at sea level.

[ 40 ] The U.S. Navy tables recommend that no alteration be made for dives at altitudes lower than 91 metres (299 ft), and for dives between 91 and 300 meters altitude, correction is required for dives deeper than 44 metres (144 ft) of sea water equivalent.

[ 14 ] Altitude diving is generally considered to be underwater diving using scuba or Surface-supplied diving equipment where the surface is 300 metres (980 ft) or more above sea level (for example, a mountain lake).

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Many recently manufactured decompression computers can automatically detect and compensate for altitude, in some others it is a user setting.

[ 43 ] Hazardous materials [ edit ] Main article: Hazmat diving US Navy Diver being decontaminated after a dive. If the contamination was severe, the decontamination team would have been wearing hazmat gear.

The diving environment may be contaminated by hazardous materials, the diving medium may be inherently a hazardous material, or the environment in which the diving medium is situated may include hazardous materials with a significant risk of exposure to these materials to members of the diving team . Hazmat diving is underwater diving in a known hazardous materials environment. Special precautions, equipment and procedures are associated with hazmat diving so that the risk can be reduced to an acceptable level.

[ 44 ] [ 28 ] Aquatic and marine organisms [ edit ] Main article: Aquatic biology Further information: List of diving hazards and precautions § The specific diving environment , Scientific diving , Marine biology , Citizen science , and Shark cage diving Aquatic and marine organisms are part of the underwater environment, They may be considered hazards, or the reason to dive, or both. Sometimes the same species or individual can be both a hazard and the subject of study or entertainment. Marine and aquatic biologists, conservationists, amateur naturalists, underwater photographers and videographers, and recreational divers may dive to observe, monitor, record, collect, or hunt the underwater life.

[ 15 ] [ 45 ] Confined spaces and overheads [ edit ] Not to be confused with confined water (diving) .

An overhead diving environment or penetration diving environment implies that there is a physical obstacle to a direct ascent to a water surface in contact with breathable air. Most confined space diving environments are under an overhead. Overhead environments include work under ships and other structures, culverts, inside industrial installations, drains, sewers, penstocks and similar installations, as well as the better known cave , cavern, and wreck diving environments. The restriction on direct ascent increases the risk of diving under an overhead, and this is usually addressed by adaptations of procedures and use of equipment such as redundant breathing gas sources and guide lines to indicate the route to the exit.

[ 11 ] [ 4 ] [ 3 ] Caves and caverns [ edit ] Main article: Cave diving A cave diver running a reel with guide line into the overhead environment The flooded and partially flooded underground environment is dived for recreation, exploration, and scientific investigation, and occasionally for the search for and recovery of divers or, as in the 2018 Thai cave rescue , other cave users. A cave is a form of overhead environment and may include restrictions and low visibility due to silt suspended in the water. Various types of caves and mines may be flooded and provide cave diving environments. The interior of caves is mostly beyond the reach of natural light, and may have a flow of water through the flooded passages. The flow is normally one directional, and may be inwards as a sink or swallet , outwards as a spring or resurgence , or in from one side and out through the other, with access to the water partway along the flow. The entire interior may be flooded, or parts may be dry, sometimes with sumps separating them. Flow velocity will vary as the cross-sectional area changes, and areas of high flow velocity can occur, making restrictions more hazardous.

Sea caves may have bidirectional flow caused by tides, and anchialine caves , which are usually coastal, contain a mixture of freshwater and saline water (usually sea water) of different densities, sometimes separated by a distinct halocline .

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] A arbitrary distinction is made by recreational diver training agencies between caves and caverns, where cavern diving is deemed to be diving in those parts of a cave where the exit to open water can be seen by natural light. An arbitrary distance limit to the open water surface may also be specified.

[ 47 ] Sunken shipwrecks and other submerged structures [ edit ] Main article: Wreck diving See also: Salvage diving , Clearance diving , and Marine archeology Diver at the wreck of the Hilma Hooker , Netherlands Antilles .

Recreational diving where the wreckage of ships , aircraft and other artificial structures are explored is called wreck diving. The term is used mainly by recreational and technical divers. Professional divers, when diving on a shipwreck, generally refer to the specific task, such as salvage work, accident investigation or archaeological survey. Although most wreck dive sites are at shipwrecks, there is an increasing trend to scuttle retired ships to create artificial reef sites . Diving to crashed aircraft can also be considered wreck diving.

[ 49 ] The recreation of wreck diving makes no distinction as to how the vessel ended up on the bottom. Some wreck diving involves penetration of the wreckage, making a direct ascent to the surface impossible for a part of the dive.

[ 50 ] The diving work associated with the recovery of all or part of ships, their cargoes , aircraft, and other vehicles and structures which have sunk or fallen into water is called salvage diving. In the case of ships it may also refer to diving to do repair work to make an abandoned or distressed but still floating vessel more suitable for towing or propulsion under its own power.

[ 51 ] [ 14 ] [ 52 ] Most salvage diving is commercial work, or military work, depending on the diving contractor and the purpose for the salvage operation, Similar underwater work may be done by divers as part of forensic investigations into accidents, in which case the procedures may be more closely allied with underwater archaeology than the more basic procedures of advantageous cost/benefit expected in commercial and military operations.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] Clearance diving , the removal of obstructions and hazards to navigation, is closely related to salvage diving, but has a different purpose, in that the objects to be removed are not intended to be recovered, just removed or reduced to a condition where they no longer constitute a hazard or obstruction.

[ 14 ] Floating vessels and structures [ edit ] See also: Ships husbandry and Salvage diving The underside of the hull is an overhead environment with no direct vertical access to the surface. As such it constitutes an entrapment hazard, particularly under large vessels where it may be too dark due to low natural light or turbid water to see the way to the side of the hull. The bottom of the largest ships is mostly flat and featureless, exacerbating the problem. There is also a hazard of crushing if the clearance is small and the tide range is large or the vessel is aground. A similar environment can be found under floating jetties .

[ 56 ] Interior of engineering or built structures [ edit ] Sewers, tanks, pipelines, culverts, tunnels, intakes, drains, etc. may require inspection or maintenance while full or partly full of water. Where a flow that can endanger the diver is possible, the valves controlling such flow must be closed during diving operations, or other measures taken to ensure the safety of divers in the water. In some of these environments the diver must be protected from contamination by the water, and in others, such as potable water systems, the water may have to be protected from contamination by the diver and their equipment.

[ 28 ] Under ice [ edit ] Main article: Ice diving Ice diving Ice diving is a type of penetration diving where the dive takes place under ice .

[ 57 ] [ 39 ] Because diving under ice places the diver in an overhead environment typically with only a single entry/exit point, it requires special procedures and equipment. Ice diving is done for purposes of recreation, scientific research, public safety (usually search and rescue/recovery) and other professional or commercial reasons.

[ 38 ] The most obvious hazards of ice diving are getting lost under the ice, hypothermia, and regulator failure due to freezing. Scuba divers are generally tethered for safety. This means that the diver wears a harness to which  a line is secured, and the other end of the line is secured above the surface and monitored by an attendant. Surface supplied equipment inherently provides a tether, and reduces the risks of regulator first stage freezing as the first stage can be managed by the surface team, and the breathing gas supply is less limited. For the surface support team, the hazards include freezing temperatures and falling through thin ice.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 38 ] Dangerous animals like polar bears and leopard seals may also be present at polar dive sites, presenting an additional risk both in and out of the water.

[ 39 ] Arbitrary geographical and legal distinctions [ edit ] Offshore [ edit ] See also: Commercial offshore diving Offshore diving is basically a legal distinction, and usually refers to commercial diving operations outside of the territorial waters of a country where national legislation does not apply, but usually within an exclusive economic zone (EEZ). It incidentally implies that the dive site is more than 12 nautical miles (territorial waters), and less than 200 nautical miles (EEZ) from the nearest inhabited land mass. Technically it also refers to any diving done in the international offshore waters (high seas) outside of the territorial waters of a state. The term also commonly refers to a branch of commercial diving , with divers working in support of the exploration and production sector of the oil and gas industry . Much of the work in this area of the industry includes maintenance of oil platforms and the building and maintenance of underwater structures and systems. Offshore diving beyond the EEZ does also occur, and is often for scientific purposes .

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Inshore [ edit ] The inshore diving environment is the territorial waters of a nation. It implies that the occupational safety legislation of the adjoining territory applies, and is normally within 12 nautical miles of the coastal baseline .

[ 60 ] Inland [ edit ] The inland diving environment is inland of the tidal high-water mark , and is usually fresh or brack water, but can gave a very high range of possible salinity. Inland diving is normally covered by national or state occupational safety legislation.

[ 60 ] Open ocean [ edit ] See also: Open ocean Those parts of the ocean where the water conditions are not directly affected by proximity to land or the seabed. Sometimes described as "far from land", [ 61 ] which is subjective, or "out of sight of land", but that is a vague criterion affected by coastal landforms, observer position and meteorological conditions. Also sometimes used as a synonym for the pelagic zone .

[ 62 ] Underwater worksites [ edit ] See also: Professional diving and Underwater work For professional divers the diving environment is the underwater worksite and the water between it and the point at which they enter the water. This will vary depending on the specific job in hand. Legally, time spent in a hyperbaric environment is part of the dive, so closed bells, decompression chambers and saturation accommodations can be considered to be part of the diving environment where applicable.

[ 1 ] Scenes of crimes, accidents and disasters [ edit ] See also: Police diving § Forensic diving , and Police diving § Conditions The crime scene environment in which police divers may be deployed to gather evidence or recover bodies is defined by reasonable belief that a crime ha been committed or that evidence of a crime is likely to be present.

[ 54 ] Due to the conditions in which accidents may happen, or where criminals may choose to dispose of evidence or their victims, police divers and public safety divers might need to dive under hostile environmental conditions with known and unknown hazards on short notice: [ 63 ] Forensic divers may be called in to investigate and recover evidence in plane crashes, submerged vehicles, boating accidents, suicides, homicides, swimming fatalities and other incidents and crimes. Forensic divers may face a number of environmental hazards from underwater structures and infrastructure, debris, industrial pollution, medical waste, organic hazards from various sources, shifting currents, poor visibility, hypothermia and hyperthermia, for which special equipment may be required to mitigate the risk.

[ 55 ] [ 53 ] Recreational dive sites [ edit ] The Blue Hole in Dahab, Egypt , a world-renowned recreational dive site Main article: Recreational dive sites The common term for a place at which one may dive is a dive site (from "dive" and "site", meaning "the place, scene, or point of an occurrence or event".

[ 64 ] )  As a general rule, professional diving is done where the work needs to be done, and recreational diving is done where conditions are suitable. There are many recorded and publicised recreational dive sites which are known for their convenience, points of interest, biodiversity, and frequently favourable conditions.

Diver training sites [ edit ] Diver training tanks at a commercial diving school Diver training facilities for both professional and recreational divers generally use a small range of training dive sites which are familiar and convenient, and where conditions are predictable and the environmental risk is relatively low. They include confined water and open water sites, chosen to suit the specific training requirements.

[ 65 ] Initial skills training is restricted to confined water , a diving environment that is enclosed and bounded sufficiently for safe training purposes. This generally implies that conditions are not affected by geographic or weather conditions, and that divers can not get lost.

Swimming pools and diver training tanks are included in this category. Once competence has been demonstrated in confined water, repetition of skills in open water is usual. This is generally done in environmental conditions that simulate realistic  but relatively low risk circumstances when reasonably practicable.

[ 65 ] See also [ edit ] Caisson (engineering) – Rigid structure to provide workers with a dry working environment below water level List of diving environments by type – Variety of environments that people may dive in List of diving hazards and precautions – Hazards associated with underwater diving Underwater habitat – Human habitable underwater enclosure filled with breathable gas Work in compressed air – Occupational activity in an atmosphere with a raised ambient pressure References [ edit ] ^ a b "Diving Regulations 2009" .

Occupational Health and Safety Act 85 of 1993 – Regulations and Notices – Government Notice R41 . Pretoria: Government Printer. Archived from the original on 3 January 2017 . Retrieved 3 November 2016 – via Southern African Legal Information Institute.

^ Graver, Dennis (2010).

Scuba Diving . Human Kinetics. p. 40.

ISBN 9780736079006 .

^ a b c Jablonski, Jarrod (2006). "9: Diving environments".

Doing It Right: The Fundamentals of Better Diving . High Springs, Florida: Global Underwater Explorers. pp. 137–.

ISBN 978-0-9713267-0-5 .

^ a b c Barsky, Steven (2007).

Diving in High-Risk Environments (4th ed.). Ventura, California: Hammerhead Press.

ISBN 978-0-9674305-7-7 .

^ Code of Practice for Diving in Benign Conditions, version 0 7 (PDF) . Pretoria: South African Department of Labour. 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 January 2017 . Retrieved 6 November 2016 .

^ "Section 2".

Australian Standard AS2815.3-1992, Training and certification of occupational divers, Part 3: Air diving to 50m (2nd ed.). Homebush, New South Wales: Standards Australia. 1992. p. 9.

ISBN 978-0-7262-7631-6 .

^ "Divers dictionary" . godivenow.com.

Archived from the original on 16 November 2019 . Retrieved 8 August 2017 .

^ a b Haddock, Stephen H. D.; Heine, John N. (2005).

Scientific Blue-Water Diving (PDF) . California Sea Grant College Program. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2016 . Retrieved 23 November 2018 .

^ a b Bartick, Mike (Spring 2017).

"Blackwater Diving" .

Alert Diver . Divers Alert Network.

Archived from the original on 7 November 2019 . Retrieved 7 November 2019 .

^ "All you'll ever need to know about Blackwater Diving!" .

info@indigoscuba.com .

Archived from the original on 7 November 2019 . Retrieved 7 November 2019 .

^ a b Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (PDF) . Pretoria: The South African Department of Labour. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 November 2016 . Retrieved 9 November 2016 .

^ "Chapter 6".

Diving Manual (10th ed.). London: British Sub-Aqua Club. 1983. pp.

383– 7.

ISBN 978-0950678610 .

^ Jackson, Jack (2000).

Scuba Diving . Taylor & Francis. p.

77 .

ISBN 9780811729277 .

^ a b c d e f US Navy Diving Manual, 6th revision . Washington, DC: US Naval Sea Systems Command. 2006. Archived from the original on 2008-05-02 . Retrieved 2008-06-15 .

^ a b c d Joiner, James T., ed. (28 February 2001).

NOAA Diving Manual, Diving for Science and Technology (4th ed.). Silver Spring, Maryland: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, National Undersea Research Program.

ISBN 978-0-941332-70-5 .

CD-ROM prepared and distributed by the National Technical Information Service (NTIS) in partnership with NOAA and Best Publishing Company ^ "Competencies of a recreational scuba diver at level 2 "Autonomous Diver" " . EUF Certification International. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 29 September 2013 .

^ a b Brylske, A. (2006).

Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving (3rd ed.). Rancho Santa Margarita, California: PADI .

ISBN 978-1-878663-01-6 .

^ Cole, Bob (March 2008). "Appendix 6".

The SAA Buhlmann Deep-stop System Handbook . Liverpool: Sub-Aqua Association. pp. vi–1.

ISBN 978-0-9532904-8-2 .

^ "Dispositions relatives aux établissements organisant la pratique de la plongée subaquatique à l'air" .

Code du Sport (in French). 5 January 2012.

Archived from the original on 15 July 2015 . Retrieved 15 July 2015 .

^ "IANTD Trimix Diver (OC, SCR, CCR)" .

IANTD Technical Programs . International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers. Archived from the original on 5 November 2016 . Retrieved 6 November 2016 .

^ Kieren, Jon.

"Are You Ready for Trimix? – Students VS. Instructor Perspective" .

TDI website . Stuart, Florida: SDI TDI ERDI.

Archived from the original on 9 October 2017 . Retrieved 9 October 2017 .

^ "Guinness World Records concludes review into deepest scuba dive (male) record" .

www.guinnessworldrecords.com . Retrieved 9 April 2024 .

^ "Innovation in extreme environments" .

Compagnie maritime d'expertises . Comex. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016 . Retrieved 11 November 2016 .

^ Logico, Mark G. (4 August 2006).

"Navy Chief Submerges 2,000 Feet, Sets Record, Story Number: NNS060804-10" . U.S. Navy. Archived from the original on 13 May 2020 . Retrieved 3 November 2016 .

^ "Hardsuit depth record" . Nuytco Research. 2016. Archived from the original on 29 June 2018 . Retrieved 24 September 2016 .

^ Struwe, Jonathan (2019-05-04).

Confirmation of Prelim. Maximum Diving Depth .

G155103 (Report). DNV-GL.

Archived from the original on 2019-11-03 . Retrieved 2023-01-16 .

^ "Triton 36000/2: Full Ocean Depth" .

fivedeeps.com .

Archived from the original on 2019-05-14 . Retrieved 2023-01-16 .

^ a b c d Barsky, Steven (2007).

Diving in High-Risk Environments (4th ed.). Ventura, California: Hammerhead Press.

ISBN 978-0-9674305-7-7 .

^ Gronfeldt, Thomas (23 April 2015).

"Diving The Muck" .

scubadiverlife.com .

Archived from the original on 20 June 2023 . Retrieved 20 June 2023 .

^ Graver, Dennis (2017).

Scuba Diving (5th ed.). Human Kinetics.

ISBN 9781492525769 .

^ a b Brylske, Alex.

"Assessing Conditions – Whether your experience is good or bad is often determined before you even enter the water" .

dtmag.com . Dive Training.

Archived from the original on 21 May 2024 . Retrieved 10 April 2024 .

^ "6: Marine sediments, 6.8: "High-Energy" and "Low-Energy" Depositional Environments".

Introduction to oceanography . Miracosta Oceanography 101. UC Davis. 20 February 2020.

Archived from the original on 24 May 2024 . Retrieved 10 April 2024 .

^ "High energy coasts" .

www.field-studies-council.org .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2024 . Retrieved 10 April 2024 .

^ Luria, S. M.; Kinney, J. A. (December 1974). "Linear polarizing filters and underwater vision".

Undersea Biomedical Research .

1 (4): 371– 8.

PMID 4469103 .

^ "Sea Surface Temperature" .

earthobservatory.nasa.gov . NASA. 31 December 2023.

Archived from the original on 20 April 2024 . Retrieved 13 April 2024 .

^ Ward, Mike (9 April 2014).

Scuba Regulator Freezing: Chilling Facts & Risks Associated with Cold Water Diving (PDF) (Report). Panama Beach, Fl.: Dive Lab, Inc.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 December 2016 . Retrieved 13 April 2024 .

^ "Coldest seawater" .

www.guinnessworldrecords.com . Retrieved 13 April 2024 .

^ a b c Smith, R. Todd; Dituri, Joseph (August 2008). "26: Expeditions ~ Arctic Ice Diving". In Mount, Tom; Dituri, Joseph (eds.).

Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Miami Shores, Florida: International Association of Nitrox Divers. pp.

297– 304.

ISBN 978-0-915539-10-9 .

^ a b c d Lang, Michael A.; Sayer, M.D.J., eds. (2007).

Consensus recommendations (PDF) .

Proceedings of the International Polar Diving Workshop, Svalbard . Washington, DC.: Smithsonian Institution. pp.

211– 213.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2023-05-31 . Retrieved 2024-04-08 .

^ a b Morris, R.; Berthold, R.; Cabrol, N. (2007). N. W. Pollock; J. M. Godfrey (eds.).

Diving at Extreme Altitude: Dive Planning and Execution During the 2006 High Lakes Science Expedition . 26th Annual Scientific Diving Symposium.

Diving for Science . Dauphin Island, Ala.: American Academy of Underwater Sciences.

ISBN 978-0-9800423-1-3 . Archived from the original on November 22, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-06-14 .

^ Brylske, A. (2006).

Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving (3rd ed.).

PADI .

ISBN 1-878663-01-1 .

^ Murphey, M. (1991).

Advanced Diving: Technology and Techniques . Montclair, CA: NAUI . pp.

150– 56.

^ Soncini, Robert (3 July 2020).

"Diving at Altitude" .

Archived from the original on 28 May 2024 . Retrieved 11 April 2024 .

^ Sheaffer, William L. (28 March 2011).

"The Life of a Nuclear Diver" .

Archived from the original on 1 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 September 2014 .

^ Sayer, Martin (2007). "Scientific diving: A bibliographic analysis of underwater research supported by SCUBA diving, 1995-2006".

Underwater Technology .

27 (3): 75– 94.

doi : 10.3723/175605407783360035 .

^ "The Complete Guide to Cave Diving: Diving Techniques" .

www.uwkdive.com . 18 June 2019.

Archived from the original on 17 May 2022 . Retrieved 19 June 2022 .

^ a b "How cavern and cave diving differ" .

cavediving.com .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2022 . Retrieved 17 June 2022 .

^ "Peldanga Labyrinth (Liepniekvalka Caves), Latvia - redzet.eu" .

www.redzet.eu .

Archived from the original on 2020-06-23 . Retrieved 2020-05-17 .

^ "The Search is in the Planning" . Canadian Harvard Aircraft Association Dive Recovery Team. 2008. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015.

^ "Penetrating Questions" .

www.scubadiving.com .

Archived from the original on 3 December 2023 . Retrieved 14 April 2024 .

^ U.S. Navy Salvage Manual (PDF) . Vol. 1: Strandings, Harbor Clearance and Afloat Salvage S0300-A6-MAN-010. United States. Navy Department. Supervisor of Salvage and Diving. 31 May 2013.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 7 April 2024 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ U.S. Navy Salvage Manual (PDF) . Vol. 4: Deep Ocean Operations S0300-A6-MAN-040 0910-LP-252-3200. United States. Navy Department. Supervisor of Salvage and Diving. 1 August 1993.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 7 April 2024 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b Dutelle, Aric (July–August 2007).

"Underwater Crime-Scene Response Part 1 of 2: Underwater Investigative Teams NCJ Number 220008" .

Evidence Technology Magazine .

5 (4). US Department of Justice: 24– 27.

Archived from the original on 2023-04-19 . Retrieved 2024-04-11 .

^ a b Stanton, Gregg (2003). Norton, S.F. (ed.). Underwater Crime Scene Investigations (UCSI), a New Paradigm.

Diving for Science. Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences (Report).

^ a b "Forensic Diving NCJ Number 174498" .

FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin .

7 (4). US Department of Justice: 1– 8.

Archived from the original on 2023-04-19 . Retrieved 2024-04-11 .

^ Staff.

"Underwater Ship Husbandry" .

SUPSALV . Washington, DC: Naval Sea Systems Command.

Archived from the original on 18 March 2017 . Retrieved 17 March 2017 .

^ Lang, M.A.; Stewart, J.R., eds. (1992).

AAUS Polar Diving Workshop Proceedings (PDF) . United States: Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA. p. 100.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-05-10 . Retrieved 2024-04-08 .

^ "IMCA International Code of Practice for Offshore Diving" (PDF) .

IMCA D 014 Rev. 2 . London: International Marine Contractor's Association. February 2014 . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .

^ McGlinchy, Bryan (27 April 2022).

"IMCA Position Statement on Offshore & Inland/Inshore Commercial Diving Qualifications. Information note 1610" . IMCA.

Archived from the original on 1 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 April 2024 .

^ a b Diving Advisory Board (10 November 2017).

NO. 1235 Occupational Health and Safety Act, 1993: Diving regulations: Inclusion of code of practice inshore diving 41237. Code of Practice Inshore Diving (PDF) . Department of Labour, Republic of South Africa. pp.

72– 139. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 October 2019 . Retrieved 7 April 2024 .

^ "Open ocean" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

Archived from the original on 8 April 2024 . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ "Open Ocean" .

oceana.org .

Archived from the original on 8 April 2024 . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ Viders, Hillary.

"The New York Police Department (NYPD) Scuba Team" .

www.wateroperations.com . Archived from the original on 23 April 2013 . Retrieved 1 September 2017 .

^ "Site" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster. 11 April 2024.

Archived from the original on 1 September 2024 . Retrieved 12 April 2024 .

^ a b Code of Practice for Commercial Diver Training, Revision 3 (PDF) . Pretoria: South African Department of Labour. 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 November 2016 . Retrieved 6 November 2016 .

v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐zkq52
Cached time: 20250815011509
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.402 seconds
Real time usage: 1.622 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7237/1000000
Revision size: 62192/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 618471/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3358/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 261245/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.766/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16733669/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1172.200      1 -total
 48.56%  569.258      1 Template:Reflist
 20.89%  244.821     31 Template:Cite_web
 16.81%  197.038      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 16.29%  190.915      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 12.36%  144.836      5 Template:Annotated_link
 12.27%  143.837     24 Template:Cite_book
  8.52%   99.856     35 Template:Navbox
  6.27%   73.531      1 Template:Short_description
  3.47%   40.730      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:76548931:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815011509 and revision id 1288774917. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Underwater_diving_environment&oldid=1288774917 " Category : Underwater diving environment Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1: unfit URL CS1: long volume value Source attribution Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 18:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Underwater diving environment Add languages Add topic

