Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 References 3 Literature 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg 10 languages Български Čeština Deutsch Esperanto Italiano Magyar 日本語 Polski Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Prince Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg Prince Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg , Giovanni Pietro de Pomis, after 1625 President of the Geheimen Rates ( Privy Council ) In office 1615–1634 Monarch Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor Succeeded by Count Maximilian von Trautmansdorff Personal details Born June 1568 Graz , Austria ( Styria ) Died 18 October 1634 (1634-10-18) (aged 66) Ljubljana , Slovenia ( Carniola ) Spouse Sidonia Maria Thannhausen Children Maria Sidonia, Maria Franziska, Maria Anna, Maria Margarita, Johann Anton Parent(s) Seyfried von Eggenberg Anna Benigna Galler von Schwanberg Residence Schloss Eggenberg (Graz) Alma mater Tübinger Stift Occupation Diplomat , governor , financier Profession Statesman , nobleman Prince Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg (1568 – 18 October 1634) was an Austrian statesman, a son of Seyfried von Eggenberg, Lord of Erbersdorf (1526–1594), [ 1 ] and great-grandson of Balthasar Eggenberger (died 1493). He was a prominent member of the House of Eggenberg and gained the title of Duke of Krumau .

Biography [ edit ] Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg may only have been of simple parentage and had a Lutheran Protestant upbringing, but by his own means, he succeeded in becoming one of the most influential Catholic princes in the Holy Roman Empire within just a few decades, outshining even his successful cousin, Ruprecht von Eggenberg .

His career, however, developed too quickly and too successfully for it to go unnoticed and unenvied. Contemporaries and historians have had differing opinions regarding Eggenberg's character: seeing him as a man ... who is successful at everything he does, a fellow of good fortune, with a reputation of being completely loyal to the Emperor, highly gifted and reliable, but also a corrupt and slippery customer. Both contemporaries and historians are, however, in agreement about his brilliant diplomatic talent, his personal charm and cleverness, and his extraordinary manner of dealing with people.

Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg was born in June 1568 in Graz and had a Protestant upbringing. However, little is known about his childhood and youth. In 1583, he traveled to Tübingen , the heartland of German Protestantism, to study at the renowned Protestant university, Tübinger Stift , where he received a profound education.  A famous associate of Hans Ulrich's, Johannes Kepler , also received a first-rate education at the Tübinger Stift and went on to write his first work, Mysterium Cosmographicum , while teaching in Graz.

[ 2 ] The intellectual dimensions of this education were to later form the basis of the complex programmatic orientations of his new residence, Schloss Eggenberg .

After completing his studies, he embarked on the Grand Tour , a long educational journey undertaken by young noblemen of the period, which took him through the Netherlands , Spain , and Italy . After the death of his father in 1594, he returned to Graz to take over the safeguarding and administration of his estate and then soon began his career at the Court of Archduke Ferdinand in Graz. To be able to serve at court, he had had to convert to the Catholic faith and subsequently also supported the strict counter-reformatory policies of the Archduke. Hans Ulrich's influence became ever stronger at the Inner Austrian court due to interventions by the Archduchess Maria of Bavaria , Ferdinand's mother. Although ten years his senior, Eggenberg soon became Ferdinand's closest friend and confidant, a relationship that was to last all his life.

With Eggenberg's help, Archduke Ferdinand was elected Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor of the German Nation in 1619.

[ 3 ] In his positions as the President of the Geheimrat (Privy Council) and Lord Chamberlain ( Obersthofmeister ) to his new Emperor, Hans Ulrich, the son of a merchant family from Graz, had risen to become one of the most significant and influential statesmen of his time during the period of the Thirty Years' War .

Being something akin to a prime minister according to contemporary political understanding, [ 4 ] it is said that between the years of 1619 to 1634, Ferdinand II never made one single significant political decision without seeking the advice of his friend Hans Ulrich, [ 5 ] who remained loyal to him throughout the whole of this highly confusing and turbulent period and also throughout the rest of his life.

Eggenberg Palace , built 1625–35, entry portal with the Eggenberg arms The grateful Emperor rewarded his loyal adviser by bestowing on him the highest honors and ranks of the realm. In 1598, his cousin Ruprecht von Eggenberg and the entire Eggenberg family , including Hans Ulrich, were elevated into the Freiherrnstand (Baron's Estate).

[ 6 ] In 1620, King Philip III of Spain named Hans Ulrich a Knight of the Golden Fleece .

[ 4 ] In 1623, Hans Ulrich received a promotion into the Reichsfürstenstand , and the Eggenbergs were from then on of princely rank.

[ 7 ] By 1628, Hans Ulrich was also named Duke of Krumau .

[ 3 ] Hans Ulrich reached the pinnacle of his career in 1625 when he was made Gubernator (Governor) of Inner Austria . From this point on, he ruled "in the name of the Emperor" the Inner Austrian Patrimonial Lands with absolute power comparable only to an archduke [ 8 ] in political, legal and military matters. He was the only non- Habsburg governor to have ever been awarded and exercised such a position. He was largely responsible for the return to imperial service of Albrecht von Wallenstein , and retired from public life after Wallenstein's assassination.

[ 3 ] His office also prompted him to commission the conversion of the medieval family castle on the western edge of Graz into a new and glorious residence, Schloss Eggenberg , to appropriately represent his new status.

[ 9 ] Unfortunately, he died of severe gout in October 1634, before the palace was completed. Alongside his four daughters, Hans Ulrich also produced a male heir to the Eggenberg dynasty, Johann Anton I , who succeeded in attaining a position even his illustrious father had failed to attain: a seat among the princes of the empire in the Reichstag .

Seal of Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg As an imperial minister, Hans Ulrich had skilfully succeeded in guiding his master on the throne despite facing numerous dangers and constant upheavals during these times of great change. He slowly and consistently worked on his ideas of a united "empire", which he saw as a strengthened central imperial power, at the expense of the feudal interests of the old noble families and the desire for autonomy of the princes of the realm. This way, he became one of the major architects of the absolutist Habsburg state, which was to dominate and shape the century to come.

In Austria, Hans Ulrich has left a historical legacy behind. His masterpiece, Schloss Eggenberg, was the main motif on one of the most famous silver collectors coins: the 10 euro Eggenberg Palace coin minted on 10 September 2002.

On 1 August 2010, UNESCO expanded the registry listing of the City of Graz - Historic Centre to include Schloss Eggenberg among the World Cultural Heritage Sites .

References [ edit ] ^ "von Eggenberg" .

genealogy.euweb.cz . Retrieved 2023-11-15 .

^ "Eggenberg Palace coin" . Austrian Mint. Archived from the original on 31 May 2011 . Retrieved 9 September 2009 .

^ a b c Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Eggenberg, Hans Ulrich von" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 9 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

16– 17.

^ a b Die Fürsten und Freiherren zu Eggenberg und ihre Vorfahren.

1965, p. 90.

^ Schloss Eggenberg.

2006, p. 43.

^ Die Fürsten und Freiherren zu Eggenberg und ihre Vorfahren.

1965, p. 44.

^ Die Fürsten und Freiherren zu Eggenberg und ihre Vorfahren.

1965, p. 91.

^ Die Fürsten und Freiherren zu Eggenberg und ihre Vorfahren.

1965, p. 95.

^ Schloss Eggenberg.

2006, p. 85.

Literature [ edit ] Hans Ulrich Fürst von Eggenberg: Freund und erster Minister Kaiser Ferdinand II.

By Hans von Zwiedineck-Südenhorst. Charleston, SC: BiblioBazaar, 2009. (new edition of digitally preserved original German text printed in Vienna in 1880, printed in Leipzig by Amazon Distribution GmbH) ISBN 1-113-02782-7 F. Mareš, Beitrage zur Geschichte der Beziehungen des Fursten J. U. von Eggenberg ( Prague , 1893) Schloss Eggenberg.

By Barbara Kaiser. Graz: Christian Brandstätter Verlag, 2006.

ISBN 3-902510-80-3 (English Edition) or ISBN 3-902510-96-X (German Edition) (available in German or English editions through the Universalmuseum Joanneum ) The Thirty Years War.

By Cicely Veronica Wedgwood. Garden City, NY: Anchor Books, 1961. (Re-issued by NYRB Classics, 2005.

ISBN 1-59017-146-2 ) Die Fürsten und Freiherren zu Eggenberg und ihre Vorfahren . By Walther Ernest Heydendorff. Graz: Verlag Styria, 1965.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg .

Short Biography Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine at Český Krumlov Info site The Joanneum - Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg Biography (German) German language biography at Cosmopolis See also: Eggenberg (disambiguation) v t e Austria articles History Hallstatt culture Celts Kingdom of Noricum Roman Era Noricum Pannonia Raetia Germanic tribes Rugiland Ostrogothic Kingdom East Francia Margraviate of Austria Duchy of Austria Archduchy of Austria Habsburg monarchy Siege of Vienna (1529) Austrian Empire March Constitution Congress of Vienna Austria-Hungary German Austria First Austrian Republic Austrian Civil War Federal State of Austria Austrofascism Anschluss Ostmark Allied-administered Austria History of Vienna Military history of Austria Geography Administrative divisions Alps conifer and mixed forests Cities Districts Ecoregions Lakes Mountains Pannonian mixed forests Rivers States Western European broadleaf forests World Heritage Sites Politics Climate change Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights Law enforcement LGBT rights Legal system Military Parliament Political parties Economy Agriculture Banking Companies Energy Mining Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Transport Rail Society Abortion Austrian people Crime Demographics Education Ethnic groups Health care Languages Pornography Prostitution Religion ( freedom of religion ) Women Culture Architecture Cinema Coat of arms Cuisine ( wine ) Flag Literature Media Museums Music National anthem Public holidays Sport Outline Index Category Portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Poland People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other RISM Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hans_Ulrich_von_Eggenberg&oldid=1291223915 " Categories : 1568 births 1634 deaths 16th-century Austrian people 17th-century Austrian people Knights of the Golden Fleece Eggenberg family Austrian barons Converts to Roman Catholicism from Lutheranism Politicians from Graz Obersthofmeister Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 19 May 2025, at 21:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg 10 languages Add topic

