Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ibn Jumayʿ 2 languages العربية مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 12th-century Egyptian physician Abū al-Makārim Hibat Allāh ibn Zayn al-Dīn ibn Jumayʿ (هبة الله بن جميع, died 1198 / AH 594) was an Egyptian Jewish physician, and the chief physician at the court of Saladin .

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Ibn Jumayʿ was born to a Jewish family in Fustat , Egypt . He studied with the physician Ibn al-ʿAynzarbī (died 1153/AH 548) and entered the service of Saladin .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] According to Ibn Abi Usaibia 's Lives of the Physicians , Ibn Jumayʿ wrote eight works on medical-related subjects.

A contemporary of Moses Maimonides , Ibn Jumayʿ "became famous for having prevented a person having a cataleptic fit from being buried alive . He was the author of a number of medical writings, including al-Irshād li-maṣāliḥ , dedicated to al-Baysanī , the vizier to Saladin, and completed by Ibn Jumayʿ al-Isrā’īlī's son Abū Tahir Ismāʿīl." [ 3 ] Works [ edit ] Kitāb al-irshād li-masālih an-nufūs waʿl-ajssad [Guide to the Welfare of Souls and Bodies] (ed. and tr. by Hartmut Fähndrich) Treatise to Salāh ad-Dīn on the revival of the art of medicine , English and Arab text, Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1983.

References [ edit ] ^ Other name forms: Abu-'l-Makārim Hibatallāh Ibn-Gumaiʿ ; Ibn Jumiʿ ; Ibn Gumayʿ ^ Fähndrich, Hartmut (1997).

"Ibn Jumay' " . In Helaine Selin (ed.).

Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures . Springer. pp.

421– 2.

ISBN 978-0-7923-4066-9 . Retrieved 29 July 2012 .

^ a b Islamic Medical Manuscripts at the National Library of Medicine , United States National Library of Medicine Further reading [ edit ] Fenton, Paul B., 'The state of Arab medicine at the time of Maimonides according to Ibn Gumayʿ's Treatise on the Revival of the Art of Medicine, in Fred Rosner and Samuel S. Kottek, ed., Moses Maimonides - Physician, Scientist and Philosopher , 1993 Meyerhof, Max, 'Sultan Saladin's physician on the transmission of Greek medicine to the Arabs', Bulletin of the History of Medicine 18 (1945), 169-178 External links [ edit ] Ibn Jumay‘ al-Isrā’īlī or, Ibn Jami‘, Abū al-Makārim Hibat Allāh by National Library of Medicine v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Sweden Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_Jumayʿ&oldid=1306103242 " Categories : Medieval Jewish physicians of Egypt 12th-century Egyptian physicians 1198 deaths Physicians from Cairo Saladin Physicians from the Ayyubid Sultanate Physicians from the Fatimid Caliphate Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 23:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ibn Jumayʿ 2 languages Add topic

