Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Scholarly recognition and criticisms 3 Eligibility 4 The Gold Standard Registry 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Standard and logo certification mark program This article contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( April 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Gold Standard logo The Gold Standard (GS) , or Gold Standard for the Global Goals , is a standard and logo certification mark program, for non-governmental emission reductions projects in the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), the Voluntary Carbon Market and other climate and development interventions. It is published and administered by the Gold Standard Foundation, a non-profit foundation headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland . It was designed with an intent to ensure that carbon credits are real, verifiable, and that projects make measurable contributions to sustainable development. The objective of the GS is to add branding, with a quality label, to carbon credits [ 1 ] generated by projects which can then be bought and traded by countries that have a binding legal commitment according to the Kyoto Protocol , businesses, or other organizations for carbon offsetting purposes.

History [ edit ] The Gold Standard for CDM (GS-CER) was developed in 2003 by World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), South-North, and Helio International.

The Voluntary Gold Standard (GS-VER), a standard for use within the voluntary carbon market , was launched in May 2006.

[ 2 ] The programs were created following a 12-month consultation period that included workshops and web-based consultation conducted by an independent standard advisory board composed of non-governmental organizations ( NGOs ), scientists, project developers and government representatives.

As of October 2018, more than 80 non-profit organizations internationally had officially endorsed the Gold Standard program.

[ 3 ] The program is administered by the Gold Standard Foundation, a non-profit foundation under Swiss law that is headquartered in Geneva , Switzerland.

[ 4 ] It also employs local experts in Brazil , India , and South Africa .

In July 2008, the Gold Standard Version 2.0 was released, including sets of guidelines and manuals on the GS requirements, toolkits, and other supporting documents to be used by project developers and DOEs. This relegated the previously applicable manuals to Version 1.0. The Version 2.0 also supports Program of Activities (PoA) .

In July 2017, a new version called the Gold Standard for the Global Goals was released, superseding the previous Gold Standards.

[ 5 ] In June 2024 Gold Standard released a Public Carbon Regulations tracker, commissioned by South Pole to increase visibility on regulations across continents for project developers.

[ 6 ] Scholarly recognition and criticisms [ edit ] The Gold Standard is recognized by carbon market and scholars of carbon markets and climate change politics scholars as a prime example of voluntary standards.

[ 7 ] As a program certifying emissions trading programs, criticisms of the general practice of emissions trading may also generally apply to the Gold Standard certification program.

[ 8 ] Eligibility [ edit ] To be eligible for Gold Standard Certification, a project must: Be a Gold Standard-approved Renewable Energy Supply or End use Energy Efficiency , Afforestation/Reforestation or Agriculture project type Be reducing one of the three eligible Greenhouse Gases: Carbon Dioxide (CO 2 ), Methane (CH 4 ) and Nitrous Oxide (N 2 O) Not employ Official Development Assistance (ODA) under the condition that the credits coming out of the project are transferred to the donor country Not be applying for other certifications, to ensure there is no double counting of credits Demonstrate its additionality by using the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 's (UNFCCC) Large Scale Additionality Tool; [ 9 ] and show that the project is not a 'business-as-usual' scenario Make a net-positive contribution to the economic as well as the environmental and social welfare of the local population that hosts it, in the form of contributions to a minimum of three Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) The Gold Standard Registry [ edit ] Status of projects that apply for Gold Standard can be tracked on its registry.

[ 10 ] Project Developers, Designated Operational Entities (DOEs) (also known as Validators), Traders and Buyers of credits can open accounts with the registry. There are various publicly available reports.

See also [ edit ] Climate, Community & Biodiversity Alliance Verified Carbon Standard References [ edit ] ^ "FAQ about Offsetting & the Voluntary Carbon Market" .

www.act4.io . Retrieved 2022-06-03 .

^ "carbonfootprint.com - Carbon Offset Standards" .

www.carbonfootprint.com . Retrieved 2023-04-08 .

^ "Who We Are" .

The Gold Standard . Archived from the original on 2018-10-12 . Retrieved 2018-10-11 .

^ "Contact" .

The Gold Standard . Retrieved 2018-10-11 .

^ "New Standard Launched to Accelerate and Measure Progress Toward the Sustainable Development Goals and Climate Targets" (Press release). Gold Standard Foundation. 10 July 2017.

^ George, Violet (2024-06-26).

"Gold Standard Releases Public Carbon Regulations Tracker" .

Carbon Herald . Retrieved 2024-08-02 .

^ Bernstein, S.; Betsill, M.; Hoffmann, M.; Paterson, M. (2010). "A Tale of Two Copenhagens: Carbon Markets and Climate Governance".

Millennium: Journal of International Studies .

39 (1): 161– 173.

doi : 10.1177/0305829810372480 .

S2CID 144401144 .

^ Blok, A (2010). "Topologies of climate change: actor-network theory, relational-scalar analytics, and carbon-market overflows".

Environment and Planning D: Society and Space .

28 (5): 896– 912.

Bibcode : 2010EnPlD..28..896B .

doi : 10.1068/d0309 .

S2CID 145650089 .

^ "CDM: Tools" .

^ "Project Registry" .

Gold Standard . Retrieved 2018-08-22 .

External links [ edit ] Gold Standard organization v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gold_Standard_(carbon_offset_standard)&oldid=1303162931 " Categories : Certification marks Carbon finance Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with a promotional tone from April 2012 All articles with a promotional tone This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 11:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) 1 language Add topic

