Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Emergent materialism 3 languages فارسی Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical concept This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Emergent materialism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the philosophy of mind , emergent (or emergentist ) materialism is a theory which asserts that the mind is irreducibly existent in some sense. However, the mind does not exist in the sense of being an ontological simple. Further, the study of mental phenomena is independent of other sciences. The theory primarily maintains that the human mind's evolution is a product of material nature and that it cannot exist without material basis.

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] The view holds that mental properties emerge as novel properties of complex material systems.

[ 2 ] These are conceptually irreducible as physical properties of the complexes that have them.

[ 3 ] The theory, however, states that the mind is independent due to the causal influences between body and mind.

[ 1 ] This is described as a "primitive relation" that is grounded in or dependent on the physical, but with metaphysical necessity.

[ 4 ] Emergent materialism can be divided into emergence which denies mental causation and emergence which allows for causal effect.  A version of the latter type has been advocated by John R. Searle , called biological naturalism .

The other main group of materialist views in the philosophy of mind can be labeled non-emergent (or non-emergentist) materialism, and includes pure physicalism ( eliminative materialism ), identity theory (reductive materialism) , [ 2 ] philosophical behaviorism , and functionalism .

See also [ edit ] Cartesian dualism Emergentism Emergence Epiphenomenalism Materialism Mind–body problem Monism Physicalism References [ edit ] ^ a b Revonsuo, Antti; Kamppinen, Matti (2013).

Consciousness in Philosophy and Cognitive Neuroscience . Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Publishers. p. 38.

ISBN 9781134783021 .

^ a b Martinich, A. P.; Sosa, E. David (2008).

A Companion to Analytic Philosophy . Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. p. 65.

ISBN 978-0631214151 .

^ Stich, Stephen P.; Warfield, Ted A. (2008).

The Blackwell Guide to Philosophy of Mind . Malden, MA: John Wiley & Sons. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0631217749 .

^ Sprevak, M.; Kallestrup, J. (2014).

New Waves in Philosophy of Mind . London: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 158.

ISBN 9781137286710 .

External links [ edit ] M.D. Robertson, Dualism vs. Materialism: A Response to Paul Churchland v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force This philosophy -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Emergent_materialism&oldid=1297183929 " Categories : Materialism Metaphysics of mind Emergence Philosophy stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2015 All articles needing additional references All stub articles This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 16:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Emergent materialism 3 languages Add topic

