Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 1.1 Borders 1.2 Landscape 1.3 Subregions 2 Nomenclature Toggle Nomenclature subsection 2.1 Etymology 2.2 Earliest sources 2.3 Terminology and attribution of subdivisions 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Prehistory to the Middle Ages (circa 400 A.D. – 1400 A.D.) 3.2 Renaissance (circa 1400–1700) to Early Modern Age 3.3 Modern Age 3.4 World War II 4 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 4.1 Cities in Pomerania 4.1.1 Cities in the historical region of Hither Pomerania 4.1.2 Cities in the historical region of Farther Pomerania 4.1.3 Cities in the historical region of Pomerelia 5 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 5.1 Languages and dialects 5.2 Cuisine 5.3 Museums 5.3.1 Museums in the Polish part 5.3.2 Museums in the German part 5.4 Education 5.4.1 Universities 5.4.2 University of Applied Sciences 6 Economy 7 Sports 8 Curiosities 9 Gallery 10 See also 11 Footnotes Toggle Footnotes subsection 11.1 Notes 11.2 Citations 12 External links Toggle External links subsection 12.1 Internet directories 12.2 Culture and history 12.3 Maps of Pomerania Toggle the table of contents Pomerania 67 languages العربية Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kaszëbsczi Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 54°17′N 18°09′E ﻿ / ﻿ 54.29°N 18.15°E ﻿ / 54.29; 18.15 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historical region on the southern shore of the Baltic Sea in Central Europe Not to be confused with Pomerelia .

"Pommern" and "Pomorze" redirect here. For other uses, see Pommern (disambiguation) and Pomorze (disambiguation) .

Historical region Pomerania Pomorze ( Polish ) Pommern ( German ) Pòmòrskô ( Kashubian ) Historical region Gdańsk historic center Toruń Old Town Ducal Castle, Szczecin Stralsund Old Town Dunes of Łeba, Slovincian National Park Chalk cliffs, Jasmund National Park Coat of arms Contemporary administrative units with Pomerania in the name, not representing the exact historical region, as they also include parts of other regions Coordinates: 54°17′N 18°09′E ﻿ / ﻿ 54.29°N 18.15°E ﻿ / 54.29; 18.15 Countries Poland Germany Largest cities in Poland: Gdańsk , Szczecin in Germany: Greifswald , Stralsund Demonym Pomeranian Time zone UTC+1 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+2 ( CEST ) Primary airports Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport Solidarity Szczecin–Goleniów Airport Highways Pomerania ( Polish : Pomorze [pɔˈmɔʐɛ] ⓘ ; German : Pommern [ˈpɔmɐn] ⓘ ; Kashubian : Pòmòrskô ; Swedish : Pommern ) is a historical region on the southern shore of the Baltic Sea in Central Europe , split between Poland and Germany . The central and eastern part belongs to the West Pomeranian , Pomeranian and Kuyavian-Pomeranian voivodeships of Poland, while the western part belongs to the German states of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania and Brandenburg .

Pomerania's historical border in the west is the Mecklenburg-Western Pomeranian border Urstromtal , [ a ] which now constitutes the border between the Mecklenburgian and Pomeranian part of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, while it is bounded by the Vistula River in the east. The easternmost part of Pomerania is alternatively known as Pomerelia , consisting of four sub-regions: Kashubia inhabited by ethnic Kashubians , Kociewie , Tuchola Forest and Chełmno Land .

Pomerania has a relatively low population density , with its largest cities being Gdańsk and Szczecin . Outside its urban areas, it is characterized by farmland, dotted with numerous lakes, forests, and small towns. In the west of Pomerania lie several islands, the largest of which are Rügen , the largest island in Germany; Usedom /Uznam, and Wolin , the largest island in Poland. The region has a rich and complicated political and demographic history at the intersection of several cultures.

Geography [ edit ] 17th-century map of the Duchy of Pomerania This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Borders [ edit ] Pomerania is the area along the Bay of Pomerania of the Baltic Sea between the rivers Recknitz , Trebel , Tollense and Augraben in the west and Vistula in the east.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It formerly reached perhaps as far south as the Noteć river, but since the 13th century its southern boundary has been placed further north.

Landscape [ edit ] Most of the region is coastal lowland, being part of the Central European Plain . Its southern, hilly parts belong to the Baltic Ridge, a belt of terminal moraines formed during the Pleistocene . Within this ridge, a chain of moraine-dammed lakes constitutes the Pomeranian Lake District . The soil is generally rather poor, sometimes sandy or marshy.

[ 1 ] The western coastline is jagged, with many peninsulas (such as Darß – Zingst ) and islands (including Rügen , Usedom , and Wolin ) enclosing numerous bays ( Bodden ) and lagoons (the biggest being the Lagoon of Szczecin ).

The eastern coastline is smooth.

Łebsko and several other lakes were formerly bays, but have been cut off from the sea. The easternmost coastline along the Gdańsk Bay (with the Bay of Puck ) and Vistula Lagoon , has the Hel Peninsula and the Vistula peninsula jutting out into the Baltic.

Subregions [ edit ] The Pomeranian region has the following administrative divisions: Western Pomerania ( Vorpommern ) in northeastern Germany, stretching from the Recknitz river to the Germany–Poland border . This region is part of the federal state of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania . The southernmost part of historical Western Pomerania (the Gartz area) is now in Brandenburg , while its historical eastern parts (the Oder estuary) are now in Poland. Western Pomerania comprises the historical regions inhabited by Western Slavic tribes Rugians and Volinians, [ citation needed ] otherwise the Principality of Rügen and the County of Gützkow .

The West Pomeranian Voivodeship ( Zachodniopomorskie ) in Poland, stretching from the Oder–Neisse line to the Wieprza river, encompassing most of historical Pomerania in the narrow sense (as well as small parts of historic Greater Poland and Lubusz Land ).

The Pomeranian Voivodeship , with similar borders to Pomerelia , stretching from the Wieprza river to the Vistula delta in the vicinity of Gdańsk .

The northern half of the Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship , comprising most of Tuchola Forest and Chełmno Land .

The bulk of Farther Pomerania is included within the modern West Pomeranian Voivodeship, but its easternmost parts (the Słupsk area) now constitute the northwest of Pomeranian Voivodeship. Farther Pomerania in turn comprises several other historical subregions, most notably the former Principality of Cammin , the Nowogard County, and the Słupsk and Sławno Land . The Lębork and Bytów Land is considered a part of Pomerelia ( Kashubia ) by the Polish historiography, and of Farther Pomerania by the German historiography.

Parts of Pomerania and surrounding regions have constituted a euroregion since 1995. The Pomerania euroregion comprises Hither Pomerania and Uckermark in Germany, West Pomerania in Poland, and Scania in Sweden.

"Narrow Pomerania" or Western Pomerania in Poland The German part of Pomerania The border between Pomerania and Mecklenburg running through Mecklenburg-Vorpommern Wdzydze Lake ( Pomeranian Voivodeship ) Słowiński National Park (Pomeranian Voivodeship) Typical Pomeranian beach ( West Pomeranian Voivodeship ) Wolin National Park (West Pomeranian Voivodeship) Hiddensee ( Mecklenburg-Vorpommern / Western Pomerania ) Cape Arkona (Mecklenburg-Vorpommern/Western Pomerania) Nomenclature [ edit ] Etymology [ edit ] In Lechitic languages the prefix "po-" means along ; unlike the word "po", which means after .

Pomorze , therefore, means Along the Sea . This construction is similar to toponyms Pogórze ( Along the Mountains ), Polesie ( Along the Forest ), Porzecze ( Along the River ), etc.

Earliest sources [ edit ] Pomerania was first mentioned in an imperial document of 1046, referring to a Zemuzil dux Bomeranorum ( Zemuzil , Duke of the Pomeranians).

[ 3 ] Pomerania is mentioned repeatedly in the chronicles of Adam of Bremen (c. 1070) and Gallus Anonymous (ca. 1113).

Terminology and attribution of subdivisions [ edit ] The territorial designation "Pomerania" lacks a universally accepted definition, since it may refer either to combined Hither and Farther Pomerania only (in German contemporary and historical usage [ 4 ] ) or to Hither and Farther Pomerania combined with Pomerelia (in Polish contemporary and historical usage).

As a consequence, the term "West Pomerania" is ambiguous, since it may refer to either Hither Pomerania (in German usage and historical usage based on German terminology [ 4 ] ), or to combined Hither and Farther Pomerania (in Polish usage and historical usage based on German terminology). In parallel, the term "East Pomerania" may similarly carry different meanings, referring either to Farther Pomerania (in German usage and historical usage based on German terminology [ 4 ] ), or to Pomerelia (in Polish usage and historical usage based on German terminology).

As a further complication, the borders of the eponymous administrative units have been drawn disregarding mostly the historical ones. The Polish unit called województwo zachodniopomorskie ( West Pomeranian Voivodeship ) includes the whole Polish part of Hither Pomerania, but only the western two-thirds of Farther Pomerania, with the remaining easternmost one-third ( Słupsk , Ustka , and Miastko ) has been part of the województwo pomorskie ([East-] Pomeranian Voivodeship ). The former regional unit stretches however far more south than the historical region, to include the northern part of the historical Neumark , located in the previous medieval border area between Pomerania and Greater Poland ( Chojna , Trzcińsko-Zdrój , Myślibórz , Nowogródek Pomorski , Lipiany , Barlinek , Pełczyce , Suchań , Choszczno , Recz , and Drawno ), as well as a strip the historical Greater Poland ( Tuczno , Człopa , Mirosławiec , Wałcz , and Czaplinek ), or even a small parts of Pomerelia ( Biały Bór ) and Lubusz Land ( Dębno ); in turn the other one comprises only approximately northern two-thirds of Pomerelia but also parts of historical Malbork Land and Upper Prussia known under the ethnographic designation of Powiśle and constituting the westernmost strip of historical Prussia ; and finally, the remaining one third of Pomerelia forms part of województwo kujawsko-pomorskie ( Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship ), a further regional unit, in this case bearing a name accurately reflecting historical heterogeneity of its territory. Similarity but to lesser extent, borders of the combined German districts Vorpommern-Rügen and Vorpommern-Greifswald deviate significantly in numerous locations from the historical ones with Mecklenburg and Brandenburg . As a consequence, the common understanding of the terms has started to be used more and more frequently in the sense of the  current administrative units.

West Pomerania East Southeast Ahrenshoop , [ b ] Ribnitz-Damgarten (Damgarten only) , Saal , Prerow , Zingst , Barth , Tribsees , Franzburg , Richtenberg , Grimmen , Stralsund , DÄNHOLM Rügen HIDDENSEE , UMMANZ , Garz/Rügen , Bergen auf Rügen , Putgarten , VILM , Sagard , Binz , Sassnitz , Sellin , Thiessow , Göhren Loitz , Gützkow , Greifswald , Lubmin , Kröslin , RUDEN , GREIFSWALDER OIE , Wolgast , Lassan Kummerow , Sommersdorf , Verchen , Demmin , Altentreptow Alt Tellin , Jarmen , Anklam Usedom Peenemünde , Karlshagen , Trassenheide , Zinnowitz , GÖRMITZ , Usedom , Zempin , Koserow , Loddin , Ückeritz , Bansin , Heringsdorf , Ahlbeck Pasewalk , Torgelow , Ueckermünde , Eggesin , Löcknitz , Penkun , Altwarp , Pomellen [ c ] Prenzlau , Brüssow , Schwedt/Oder , [ d ] Gartz (Oder) , Mescherin [ e ] Uznam / Wolin Świnoujście , Międzyzdroje , Wolin , Międzywodzie , CHRZĄSZCZEWSKA , Dziwnów (left-bank) Goleniów , Police , Nowe Warpno , Szczecin , Dąbie Widuchowa , Gryfino , Banie , Pyrzyce Maszewo , Stargard , Stepnica , Dziwnów , [ f ] Kamień Pomorski , Golczewo , Ińsko , Dobrzany , Chociwel , Gryfice , Gościno , Płoty , Nowogard , Łobez , Węgorzyno , Resko , Trzebiatów , Dobra Świdwin , Połczyn-Zdrój , Drawsko Pomorskie , Kołobrzeg , Koszalin , Karlino , Tychowo , Bobolice , Białogard , Biały Bór , Szczecinek , Mielno , Kalisz Pomorski , [ g ] Złocieniec , [ g ] Barwice [ g ] Sławno , Darłowo , Polanów , Sianów Ustka , Słupsk , Miastko , Kobylnica Łeba , Lębork , Bytów Biały Bór Czarne , Człuchów Chojnice Ostrowite Borowy Młyn , Borzyszkowy Czersk , Brusy Kościerzyna , Kartuzy , Żukowo , Puck , Władysławowo , Jastarnia , Hel , Wejherowo , Reda , Rumia , (so-called Little Kashubian Tricity ) Gdynia , Sopot , Gdańsk ( Tricity ) Pruszcz Gdański , Nowy Staw Krynica Morska Narmeln [ 5 ] Starogard Gdański , Skarszewy , Pelplin , Tczew , Gniew , Skórcz Świecie , Nowe Obrowo Tuchola , Pruszcz Toruń , Grudziądz , Chełmno , Chełmża , Wąbrzeźno , Kowalewo Pomorskie , Jabłonowo Pomorskie , Radzyń Chełmiński , Łasin , Brodnica , [ h ] Golub Current countries Germany Poland Russia Poland Current administrative regions Mecklenburg-Vorpommern (Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania) Brandenburg województwo zachodniopomorskie ( West Pomeranian Voivodeship ) województwo pomorskie ( Pomeranian Voivodeship ) województwo zachodniopom.

( West Pomeranian Voivodeship ) województwo pomorskie ( Pomeranian Voivodeship ) Калининградская область ( Kaliningrad Oblast ) województwo pomorskie ( Pomeranian Voivodeship ) województwo kujawsko-pomorskie ( Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship ) Vorpommern-Rügen Vorpommern-Greifswald Mecklenburgische Seenplatte Vorpommern-Greifswald Uckermark German terminology (corresponding English term) Pommern [ 1 ] (Pomerania) bounded in the west by the Recknitz , Trebel and Lake Kummerow , and in the east by the Piaśnica Pomerellen, Pommerellen [ 1 ] ( Pomerelia ) [ 1 ] After Partitions of Poland , part of the wider Westpreussen ( West Prussia ) before Partitions of Poland , part of the wider Königlich-Preußen or Preußen Königlichen Anteils ( Royal Prussia ) Vorpommern ( Hither Pomerania , Fore Pomerania) in modern usage the part located in Germany only Hinterpommern (Farther/Further Pomerania, Rear Pomerania) Tucheler Heide ( Tuchola Forest ) Kaschubei [ 6 ] Frische Nehrung ( Vistula Spit ) Kociewie Tucheler Heide ( Tuchola Forest ) Kulmerland ( Chełmno Land ) Neuvorpommern (New Hither Pomerania) western part of Swedish Pomerania that went from Sweden to Prussia in 1815 Altvorpommern (Old Hither Pomerania) eastern part of Swedish Pomerania that went from Sweden to Prussia in 1720 Westpommern (Western Pomerania) mainland west of the Zarow and Rügen archipelago Mittelpommern (Middle Pomerania) mainland east of the Zarow as well as Usedom and Wolin Ostpommern (Eastern Pomerania) Mittelpommerscher Keil (Middle Pomeranian Wedge) excluding Uznam and Wolin Lande Schlawe und Stolp ( Lands of Schlawe and Stolp ) Lande Lauenburg und Bütow ( Lauenburg and Bütow Land ) Koschneiderei Koschneiderei Polish terminology (corresponding English term) Pomorze Zachodnie (Western Pomerania) Pomorze Nadodrzańskie ( Oder Pomerania) Pomorze Wschodnie (Eastern Pomerania) Pomorze Nadwiślańskie ( Vistula Pomerania) before World War II simply Pomorze [ 1 ] (Pomerelia, [ 1 ] literally Pomerania) before Partitions of Poland , part of the wider Prusy Królewskie (Royal Prussia) Pomorze Zaodrzańskie (Trans-Oder Pomerania) Pomorze Wołogoskie (Wołogoszcz or German : Wolgast Pomerania) Pomorze Szczecińskie (Szczecin Pomerania) Pomorze Zachodnie w węższym znaczeniu (Western Pomerania in narrower sense) Pomorze Środkowe (Middle Pomerania) Pomorze Koszalińsko-Słupskie (Koszalin and Słupsk Pomerania) Pomorze Gdańskie (Gdańsk Pomerania) Ziemia chełmińska ( Chełmno Land ) ethnocultural region Pomorze Przednie ( Hither Pomerania , Fore Pomerania) in modern usage the part located in Germany only Pomorze Tylne (Farther/Further Pomerania, Rear Pomerania) usage limited mainly to translations of German texts Kaszuby (Kashubia) Bory Tucholskie ( Tuchola Forest ) ethnocultural region Kaszuby (Kashubia) ethnocultural region Żuławy Wiślane ( Vistula Fens ) Mierzeja Wiślana ( Vistula Spit ) Kociewie ethnocultural region Bory Tucholskie ( Tuchola Forest ) Ziemia słupsko-sławieńska ( Słupsk and Sławno Land ) Ziemia lęborsko-bytowska (Lębork and Bytów Land) Kosznajderia former ethnocultural region Gochy Zabory [ 7 ] Kosznajderia former ethnocultural region Kashubian terminology (corresponding English term) Zôpadnô Pòmòrskô (Western Pomerania) Lãbòrskò-bëtowskô Zemia ( Lębork and Bytów Land ) Pòrénkòwô Pòmòrskô (Eastern Pomerania) Kaszëbë (Kashubia) ethnocultural region Wiselny Zëławë ( Vistula Fens ) Kòcéwskô ( Kociewie ) ethnocultural region Tëchòlsczé Bòrë ( Tuchola Forest ) ethnocultural region Chełmińskô Zemia ( Chełmno Land ) Kòsznajderiô (Kosznajderia) former ethnocultural region Gòchë ( Gochy ) Zabòrë (Zabory) Kòsznajderiô (Kosznajderia) former ethnocultural region History [ edit ] Main article: History of Pomerania Part of a series on the History of Pomerania Early history Early Middle Ages High Middle Ages Late Middle Ages Early modern period 1806–1933 1933–1945 1945–present Poland portal Germany portal v t e Prehistory to the Middle Ages (circa 400 A.D. – 1400 A.D.) [ edit ] Main articles: Early history of Pomerania and Pomerania during the Early Middle Ages Poland with Pomerania under the rule of Mieszko I , c. 960-992.

Dagome iudex first defined Poland's geographical boundaries (including Pomerania) and placed the lands under the protection of the Apostolic See .

Settlement in the area called Pomerania for the last 1,000 years started by the end of the Vistula Glacial Stage , some 13,000 years ago.

[ 8 ] Archeological traces have been found of various cultures during the Stone and Bronze Age , Baltic peoples , Germanic peoples and Veneti during the Iron Age and, in the Dark Ages , West Slavic tribes and Vikings .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 8 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Starting in the 10th century, early Polish rulers subdued the region, successfully integrating the eastern part with Poland, while the western part fell under the suzerainty of Denmark and the Holy Roman Empire in the late 12th century.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Gdańsk , established during the reign of Mieszko I of Poland has since become Poland's main port (apart from periods of Poland losing control over the region).

The main burial sites of Pomeranian dukes of the houses of Griffin and Sobiesław Ducal Castle in Szczecin St. Peter's Church in Wolgast Eldena Abbey in Greifswald Oliwa Cathedral in Gdańsk In the 12th century, the Duchy of Pomerania (western part), as a vassal state of Poland, became Christian under saint Otto of Bamberg ( the Apostle of the Pomeranians ); at the same time Pomerelia (eastern part) became a part of diocese of Włocławek within Poland. Since the late 12th-early 13th century, the Griffin Duchy of Pomerania stayed with the Holy Roman Empire and the Principality of Rugia with Denmark, while Pomerelia, under the ruling of Samborides , was a part of Poland.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Pomerania, during its alliance in the Holy Roman Empire , shared borders with West Slavic state Oldenburg, as well as Poland and the expanding Margraviate of Brandenburg . In the early 14th century the Teutonic Knights invaded and annexed Pomerelia from Poland into their monastic state , which already included historical Prussia . As a result of the Teutonic rule, in German terminology the name of Prussia was also extended to conquered Polish lands like Gdańsk Pomerania , although it was not inhabited by Baltic Prussians but Lechitic Poles. Meanwhile, the Ostsiedlung started to turn Slavic narrow Pomerania into an increasingly German-settled area; the remaining Wends and Polish people, often known as Kashubians , continued to settle within Pomerelia.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] In 1325 the line of the princes of Rügen died out, and the principality was inherited by the Griffins .

[ 28 ] Renaissance (circa 1400–1700) to Early Modern Age [ edit ] Main articles: Pomerania during the High Middle Ages , Pomerania during the Late Middle Ages , and Pomerania during the Early Modern Age Location of the Pomeranian Voivodeship within the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth In 1466, with the Teutonic Order 's defeat in the Thirteen Years' War , Pomerelia became again part of the Polish Crown and formed the Pomeranian Voivodeship within the provinces of Royal Prussia and Greater Poland .

[ 29 ] While the German population in the Duchy of Pomerania adopted the Protestant reformation in 1534, [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] the Polish (along with Kashubian ) population remained with the Roman Catholic Church . The Thirty Years' War severely ravaged and depopulated narrow Pomerania; few years later this same happened to Pomerelia ( the Deluge ).

[ 33 ] With the extinction of the Griffin house during the same period, the Duchy of Pomerania was divided between the Swedish Empire and Brandenburg-Prussia in 1648 , while Pomerelia remained in with the Kingdom of Poland. In the late 17th and early 18th centuries, French Huguenot communes were established in Gdańsk , Stargard , Prenzlau , Schwedt , Kołobrzeg , Pasewalk and Szczecin .

[ 34 ] Modern Age [ edit ] Main articles: History of Pomerania (1806–1933) , History of Pomerania (1933–1945) , and History of Pomerania (1945–present) The Prussian Province of Pomerania within Prussia and the German Empire circa 1871 The Province of Pomerania The flag used in the German part of Pomerania Prussia gained the southern parts of Swedish Pomerania in 1720, [ 35 ] : 341–343 invaded and annexed Pomerelia from Poland in 1772 and 1793, and gained the remainder of Swedish Pomerania in 1815 , after the Napoleonic Wars .

[ 35 ] : 363, 364 The former Brandenburg-Prussian Pomerania and the former Swedish parts were reorganized into the Prussian Province of Pomerania , [ 35 ] : 366 while Pomerelia was made part of the Province of West Prussia . With Prussia, both provinces joined the newly constituted German Empire in 1871. Under German rule, the Polish minority suffered discrimination and oppressive measures aimed at eradicating its culture.

Following the German Empire's defeat in World War I, however, eastern Pomerania/ Pomerelia was returned to the rebuilt Polish state, while German-majority Gdańsk/Danzig was transformed into the independent Free City of Danzig . In the interbellum, the border with Poland and the creation of what German propaganda called the " Polish Corridor " were often contested in Germany. Irredentist claims towards Poland were one of the factors contributing to the rise of the Nazi Party in Germany. In 1938 Germany's Province of Pomerania was expanded to include northern parts of the former Province of Posen–West Prussia (part of historic Greater Poland ).

Under the Nazi government , the persecution of Poles in the German-controlled part of Pomerania intensified. In January 1939, Germany resumed expulsions of Poles and many were also forced to flee.

[ 36 ] The Sturmabteilung , Schutzstaffel , Hitler Youth and Bund Deutscher Osten launched attacks on Polish institutions, schools and activists.

[ 37 ] From May to August 1939, the Gestapo carried out arrests of Polish leaders, activists, entrepreneurs, and even some staff of the Consulate of Poland in Szczecin.

[ 38 ] World War II [ edit ] German battleship SMS Schleswig-Holstein firing at the Polish Military Transit Depot during the battle of Westerplatte , 1939 In September 1939, Germany invaded Poland starting World War II . The first battle of the war, at Westerplatte , was fought in the region. Afterwards the Polish part of Pomerania was annexed by Germany, and made part of the Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia . The Nazis deported the Pomeranian Jews to a reservation near Lublin .

[ 39 ] The Polish population suffered heavily during the Nazi oppression ; more than 40,000 died in executions, death camps, prisons and forced labour , primarily those who were teachers, businessmen, priests, politicians, former army officers, and civil servants.

[ 40 ] Thousands of Poles and Kashubians suffered expulsion , their homes taken over by the German military and civil servants, as well as some Baltic Germans resettled there between 1940 and 1943 in accordance with the Lebensraum policy. The Stutthof concentration camp with numerous subcamps was located in the region. There were also numerous Nazi prisons, forced labour camps, and multiple prisoner-of-war camps , including the large Stalag II-B and Stalag II-D , for Polish, French , Belgian, Dutch, Serbian, Italian , American, Canadian, Australian, New Zealander and other Allied POWs.

Połczyn-Zdrój was the location of a Germanisation camp for kidnapped Polish children .

[ 41 ] The Polish resistance movement was active both in the pre-war Polish part and the pre-war German part of Pomerania.

After Nazi Germany 's defeat in World War II, the German–Polish border was shifted west to the Oder–Neisse line , [ 42 ] and all of Pomerania was in the Soviet Occupation Zone .

[ 35 ] : 512–515 [ 43 ] : 373ff The German inhabitants of the former eastern territories of Germany and Poles of German ethnicity from Pomerelia were expelled .  Between 1945 and 1948, millions of ethnic Germans (Volksdeutsche) and German citizens (Reichsdeutsche), were removed from former German territory now governed by Poland and other Eastern European countries. Many German civilians were sent to internment and labor camps where they were used as forced labor as part of German reparations to countries in Eastern Europe.  The death toll attributable to the flight and expulsions is disputed, with low-range estimates in the hundreds of thousands (see: Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950) ). The area was resettled primarily with Poles of Polish ethnicity, (some themselves expellees from former eastern Poland ) and some Poles of Ukrainian ethnicity (resettled under Operation Vistula ) and few Polish Jews .

[ 43 ] : 381ff [ 44 ] [ 45 ] Most of Hither or Western Pomerania ( Vorpommern ) remained in Germany, and most of the expelled Pomeranians found refuge there, later many moved on to other German regions and abroad. Today German Hither Pomerania forms the eastern part of the state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern , while the Polish part is divided mainly between the West Pomeranian , Pomeranian voivodeships, with their capitals in Szczecin and Gdańsk . During the 1980s, the Solidarity and Die Wende ("the change") movements overthrew the Communist regimes implemented during the post-war era; since then, Pomerania is democratically governed .

Pomeranian dialect and traditions still live in the country of Brazil in a colony where the language is still spoken. The arrival of Pomerania immigrants with Germans and Italians helped form the state of Espírito Santo since the early 1930s.

[ 46 ] Their importance and respect are one of the cultural signatures of the area. The Brazilian city of Pomerode (in the state of Santa Catarina ) was founded by Pomeranian Germans in 1861 and is considered the most typically German of all the German towns of southern Brazil.

Demographics [ edit ] See also: Historical demography of Pomerania Kashubians in regional dress Woman in the regional costume of the Mönchgut area on Rügen The German part of Western Pomerania is inhabited by German Pomeranians . In other parts, Poles are the dominant ethnic group since the territorial changes of Poland after World War II , and the resulting Polonization .

Kashubians , descendants of the medieval West Slavic Pomeranians , are numerous in rural Pomerelia .

German Hither Pomerania had a population of about 470,000 in 2012 (districts of Vorpommern-Rügen and Vorpommern-Greifswald combined) – while the Polish districts of Hither Pomerania had a population of about 580,000 in 2012 ( Szczecin and Świnoujście cities with powiat rights , Police County , as well as Goleniów Wolin and Międzyzdroje gminas combined). So overall, about 1.15 million people live in the historical region of Hither Pomerania today, while the Szczecin metropolitan area reaches even further.

[ citation needed ] Pomerelia is dominated by the Tricity metropolitan area (Pomeranian Voivodeship) with its population in 2012 estimated at least at 1,035,000 and the area at 1,332,51 km 2 , encompassing the Tricity itself with a population of 748,986 combining the eponymous three cities of Gdańsk (population 460,427), Gdynia (population 248,726) and Sopot (population 38,217), as well as the Little Kashubian Tricity with a population of 120,158 people (2012), formed by the City of Wejherowo (population 50,310 in 2012) and the towns (urban gminas) of Rumia (population 49,230 in 2020) and Reda (population 26,011 in 2019). The area also includes two smaller towns of Żukowo and Pruszcz Gdański belonging to the eponymous urban-rural gminas, and a number of rural gminas.

Region Seat Registration plates Area (km 2 ) Population (Poland 2019/2021, Germany 2022) West Pomeranian Voivodeship Szczecin Z 22,892 1,682,003 Pomeranian Voivodeship Gdańsk G 18,293 2,337,769 Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship Pomeranian part only Toruń Voivod council Bydgoszcz Voivod office; not in Pomerania C 11,980 1,124,517 Polish Pomerania 53,165 5,144,289 Landkreis Vorpommern-Greifswald Greifswald VG, ANK, GW, HGW, PW, SBG, UEM, WLG 3,927 237,355 Landkreis Vorpommern-Rügen Stralsund VR, GMN, HST, NVP, RDG, RÜG 3,188 227,683 Amt Demmin-Land and City of Demmin in Landkreis Mecklenburgische Seenplatte Demmin MSE, AT, DM, MC, MST, MÜR, NZ, RM, WRN 443 17,301 Amt Treptower Tollensewinkel in Landkreis Mecklenburgische Seenplatte Altentreptow MSE, AT, DM, MC, MST, MÜR, NZ, RM, WRN 414 13,581 Amt Gartz (Oder) in Landkreis Uckermark , Brandenburg Gartz (Oder) UM, ANG, PZ, SDT, TP 264 6,682 City of Schwedt/Oder in Landkreis Uckermark , Brandenburg ; Pomeranian parts only: Hohenfelde, Jamikow, Kummerow, Kunow, Schönow Schwedt/Oder UM, ANG, PZ, SDT, TP 71 1,028 Municipality of Zettemin in Landkreis Mecklenburgische Seenplatte ; historically a Pomeranian enclave of seven villages (the Säben Dörper ), southeast of Malchin , surrounded by Mecklenburg Zettemin MSE, AT, DM, MC, MST, MÜR, NZ, RM, WRN 19 267 German Pomerania 8,326 503,897 Pomerania 61,491 5,648,186 Cities in Pomerania [ edit ] Altogether, there are 16 cities in the broad-sense Pomerania, understood as comprising also Pomerelia . Their list is presented below and includes the 14 municipalities in Poland electing a city mayor ( Polish : prezydent miasta ) instead of a town mayor ( Polish : burmistrz ), with 9 of them holding the status of a city with powiat rights ( Polish : miasto na prawach powiatu , an independent city ), as well as the 2 municipalities in Germany holding the status of a district-belonging city (German: Große kreisangehörige Stadt ), as no city of the German part of Pomerania holds currently any higher status, such as a partially of fully independent city (German: Große selbständige Stadt , Kreisfreie Stadt , or Stadtkreis ), or a city-state (German: Stadtstaat ).

Cities in the historical region of Hither Pomerania [ edit ] Szczecin ( city with powiat rights , West Pomeranian Voivodeship ): 394,482; up to 763,321 in the metropolitan area [ 47 ] Greifswald , in Low German Griepswohld ( Vorpommern-Greifswald , Mecklenburg-Vorpommern ): 59,332 Stralsund ( Vorpommern-Rügen , Mecklenburg-Vorpommern): 59,171 Świnoujście ( city with powiat rights , West Pomeranian Voivodeship); 39,834 Schwedt/Oder ( Uckermark , Brandenburg ) expanded in contemporary times, so that it now also encompasses some neighbourhoods north of the Welse , the historical border river between Brandenburg and Pomerania (Blumenhagen, Gatow, Hohenfelde, Jamikow, Kummerow, Kunow, Schönow and Vierraden ): 33,524 Szczecin Greifswald Stralsund Świnoujście Cities in the historical region of Farther Pomerania [ edit ] Koszalin ( city with powiat rights , West Pomeranian Voivodeship): 109,343 Słupsk ( city with powiat rights , Pomeranian Voivodeship ): 94,849 Stargard ( Stargard County , West Pomeranian Voivodeship): 69,724 Kołobrzeg ( Kołobrzeg County , West Pomeranian Voivodeship); 46,259 Koszalin Słupsk Stargard Kołobrzeg Cities in the historical region of Pomerelia [ edit ] Tricity (Pomeranian Voivodeship): 748,986; the Tricity metropolitan area (Pomeranian Voivodeship): population in 2012; at least 1,035,000 area 1,332,51 km 2 Gdańsk ( city with powiat rights , Pomeranian Voivodeship): 460,427 Gdynia ( city with powiat rights , Pomeranian Voivodeship): 248,726 Sopot ( city with powiat rights , Pomeranian Voivodeship): 38,217 Toruń ( city with powiat rights , Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship ): 205,934 Grudziądz ( city with powiat rights , Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship): 96,042 Tczew ( Tczew County , Pomeranian Voivodeship): 60,279 Wejherowo ( Wejherowo County , Pomeranian Voivodeship): 50,375 Starogard Gdański ( Starogard County , Pomeranian Voivodeship): 44,470 Gdańsk Gdynia Toruń Grudziądz Culture [ edit ] Languages and dialects [ edit ] For historical language, see Pomeranian language .

Polish is the dominating language in the Polish part of Pomerania.

Kashubian dialects are also spoken by the Kashubians in Pomerelia .

In the German part of Pomerania, Standard German dominates. The historical German dialects of Pomerania are, however, Low German . The Pomeranian dialects were all part of the East Low German subgroup: Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch in the west, Central Pomeranian (Mittelpommersch) in Central Pomerania around Szczecin (then Stettin), and East Pomeranian in the east. The regions east of the Piaśnica river are not considered Pomeranian according to German terminology, but either West Prussian or Pomerelian.

Danzig German was hence classified as Low Prussian , like the dialects of East Prussia ( Königsberg ).

Those parts of Pomerania that remained German after 1945 are almost entirely located in the Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch area. Only the regions between the Zarow river in the west and the Oder river in the east are historically part of the Central Pomeranian dialect region: the southern shores of the Szczecin Lagoon ( Ueckermünde ), the towns along the Uecker and Randow rivers, and those parts of Pomerania that are now in Brandenburg ( Gartz and the northern districts of Schwedt/Oder ). Central Pomeranian is also spoken along the historically Brandenburgian headwaters of the Uecker river ( Prenzlau ). In Mecklenburg-Vorpommern , however, the dominating Low German standard version is the Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch dialect, and Central Pomeranian texts are often rewritten.

East Pomeranian, Low Prussian , and Standard German were dominating east of the Oder-Neisse line before most of its speakers were expelled after World War II .

Kashubian and East Low German are also spoken by the descendants of émigrées, most notably in the Americas (e.g. Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Canada).

Slovincian was spoken at the Farther Pomeranian –Pomerelian frontier, but is now extinct.

A map of Polish dialects. The Pomorze region contains the Kashubian language and a mix of Polish dialects from other parts of the country.

Pomerania historically lay in the Low German dialect region: Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch , Central Pomeranian (on the map:Mittelpommerisch) and East Pomeranian (on the map: Hinterpommerisch) dialects. The regions east of the Piaśnica river are not regarded as speaking East Pomeranian according to German terminology, and the Low German dialects that were spoken there are called Low Prussian .

The Central Pomeranian dialect region of Low German , east of the Zarow and north of the Welse , where "Ohren" (ears) is pronounced like "oan" and "orn" (now bounded by the Oder-Neisse line in the east) Cuisine [ edit ] For typical food and beverages of the region, see Pomeranian cuisine .

Museums [ edit ] Museums in the Polish part [ edit ] National Museum in Szczecin National Museum in Gdańsk District Museum in Toruń Museum of the Second World War in Gdańsk At least 50 museums in Poland cover the history of Pomerania, the most important of them being the District Museum in Toruń , the Museum in Grudziądz, the National Museum in Gdańsk , the National Maritime Museum, Gdańsk , the Museum of Sopot, the Emigration Museum in Gdynia, the Museum of Polish Navy in Gdynia, the Museum of Kociewie in Starogard Gdański, the Museum of Kashubian and Pomeranian Literature and Music in Wejherowo, the Kashubian Museum in Kartuzy, the Central Pomerania Museum in Słupsk , [ 48 ] the Darłowo Museum, [ 49 ] the Koszalin Museum, [ 50 ] the Museum of Archeology and History in Stargard, [ 51 ] the National Museum in Szczecin , [ 52 ] the Museum of the Puck Region , and the Museum of Maritime Fisheries in Świnoujście.

Other notable museums include the Museum of the National Anthem ( Muzeum Hymnu Narodowego ) in Będomin at the birthplace of Józef Wybicki , author of the lyrics of the national anthem of Poland , and the Copernicus House in Toruń , birthplace of famed astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus . The Diocesan Museum in Pelplin contains one of the finest collections of medieval art in Poland, and the country's sole copy of the Gutenberg Bible . Medieval open-air museums are the Grodzisko in Sopot and Skansen in Wolin . The Museum of Polish Arms in Kołobrzeg contains a collection of militaria related to the military of Poland from the Early Middle Ages to the present. There are also the Dar Pomorza , ORP Błyskawica and SS Sołdek museum ships .

Several museums devoted to World War II history are located in Polish Pomerania, including the Museum of the Second World War in Gdańsk, the Guardhouse no. 1 at Westerplatte (a branch of the Museum of Gdańsk), the Museum of Coastal Defence in Hel , the Stutthof Museum in Sztutowo with the branch Piaśnica Museum in Wejherowo , the Museum of the Pomeranian Wall and World War II in Szczecinek , and the Armory Museum in Kłanino .

There are also aquaria: the Gdynia Aquarium and the Seal Sanctuary in Hel .

Perhaps more unusual museums include the Amber Museums in Gdańsk and Jarosławiec , and the Museum of Gingerbread in Toruń.

Museums in the German part [ edit ] Ozeaneum in Stralsund Inside the Ozeaneum Ukranenland in Torgelow Pomeranian State Museum in Greifswald There are around 40 museums in the district of Vorpommern-Rügen , the most notable of which are: the "Foundation German Oceanographic Museum" in Stralsund, which runs four locations: the German Oceanographic Museum , which is housed in the former St. Catherine's Monastery in Stralsund, the Ozeaneum Stralsund (a natural history museum with a focus on the sea), the Nautineum on the Dänholm , and the Natureum in Born auf dem Darß .

the Stralsund Museum , which houses a Svantevit Stone, the Hiddensee treasure and the Peenemünde gold rings.

the Navy Museum Dänholm (Marinemuseum Dänholm), the Dänholm being the cradle of the German Navy.

the German Amber Museum in Ribnitz-Damgarten , located in the former monastery of the Order of Saint Clare in Ribnitz.

the Bibelzentrum Barth , which shows one of the Barth Bibles, that were printed in 1588 in Middle Low German by the Ducal Printing House Barth (Herzogliche Druckerei Barth), founded by Bogislaw XIII, Duke of Pomerania .

the Granitz Hunting Lodge with among others, the exhibition "Deers of the world" is Mecklenburg-Vorpommern's most visited castle.

the West Pomeranian Potato Museum in Tribsees , one of three German potato museums.

the crane museum ( Kranich Museum ) in Saal , dedicated to all kinds of cranes.

In the district of Vorpommern-Greifswald are located around 30 museums, among which: the Pomeranian State Museum , the collections of which include the famous Croÿ-Carpet and various paintings by Caspar David Friedrich and Vincent van Gogh .

the Peenemünde Historical Technical Museum , where the only rockets in the territory of Pomerania are exhibited.

the Museumshafen Greifswald is Germany's largest museum harbour.

Ukranenland , an archaeological open-air museum on the banks of the Uecker in Torgelow , which is modeled on an early medieval Slavic village. It depicts the life of the Ukrani , the Elbe Slavic tribe once native to the Uckermark .

Education [ edit ] Universities [ edit ] The University of Greifswald, founded in 1456 (teaching since 1436), is the oldest university in Pomerania.

There are four traditional (non-profiled and multi-faculty, public research ) universities in the region, namely the University of Greifswald , the University of Szczecin , the University of Gdańsk and the Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń , the oldest of which, the University of Greifswald , was founded when Greifswald belonged to Duchy of Pomerania , thus being one of the oldest universities in the world .

The technical universities are the Gdańsk University of Technology , West Pomeranian University of Technology in Szczecin, and Koszalin University of Technology .

University of Applied Sciences [ edit ] The Stralsund University of Applied Sciences (Hochschule Stralsund) in Stralsund has around 2,400 students.

Economy [ edit ] Agriculture primarily consists of raising livestock, forestry, fishery, and the cultivation of cereals , sugar beets , and potatoes. Industrial food processing is increasingly relevant in the region. Key producing industries are shipyards , mechanical engineering facilities (i.e.

renewable energy components), and sugar refineries , along with paper and wood fabricators.

[ 1 ] Service industries today are an important economical factor in Pomerania, most notably with logistics, information technology, life science , biotechnology , health care, and other high-tech branches often clustering around research facilities of the Pomeranian universities.

Since the late 19th century, tourism has been an important sector of the economy, primarily in the numerous seaside resorts along the coast.

The Polish Świnoujście LNG terminal is located in Pomerania.

Sports [ edit ] The Tricity Derby , contested by Arka Gdynia and Lechia Gdańsk , is the largest football derby in Pomerania Sports enjoying either great popularity or success in Pomerania are football , basketball , speedway , handball , volleyball and rugby union .

Most popular and accomplished football teams are Arka Gdynia , Lechia Gdańsk and Pogoń Szczecin , based in the three largest cities.

Among the most successful Polish basketball teams are the Arka Gdynia men's and women's teams. Other popular men's clubs are Czarni Słupsk , Spójnia Stargard , Trefl Sopot , Wilki Morskie Szczecin , SKS Starogard Gdański .

The most successful speedway club is KS Toruń , while other popular teams are Wybrzeże Gdańsk and GKM Grudziądz .

The most successful men's handball team is Wybrzeże Gdańsk , and other popular club is Pogoń Szczecin , whereas successful women's teams are Pogoń Szczecin and Arka Gdynia .

With ten Polish Championship titles KPS Chemik Police is among the most successful women's volleyball clubs in Poland (as of October 2023).

RC Lechia Gdańsk , Ogniwo Sopot and RC Arka Gdynia are all multiple times Polish champions in rugby union, winning a combined total of 28 titles (as of November 2023).

Largest stadiums are Stadion Gdańsk , Stadion Miejski im. Floriana Krygiera in Szczecin, MotoArena Toruń and Stadion Miejski in Gdynia. Main indoor arenas include Ergo Arena in Gdańsk/Sopot, Gdynia Arena in Gdynia and Netto Arena in Szczecin.

Curiosities [ edit ] This section contains a list of miscellaneous information .

Please help improve it by relocating relevant information into other sections or articles.

( May 2025 ) The Pomeranian dog and Pomeranian Coarsewool are named after the region.

The historic centre of Stralsund is part of the UNESCO World Heritage Site "Historic Centres of Stralsund and Wismar ".

The old town of Toruń is listed as UNESCO World Heritage Site.

The beech forest in Jasmund National Park is part of the UNESCO World Heritage Site Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe .

The Peene Valley is, with a total area of about 45,000 hectares, the largest contiguous fen region of Europe.

[ 53 ] The Randow , historic border river between Pomerania and the Uckermark , is a river which is fed by lateral tributaries and swampland and has a mouth at both ends.

Pomerania boasts 13 Historic Monuments of Poland , including the old towns of Gdańsk , Toruń and Chełmno .

There are 3 national parks each in the Polish and German parts of Pomerania: Slovincian National Park , Tuchola Forest National Park , Wolin National Park , Western Pomerania Lagoon Area National Park , Jasmund National Park and Lower Oder Valley National Park .

The Gothic Our Lady of Częstochowa Church in Darłowo contains the sarcophagus of Eric of Pomerania , King of Denmark, Norway and Sweden, whereas the Toruń Cathedral contains the heart of King John I Albert of Poland.

Pomerania is home to the Sopot Pier , the longest wooden pier in Europe, and the Świnoujście Lighthouse , the tallest brick lighthouse in the world.

The pier of Prerow on Fischland-Darß-Zingst will become the longest pier in the Baltic Sea, measuring 720 metres.

The Slovincian National Park contains the largest dunes in Europe.

[ 54 ] The two most populous islands of the Baltic Sea, Usedom and Rügen , are part of Pomerania.

St. Mary's Church, Stralsund has been the tallest structure in the world from 1549-1569 and from 1573-1647.

Pomerania is home to the St. Mary's Church, Gdańsk and Szczecin Cathedral , the largest and tallest Gothic churches in Poland, respectively.

The astronomical clock of St. Nicholas Church, Stralsund is the oldest mechanical clock in the world to have been preserved in its original state.

The Crooked Forest is located in Nowe Czarnowo in Pomerania.

The main sanctuary of the Rani was located on Cape Arkona , where they whorshiped Svetovit , chief god of the Rani and later of all Polabian Slavs .

Pomerania's fourth-largest island of Hiddensee looks like a seahorse from above, which is reflected in the island's flag.

A ballistic missile lifting off from the army research center in Peenemünde on October 3, 1942, was the first human-built object to enter outer space .

The Colossus of Prora is a 3 km long string of houses built with the intention of becoming a huge holiday accommodation.

The Hiddensee treasure is the largest discovery of Viking gold artifacts in Germany.

There exists a village called Pommern on the Moselle.

There is a memorial to British pilots of the No. 617 Squadron RAF , who were shot down by Germany during WWII, at the Karsibór island.

Gallery [ edit ] Stralsund , one of several Hanseatic cities built in typical Brick Gothic style Town Hall and Our Lady of Częstochowa Church in Darłowo Cathedral Basilica of the Assumption in Pelplin , one of the largest churches in Poland Gniew Castle See also [ edit ] German exonyms (Pomorze) Polish exonyms (Western Pomerania) History of Pomerania Kashubian-Pomeranian Association Pomerode Eastern Pomerania (disambiguation) Western Pomerania (disambiguation) Middle Pomerania Pomeranian (disambiguation) Footnotes [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ The border valley is formed by the rivers Landgraben , Tollense , Trebel , Recknitz and Randow ^ Westernmost Pomeranian settlement.

^ Easternmost settlement in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern .

^ Districts north of the Welse river only.

^ Easternmost Pomeranian settlement in Germany.

^ Right-bank with historic centre.

^ a b c Also considered part of the historical region of Greater Poland in the medieval period.

^ Part north of Drwęca with historic center.

Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition, 2001–07 Archived 29 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition, 2000, Pomerania [1] ^ Werner Buchholz, Pommern, Siedler, 1999, pp.23,24, ISBN 3-88680-272-8 ^ a b c e.g.

here (Sheperd Atlas), or in old Enc Britannica ^ Biskup, Marian; Tomczak, Andrzej (1955).

Mapy województwa pomorskiego w drugiej połowie XVI w.

(in Polish). Toruń. p. 129.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Duden online Kaschubei" . 12 June 2019.

^ Słownik geograficzny Królestwa Polskiego i innych krajów słowiańskich (in Polish). Vol. XIV. Warszawa. 1895. p. 201.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Johannes Hoops, Reallexikon der germanischen Altertumskunde, Walter de Gruyter, p.422, ISBN 3-11-017733-1 ^ From the First Humans to the Mesolithic Hunters in the Northern German Lowlands, Current Results and Trends – THOMAS TERBERGER. From: Across the western Baltic, edited by: Keld Møller Hansen & Kristoffer Buck Pedersen, 2006, ISBN 87-983097-5-7 OCLC 43087092 , Sydsjællands Museums Publikationer Vol. 1 "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 September 2008 . Retrieved 1 October 2008 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Jan M Piskorski, Pommern im Wandel der Zeiten , 1999, pp.18ff, ISBN 83-906184-8-6 ^ Horst Wernicke, Greifswald, Geschichte der Stadt , Helms, 2000, pp.16ff, ISBN 3-931185-56-7 ^ A. W. R. Whittle, Europe in the Neolithic: The Creation of New Worlds, Cambridge University Press, 1996, p.198, ISBN 0-521-44920-0 ^ Werner Buchholz, Pommern , Siedler, 1999, pp.22,23, ISBN 3-88680-272-8 ^ Joachim Herrmann, Die Slawen in Deutschland , Akademie-Verlag Berlin, 1985, pp.pp.237ff,244ff ^ Joachim Herrmann, Die Slawen in Deutschland , Akademie-Verlag Berlin, 1985, pp.261,345ff ^ Jan M Piskorski, Pommern im Wandel der Zeiten, 1999, p.32, ISBN 83-906184-8-6 OCLC 43087092 :pagan reaction of 1005 ^ Werner Buchholz, Pommern , Siedler, 1999, p.25, ISBN 3-88680-272-8 : pagan uprising that also ended the Polish suzerainty in 1005 ^ A. P. Vlasto, Entry of Slavs Christendom , CUP Archive, 1970, p.129, ISBN 0-521-07459-2 : abandoned 1004 – 1005 in face of violent opposition ^ Nora Berend, Christianization and the Rise of Christian Monarchy: Scandinavia, Central Europe and Rus' C. 900–1200 , Cambridge University Press, 2007, p.293, ISBN 0-521-87616-8 , ISBN 978-0-521-87616-2 ^ David Warner, Ottonian Germany: The Chronicon of Thietmar of Merseburg , Manchester University Press, 2001, p.358, ISBN 0-7190-4926-1 , ISBN 978-0-7190-4926-2 ^ Michael Borgolte, Benjamin Scheller, Polen und Deutschland vor 1000 Jahren: Die Berliner Tagung über den "Akt von Gnesen" , Akademie Verlag, 2002, p.282, ISBN 3-05-003749-0 , ISBN 978-3-05-003749-3 ^ Jan M Piskorski, Pommern im Wandel der Zeiten, 1999, pp.35ff, ISBN 83-906184-8-6 OCLC 43087092 ^ Gerhard Krause, Horst Robert Balz, Gerhard Müller , Theologische Realenzyklopädie , De Gruyter, 1997, pp.40ff, ISBN 3-11-015435-8 ^ Werner Buchholz, Pommern , Siedler, 1999, p.34ff,87,103, ISBN 3-88680-272-8 ^ Jan M. Piskorski, Pommern im Wandel der Zeiten, 1999, p.43, ISBN 83-906184-8-6 OCLC 43087092 ^ Jan M Piskorski, Pommern im Wandel der Zeiten, 1999, pp.77ff, ISBN 83-906184-8-6 OCLC 43087092 ^ Werner Buchholz, Pommern , Siedler, 1999, pp.45ff, ISBN 3-88680-272-8 ^ Werner Buchholz, Pommern , Siedler, 1999, pp.115,116, ISBN 3-88680-272-8 ^ Werner Buchholz, Pommern , Siedler, 1999, p. 186, ISBN 3-88680-272-8 ^ Werner Buchholz, Pommern , Siedler, 1999, pp. 205–212, ISBN 3-88680-272-8 ^ Richard du Moulin Eckart, Geschichte der deutschen Universitäten , Georg Olms Verlag, 1976, pp.111, 112, ISBN 3-487-06078-7 ^ Gerhard Krause, Horst Robert Balz, Gerhard Müller, Theologische Realenzyklopädie , Walter de Gruyter, 1997, pp.43ff, ISBN 3-11-015435-8 ^ Werner Buchholz, '"Pommern , Siedler, 1999, pp. 263, 332, 341–343, 352–354, ISBN 3-88680-272-8 ^ Muret, Eduard (1885).

Geschichte der Französischen Kolonie in Brandenburg-Preußen, unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Berliner Gemeinde. Aus Veranlassung der Zweihundertjährigen Jubelfeier am 29. Oktober 1885 (in German). Berlin. pp.

208– 209, 211, 256, 259, 266, 269.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b c d Werner Buchholz, Pommern, Siedler, 1999, ISBN 3-88680-272-8 ^ Cygański, Mirosław (1984). "Hitlerowskie prześladowania przywódców i aktywu Związków Polaków w Niemczech w latach 1939-1945".

Przegląd Zachodni (in Polish) (4): 45.

^ Cygański, p. 46 ^ Cygański, pp. 46-47, 51-52 ^ Leni Yahil, Ina Friedman, Haya Galai, The Holocaust: The Fate of European Jewry, 1932–1945 , Oxford University Press US, 1991, ISBN 0-19-504523-8 , p.138: 12/13 February 1940, 1,300 Jews of all sexes and ages, extreme cruelty, no food allowed to be taken along, cold, some died during deportation, cold and snow during resettlement, 230 dead by 12 March, Lublin reservation chosen in winter, 30,000 Germans resettled before to make room [2] ^ "Poland" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 8 July 2023.

^ "Lebensborn" .

Połczyn-Zdrój (in Polish) . Retrieved 3 November 2023 .

^ "It is difficult to credit with good faith any person who asserts that Poland's western boundary was fixed by the Potsdam conference, or that there was a promise that it would be established at some particular place." See: Speaking Frankly by James F. Byrnes, New York & London, 1947, p.79-81. Byrnes, a Judge and former State Governor, served as a close adviser to President Truman and became US Secretary of State in July 1945. In that capacity, Byrnes attended the Potsdam Conference and the Paris Conference.

^ a b Jan M Piskorski, Pommern im Wandel der Zeiten, ISBN 83-906184-8-6 OCLC 43087092 ^ Tomasz Kamusella in Prauser and Reeds (eds), The Expulsion of the German communities from Eastern Europe , p.28, EUI HEC 2004/1 [3] Archived 1 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Philipp Ther, Ana Siljak, Redrawing Nations: Ethnic Cleansing in East-Central Europe, 1944–1948 , 2001, p.114, ISBN 0-7425-1094-8 , ISBN 978-0-7425-1094-4 ^ "Os pomeranos: um povo sem Estado finca suas raízes no Brasil" (in Portuguese). 29 December 2014.

^ Entwicklungsprioritäten der Metropolregion Stettin Archived 5 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine (German PDF; 1,7 MB) ^ "Muzeum Pomorza Środkowego – Strona główna" . Muzeum.slupsk.pl . Retrieved 30 July 2010 .

^ "Muzeum w Darłowie – Zamek Książąt Pomorskich zaprasza" . Muzeumdarlowo.pl . Retrieved 30 July 2010 .

^ "Muzeum w Koszalinie" . Muzeum.koszalin.pl . Retrieved 30 July 2010 .

^ "Muzeum Archeologiczno-Historyczne w Stargardzie" (in Polish) . Retrieved 15 April 2025 .

^ "Muzeum Narodowe w Szczecinie – Aktualności" . Muzeum.szczecin.pl . Retrieved 30 July 2010 .

^ Peenetal / Peene-Haff-Moor Archived 2012-01-14 at the Wayback Machine at www.bfn.de ^ "Słowiński National Park" .

Wellbeing . Retrieved 3 November 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pomerania .

Internet directories [ edit ] Culture and history [ edit ] Pomeranian dukes castle in Szczecin (Polish, German, English) Pomeranian (German) Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Pomerania" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Collection of historical eBooks about Pomerania (German) Archived 12 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Pomerania" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Maps of Pomerania [ edit ] Map of Pomerania as in 1905, in German Wikipedia Woiewództwa Pomorskie i Małborskie oraz Pomerania Elektorska, G.B.A.Rizzi-Zannoni 1772 FEEFHS Map Room: German Empire – East (1882) – Pommern (Pomerania), Prussia Pomerania in 1789 v t e Geography of Pomerania Regions Current Western Pomerania Farther Pomerania Pomerelia Gdańsk Pomerania Kashubia Kociewie Tuchola Forest Chełmno Land Michałów Land Lubawa Land Former Circipania Lauenburg and Bütow Land Lands of Schlawe and Stolp Administration Mecklenburg-Vorpommern Brandenburg West Pomeranian Voivodeship Pomeranian Voivodeship Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship Pomerania Euroregion Cities and towns Anklam Barth Demmin Gartz Greifswald Grudziądz Heringsdorf Kołobrzeg Koszalin Ribnitz-Damgarten Sagard Sassnitz Słupsk Stargard Starogard Gdański Stralsund Świnoujście Szczecin Tczew Toruń Tricity metro Gdańsk Gdynia Sopot Ueckermünde Wejherowo Wolgast Zingst List of towns in Western Pomerania List of towns in Farther Pomerania List of placenames in the Province of Pomerania A–H I–P Q–Z Inhabited islands Kirr Hiddensee Ummanz Dänholm Rügen Öhe Riems Vilm Greifswalder Oie Görmitz Usedom Karsibór Wolin Wolińska Kępa Chrząszczewska Pucka Grodzka Kępa Parnicka Zaleskie Łęgi Zielona Łasztownia Ostrów Grabowski Salt Island Młyńska Island Port Ołowianka Ostrów Sobieszewo Peninsulae and headlands Darß-Zingst Jasmund Hel Mönchgut Reddevitz Höft Rewa Sandbar Cape Rozewie Cape Rzucewo Westerplatte Wittow Cape Arkona Bug Schaabe Zudar Palmer Ort Rivers Brda Drawa Drwęca Dziwna Grabowa Gwda Ina Łeba Motława Oder West East Regalica Parsęta Peene Peenestrom Piaśnica Płonia Radunia Randow Recknitz Reda Rega Ryck Słupia Świna Tollense Trebel Uecker Vistula Leniwka Śmiała Wisła Martwa Wisła Przekop Canal Wda Wieprza Wierzyca Lakes Charzykowskie Lake Dąbie Lake Drawsko Lake Gardno Lake Jamno Lake Lake Kummerow Łebsko Lake Miedwie Lake Raduńskie Lake Wdzydze Lake Wicko Lake Bays, lagoons Achterwasser Balmer See Darss-Zingst Bodden Chain Bodstedter Bodden Barther Bodden Grabow Bay of Gdańsk Bay of Puck Bay of Pomerania Bay of Greifswald Rügischer Bodden Hagensche Wiek Having Wreecher See Kamieński Lagoon North Rügen Bodden Wieker Bodden Rassower Strom Großer Jasmunder Bodden Kleiner Jasmunder Bodden Prorer Wiek Szczecin Lagoon Nowe Warpno Bay Neuwarper See Tromper Wiek West Rügen Bodden Vitter Bodden Schaproder Bodden Udarser Wiek Kubitzer Bodden Liebitz National parks Western Pomerania Lagoon Area Jasmund Lower Oder Valley Wolin Drawa Slovincian Bory Tucholskie v t e History of Pomerania 10,000 BC – 600 AD 600–1100 1100–1300 1300–1500 1500–1806 1806–1933 1933–1945 1945–present Administrative Western Pomerania Billung March Northern March Principality of Rügen Duchy of Pomerania House of Pomerania List of dukes Gützkow Partitions Pomerania-Demmin Pomerania-Stettin Pomerania-Schlawe Pomerania-Wolgast Pomerania-Stolp Pomerania-Neustettin Pomerania-Stargard Pomerania-Rügenwalde Pomerania-Wolgast-Stolp Pomerania-Barth Swedish Pomerania Province of Pomerania 1815–1945 Stettin Region Stralsund Region List of placenames Enclave of Police Szczecin Voivodeship 1946–1975 Mecklenburg-Vorpommern 1946–1952 Bezirk Frankfurt Bezirk Neubrandenburg Bezirk Rostock Szczecin Voivodeship 1975–1998 Contemporary Mecklenburg-Vorpommern Brandenburg West Pomeranian Voivodeship Farther Pomerania Duchy of Pomerania House of Pomerania List of dukes Cammin Schlawe-Stolp Partitions Pomerania-Stolp Brandenburgian Pomerania Starostwo of Draheim Province of Pomerania 1815–1945 Stettin Region Köslin Region List of placenames Szczecin Voivodeship 1946–1975 Koszalin Voivodeship 1950–1975 Szczecin Voivodeship 1975–1998 Koszalin Voivodeship 1975–1998 Słupsk Voivodeship 1975–1998 Contemporary West Pomeranian Voivodeship Pomeranian Voivodeship Lauenburg-Bütow classified as Farther Pomerania or Pomerelia Duchy of Pomerania House of Pomerania List of dukes Partitions Royal Prussia Pomeranian Voivodeship Lauenburg-Bütow Pawn Brandenburgian Pomerania Lauenburg and Bütow Land Province of Pomerania 1815–1945 Köslin Region Szczecin Voivodeship 1946–1975 Koszalin Voivodeship 1950–1975 Słupsk Voivodeship 1975–1998 Contemporary Pomeranian Voivodeship Pomerelia ( Kashubia , Kociewie , Tuchola Forest , Chełmno Land ) Polish Pomerelia Danish Pomerelia Duchy of Eastern Pomerania Samborides Duchy of Gdańsk Duchy of Świecie and Lubiszewo Duchy of Białogarda Duchy of Lubiszewo Duchy of Świecie State of the Teutonic Order Royal Prussia 1466–1793 Pomeranian Voivodeship Chełmno Voivodeship Free City of Danzig 1807–1814 West Prussia Posen-West Prussia Region Pomeranian Voivodeship 1919–1939 ( Polish Corridor ) Free City of Danzig 1920–1939 Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia Gdańsk Voivodeship 1946–1975 Bydgoszcz Voivodeship 1946–1975 Szczecin Voivodeship 1946–1975 Koszalin Voivodeship 1950–1975 Gdańsk Voivodeship 1975–1998 Koszalin Voivodeship 1975–1998 Słupsk Voivodeship 1975–1998 Bydgoszcz Voivodeship 1975–1998 Toruń Voivodeship 1975–1998 Contemporary Pomeranian Voivodeship West Pomeranian Voivodeship Gmina Biały Bór Kuyavian-Pomeranian Voivodeship Ecclesiastical Roman Catholic Historical Christianization of Pomerania Diocese of Wollin/Cammin Diocese of Kolberg Diocese of Chełmno Diocese of Roskilde Apostolic Vicariate of Northern Germany Prince-Episcopal Delegation for Brandenburg and Pomerania Apostolic Administration of the Free City of Danzig Apostolic Administration of Tütz Prelature of Schneidemühl Apostolic Administration of Kamień (Cammin), Lubusz (Lebus) and the Prelature of Piła (Schneidemühl) with see in Gorzów Wielkopolski 1945–1972 Extant Archdiocese of Berlin Diocese of Bydgoszcz Archdiocese of Gdańsk Diocese of Koszalin-Kołobrzeg Diocese of Pelplin Archdiocese of Szczecin-Kamień Diocese of Toruń Diocese of Włocławek Protestant Historical Protestant Reformation Evangelical State Church in Prussia Pomeranian Evangelical Church Extant Protestant Church in Germany Evangelical Lutheran Church in Northern Germany Lutheran Diocese of Mecklenburg and Pomerania Evangelical Reformed Church in Germany Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession in Poland Lutheran Diocese of Pomerania-Greater Poland Lutheran Diocese of Wrocław Pentecostal Church in Poland Demography and anthropology Archaeological cultures Hamburg Maglemosian Ertebølle-Ellerbek Linear Pottery Funnelbeaker Havelland Corded Ware Comb Ceramic Nordic Bronze Age Lusatian Jastorf Pomeranian Oksywie Wielbark Gustow Dębczyn (Denzin) Peoples Gepids Goths Lemovii Rugii Vidivarii Vistula Veneti Slavic Pomeranians Prissani Rani Ukrani Veleti Lutici Velunzani German Pomeranians Kashubians Poles Slovincians Major demographic events Migration Period Ostsiedlung WWII flight and expulsion of Germans Post-WWII settlement of Poles and Ukrainians Languages and dialects West Germanic Low German Low Prussian Central Pomeranian Mecklenburgisch-Vorpommersch East Pomeranian West Pomeranian Standard German West Slavic Polabian Polish Pomeranian Kashubian Slovincian Treaties 1200–1500 Kremmen (1236) Landin (1250) Kępno (1282) Soldin (1309) Templin (1317) Ueckermünde (1327) Kalisz (1343) Stralsund (1354) Stralsund (1370) Pyzdry (1390) Raciążek (1404) Thorn, First (1411) Eberswalde, First (1415) Melno (1422) Perleberg (1427) Eberswalde, Second (1427) Łęczyca (1433) Brześć Kujawski (1435) Soldin (1466) Thorn, Second (1466) Prenzlau (1448/1468/1472/1479) Pyritz (1493) 1500–1700 Thorn (1521) Kraków (1525) Grimnitz (1529) Augsburg (1555) Lublin (1569) Stettin (1570) Franzburg (1627) Stettin (1630) Westphalia (1648) Stettin (1653) Labiau (1656) Wehlau and Bromberg (1657) Oliva (1660) Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1679) Lund (1679) 1700–present Stockholm (1719 / 1720) Frederiksborg (1720) Polish Partitions Treaties (1772/1773, 1793, 1795) Tilsit (1807) Kiel (1814) Vienna (1815) North German Confederation Treaty (1866) Peace of Prague (1866) Versailles (1919) Polish Concordat (1925) Prussian Concordat (1929) Reichskonkordat (1933) Molotov–Ribbentrop (1939) Potsdam (1945) Zgorzelec (1951) Moscow (1970) Warsaw (1970) Helsinki Accords (1975) Polish-East German Maritime Border Agreement (1989) Two Plus Four (1990) German Reunification Treaty (1990) German–Polish Border Treaty (1991) Treaty of Good Neighbourship (1991) Polish Concordat (1993) Convention on the International Commission on the Protection of the Oder against Pollution (1996) Treaty of Accession 2003 Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Czech Republic Poland Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐rjjpn
Cached time: 20250817043735
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.206 seconds
Real time usage: 1.547 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10086/1000000
Revision size: 76856/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 293069/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16938/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 47/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 259523/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.634/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25140841/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1154.434      1 -total
 27.36%  315.828      1 Template:Infobox_settlement
 24.75%  285.732      1 Template:Infobox
 21.76%  251.187      3 Template:Reflist
  7.85%   90.625      1 Template:History_of_Pomerania
  7.71%   89.058      1 Template:Sidebar
  7.34%   84.746      3 Template:Native_name
  6.83%   78.830     33 Template:ISBN
  5.01%   57.821      1 Template:Pomerania
  4.84%   55.927      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:24261:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043735 and revision id 1306005344. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pomerania&oldid=1306005344 " Categories : Pomerania Historical regions Historical regions in Germany Historical regions in Poland Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages using the Phonos extension Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2021 Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Kashubian-language text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with Polish IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Pages with German IPA Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles needing additional references from January 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 Articles with trivia sections from May 2025 All articles with trivia sections Commons link is on Wikidata Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 10:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pomerania 67 languages Add topic

