Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Common thresholds of supermajority Toggle Common thresholds of supermajority subsection 2.1 Two-thirds 2.2 Three-fifths, or 60 percent 2.3 55% 3 Use in parliamentary procedure 4 Use in governments around the world Toggle Use in governments around the world subsection 4.1 Australia 4.2 Bangladesh 4.3 Canada 4.4 Denmark 4.5 European Union 4.5.1 Council 4.5.2 Parliament 4.6 Finland 4.7 India 4.8 Italy 4.9 Japan 4.10 New Zealand 4.11 Nigeria 4.12 Philippines 4.13 Singapore 4.14 South Korea 4.14.1 Legislation 4.14.2 Impeachment 4.14.3 Judicial review 4.14.4 Constitutional amendments 4.15 Spain 4.15.1 Constitutional reform 4.15.2 Other legal procedures 4.15.3 Autonomous communities 4.16 Taiwan 4.17 Turkey 4.18 Ukraine 4.18.1 Constitutional amendments 4.19 United Kingdom 4.19.1 UK Parliament 4.19.2 Devolved parliaments 4.19.3 Local authorities 4.20 United Nations 4.21 United States 4.21.1 Federal government 4.21.2 State government 5 International agreements 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Supermajority 29 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית Кыргызча Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Twi Українська ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Voting requirement above 50% for passage "Two-thirds rule" redirects here. For the railway safety rule, see Two-thirds rule (railway safety) .

Part of a series on Politics Outline Index Category Primary topics Outline of political science Index of politics articles Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Collective leadership Confessional system Democracy Dictatorship Directorial Federacy Feudalism Hybrid regime Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science ( political scientists ) International relations ( theory ) Comparative politics Election science Political analysis Political theory Policy studies Political psychology Political sociology Public administration Bureaucracy ( street-level ) Technocracy Adhocracy Service ( Public / Civil ) Policy Public policy ( doctrine ) Domestic policy Foreign policy Civil society Public interest Government branches Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Polity / State / Country Biology and political orientation Critique of political economy Political censorship Political organisations Theories of political behavior Subseries Electoral systems Elections voting Unitarism Federalism Government ( forms / Governance ) Ideology Culture Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e A supermajority is a requirement for a proposal to gain a specified level of support which is greater than the threshold of one-half used for a simple majority , sometimes expressed as a "50%+1 vote." Supermajority rules in a democracy can help to prevent a majority from eroding fundamental rights of a minority, but can also hamper efforts to respond to problems and encourage corrupt compromises at times when action is taken. Changes to constitutions , especially those with entrenched clauses , commonly require supermajority support in a legislature . In consensus democracy the supermajority rule is applied in most cases.

History [ edit ] The first known use of a supermajority rule was in juries during the 100s BC in ancient Rome .

[ 1 ] In some [ which?

] cases, two thirds of jurors had to confirm they were ready to take a decision before the matter went to a simple majority vote.

Pope Alexander III introduced the use of supermajority rule for papal elections at the Third Lateran Council in 1179.

[ 2 ] In the Democratic Party of the United States, a rule requiring the determination of a presidential nominee by the votes of two-thirds of delegates to the Democratic National Convention was adopted at the party's first presidential nominating convention in 1832 .

[ 3 ] The two-thirds rule gave southern Democrats a de facto veto over any presidential nominee after the Civil War, which lasted until the rule was abolished in 1936 .

[ 4 ] In the Federalist Papers , Alexander Hamilton and James Madison were critical of supermajority requirements. In Federalist 22, Hamilton wrote that while preventing harmful legislation from being passed, such requirements also prevented beneficial legislation from being passed, and "its real operation is to embarrass the administration, to destroy the energy of government, and to substitute the pleasure, caprice or artifices of an insignificant, turbulent or corrupt junto, to the regular deliberations and decisions of a respectable majority." Hamilton also wrote that such a requirement would encourage "contemptible compromises of the public good".

[ 5 ] In Federalist 58, Madison wrote that supermajority requirements might help impede the passage of "hasty and partial measures", but "[i]n all cases where justice or the general good might require new laws to be passed, or active measures to be pursued, the fundamental principle of free government would be reversed. It would be no longer the majority that would rule; the power would be transferred to the minority." Madison also wrote that such requirements would encourage secession .

[ 6 ] Common thresholds of supermajority [ edit ] Look up supermajority or qualified majority in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

A majority vote , or more than half the votes cast, is a common voting basis . Instead of the basis of a majority, a supermajority can be specified using any fraction or percentage which is greater than one-half .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Common supermajorities include three-fifths (60%), two-thirds (66.666...%), and three-quarters (75%). In most cases, if the supermajority fraction or percentage of votes yields a non- whole number , it is rounded to the next higher whole number.

Two-thirds [ edit ] A two-thirds vote, when unqualified, means two-thirds or more of the votes cast.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] This voting basis is equivalent to the number of votes in favor being at least twice the number of votes against.

[ 12 ] Abstentions and absences may be excluded when calculating a two-thirds vote.

[ 10 ] The two-thirds requirement can be qualified to include the entire membership of a body instead of only those present and voting, but such a requirement must be explicitly stated (such as "two-thirds of those members duly elected and sworn").

[ 9 ] In this case, abstentions and absences count as votes against the proposal. Alternatively, the voting requirement could be specified as "two-thirds of those present", which has the effect of counting abstentions but not absences as votes against the proposal.

[ 13 ] For example, if there are 100 eligible voters, 67 votes are required for a supermajority (two-thirds of 100, rounded up). However, if two voters abstain or are absent, the total decreases to 98, and the required votes for a supermajority drops to 66 (two-thirds of 98, rounded up).

[ 14 ] In Italy, between 1948 and 1993, the Senate was divided into a number of single-seat constituencies, where, to get elected in a FPTP vote, a two-thirds majority of votes was required. Usually, it was attainable only for the South Tyrolean People's Party senators representing the German-speaking minority of South Tyrol , thus most other Senators were still elected proportionally in regional constituencies, after being grouped in party lists.

[ 15 ] Two-thirds is the most common supermajority requirement in the US Constitution, as set out in: Article I with regard to veto overrides; Article II with regard to treaty ratification and to presidential conviction and removal after an impeachment; and Article V with regard to the proposal of constitutional amendments either by Congress or via petitions by the states.

Three-fifths, or 60 percent [ edit ] Another type of supermajority is three-fifths (60 percent). This requirement could also be qualified to include the entire membership or to include those present.

In 2006, the Constitution of Florida was amended to require a 60% majority to pass new constitutional amendments by popular vote.

[ 16 ] In Poland , the Sejm ( lower house of the bicameral parliament of Poland ) requires a three-fifths majority of MPs to overturn a veto from the President of Poland .

[ 17 ] 55% [ edit ] For the Montenegrin independence referendum held in 2006 the European Union envoy Miroslav Lajčák proposed independence if a 55% supermajority of votes are cast in favor with a minimum turnout of 50%. Such procedure, ultimately accepted by the government of Montenegro , was somewhat criticized as overriding the traditional practice of requiring a two-thirds supermajority, as practiced in all former Yugoslav countries before (including the previous referendum in Montenegro ).

[ citation needed ] The requirement for 50% turnout has also been criticized for causing no-show paradoxes .

In 2016, the Constitution of Colorado was amended to require a 55% majority to pass new constitutional amendments by popular vote. It had previously been a simple majority.

[ 18 ] Use in parliamentary procedure [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Parliamentary procedure requires that any action that may alter the rights of a minority have a supermajority requirement.

Robert's Rules of Order states: [ 10 ] As a compromise between the rights of the individual and the rights of the assembly, the principle has been established that a two-thirds vote is required to adopt any motion that: (a) suspends or modifies a rule of order previously adopted; (b) prevents the introduction of a question for consideration; (c) closes, limits, or extends the limits of debate; (d) closes nominations or the polls, or otherwise limits the freedom of nominating or voting; or (e) takes away membership.

Use in governments around the world [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] To pass an amendment to the Australian Constitution , a referendum is required and must achieve a " double majority ": a majority of those voting nationwide, as well as separate majorities in a majority of states (i.e., 4 out of 6 states).

[ 19 ] Furthermore, in circumstances where a specific state is affected by a referendum, a majority of voters in that state must also agree to the change [ 20 ] —referred to as a "triple majority".

[ citation needed ] Bangladesh [ edit ] Article 142 of the Constitution of Bangladesh stipulates a bill in the Jatiya Sangsad must expressly state in its short title its purpose is to amend a provision of the constitution. Constitutional amendments require a two-thirds majority in the unicameral Jatiya Sangsad to become effective.

Canada [ edit ] In Canada, most constitutional amendments can be passed only if identical resolutions are adopted by the House of Commons, the Senate, and two-thirds or more of the provincial legislative assemblies representing at least 50 percent of the national population.

Denmark [ edit ] Article 20 of the Constitution of Denmark states that if the government or parliament wants to cede parts of national sovereignty to an international body such as the European Union or the United Nations , it has to get a five-sixths majority in the Folketing (150 out of 179 seats).

[ 21 ] If there is only a simple majority, a referendum must be held on the subject.

[ 21 ] European Union [ edit ] Council [ edit ] Main article: Voting in the Council of the European Union The Council of the European Union uses 'Qualified majority voting' for the majority of issues brought before the institution. However, for matters of extreme importance for individual member states, unanimous voting is implemented.

[ 22 ] An example of this is Article 7 of the Treaty on European Union , whereby a member state can have its rights suspended with the unanimous approval of all other member states.

After the accession of Croatia, on 1 July 2013, at least 260 votes out of a total of 352 by at least 15 member states were required for legislation to be adopted by qualified majority. From 1 July 2013, the pass condition translated into: At least 15 (or 18, if proposal was not made by the commission) countries, At least 260 of the total 352 voting weights, At least 313.6 million people represented by the states that vote in favour.

Parliament [ edit ] Requirements to reach an absolute majority is a common feature of voting in the European Parliament (EP) where under the ordinary legislative procedure the EP is required to act by an absolute majority if it is to either amend or reject proposed legislation.

[ 23 ] Finland [ edit ] According to Finnish Law , when a new legislative proposal would in some way add, alter or remove a part of the Finnish constitution, a bill requires a 2/3 majority in the Parliament of Finland . In other words, a legislative proposal that would modify, add or remove a part of the Finnish Constitution requires at least the approval of 134 out of 200 representatives in the Parliament of Finland .

India [ edit ] Article 368 of the Indian Constitution requires a supermajority of two-thirds of members present and voting in each house of the Indian Parliament , subject to at least by a majority of the total membership of each House of Parliament, to amend the constitution. In addition, in matters affecting the states and judiciary, at least above half of all the states need to ratify the amendment.

Italy [ edit ] Main article: President of Italy § Election The President of Italy is elected by an electoral college consisting of both chambers of Parliament sitting in joint session with 58 electors from the country's 20 regions . In the first three rounds of voting, a candidate must get two-thirds of the votes to win, but from the fourth round onwards only an absolute majority is needed. Reforms to the Constitution need to achieve a supermajority of two-thirds of the votes both in the Chamber and in the Senate to avoid the possibility of being sent to popular vote in order to be confirmed through a referendum.

Japan [ edit ] Amendments to the constitution require a two-thirds majority in both houses of the National Diet and a simple majority in a referendum.

[ 24 ] New Zealand [ edit ] Section 268 of the Electoral Act sets out a number of 'reserved provisions'. These provisions include section 17(1) of the Constitution Act 1986 (regarding Parliament 's term length), section 35 of the Electoral Act (regarding the drawing of electoral boundaries), and section 74 of the Electoral Act (designating 18 as the minimum voting age). For a 'reserved provision' to be amended or repealed, a three-quarters majority is required in the House of Representatives or a majority is needed in a national referendum .

[ 25 ] Nigeria [ edit ] Under the Constitution of Nigeria a two-thirds majority is required in the National Assembly to alter the Constitution, enact legislation in a few areas, or remove office holders from some positions, such as Speaker. Legislative override or impeachment of the executive at either the state or federal government level also requires a two-thirds majority of the corresponding legislative assembly.

[ 26 ] Philippines [ edit ] Under the 1987 Constitution of the Philippines , a two-thirds majority of both chambers of the Congress of the Philippines (the House of Representatives and the Senate ) meeting in joint session is required to declare war .

[ 27 ] A two-thirds majority of both chambers is required to override a presidential veto .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] A two-thirds vote of both chambers of Congress voting separately is required to designate the vice president as acting president in the event that a majority of the Cabinet certifies that the president is "unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office" but the president declares that no such inability exists.

[ 27 ] A two-thirds vote of either chamber is required to suspend or expel a member from that chamber.

[ 27 ] Under the 1987 Constitution, "The Congress may, by a vote of two-thirds of all its Members, call a constitutional convention , or by a majority vote of all its Members, submit to the electorate the question of calling such a convention." [ 27 ] A three-quarters vote of all the members of the Congress is required to propose an amendment to the Constitution; the proposed amendment is submitted to the people for ratification (by a majority of the votes cast) in a plebiscite .

[ 27 ] A two-thirds majority of the Senate is required to ratify treaties, and to remove an impeached official from office.

[ 27 ] Impeachment by the House, which is the required first step in the removal process, only requires one-third of Representatives to sign a petition (specifically a verified complaint or resolution of impeachment).

[ 27 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Singapore [ edit ] Different amendment procedures apply to different parts of the Constitution. Most of the Articles of the Constitution may be amended by a bill enacted by Parliament if there is at least a supermajority of two-thirds of all elected MPs voting in favour of the bill during its Second and Third Readings in Parliament.

[ 31 ] This is in contrast to ordinary bills, which only need to be approved by at least a simple majority of all the MPs present and voting.

[ 32 ] However, the ruling People's Action Party (PAP) has commanded a majority of more than two-thirds of the seats in Parliament since 1968. Thus, the more stringent amendment requirement has not imposed any major limitation on Parliament's ability to amend the Constitution.

[ 33 ] [ failed verification ] South Korea [ edit ] Legislation [ edit ] A three-fifths majority of legislators is required for a bill to be put to a vote in the National Assembly in order to prevent the ruling party from passing laws without the support of opposition parties.

[ 34 ] However, if a bill does not achieve the required three-fifths majority at one session without also being rejected, it must then be voted on at the next session even if less than three-fifths of legislators agree to do so.

[ 35 ] Additionally, if the President vetoes a bill, the veto can be overridden by a two-thirds majority of legislators.

[ 36 ] Impeachment [ edit ] According to Article 65 of the Constitution of South Korea , impeachment of the President requires a two-third majority of legislators to be effective.

[ 36 ] Judicial review [ edit ] According to Article 113 of the Constitution of South Korea, the Constitutional Court requires a two-thirds majority of its judges to issue rulings nullifying laws, removing impeached officials or dissolving a political party.

[ 36 ] Constitutional amendments [ edit ] According to Article 130 of the Constitution of South Korea, amendments to the constitution must be passed by a two-thirds majority of legislators and then approved by voters at a referendum in order to become effective.

[ 36 ] Spain [ edit ] Constitutional reform [ edit ] The 1978 Constitution states that a three-fifths majority in both Congress of Deputies and Senate of Spain is needed to pass a constitutional reform, but if a two-thirds majority is reached in the Congress of Deputies, an absolute majority of senators is enough to pass the proposal.

[ 37 ] Nevertheless, when a new Constitution is proposed or the proposal's goal is to reform the Preliminary Title, the Chapter on Fundamental Rights and Freedoms or the Title on the Crown, the supermajority becomes significantly harder: A supermajority of two-thirds must be reached in both Congress of Deputies and Senate.

Both chambers must be dissolved.

The new elected chambers must approve the proposal by a new two-thirds supermajority.

Finally, the proposal is passed by majority in referendum .

The first way has been used twice (1992 and 2011), but the second has never been used.

Other legal procedures [ edit ] The Spanish Constitution states other supermajorities: Members of the General Council of the Judiciary are appointed by the Congress of Deputies and Senate of Spain, and each appointment needs a three-fifths majority.

[ 38 ] Members of the Constitutional Court are also appointed by both Congress of Deputies and Senate of Spain, and each appointment needs a three-fifths majority.

[ 38 ] The president of the RTVE , the public radio and television broadcaster, must be elected by two-thirds majority of the Congress of Deputies.

[ 39 ] Autonomous communities [ edit ] Each Spanish autonomous community has its own Statute of Autonomy , working like a local constitution that is subject to the 1978 Constitution and national powers.

The Statute of Autonomy of the Canary Islands states that its economic and fiscal regime and electoral law need a two-thirds majority of the Parliament to be modified.

[ 40 ] On its behalf, the Ombudsman needs a three-fifths majority to be appointed. Also, if a two-thirds majority votes against a law project, it must be proposed to the following session.

Taiwan [ edit ] Before the Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China in 2005, constitutional amendments needed to be passed by the National Assembly . Since the Additional Articles were ratified on June 7, 2005, the National Assembly was abolished. Amendments of the constitution need to be proposed by more than one-quarter of members of the Legislative Yuan, passed by three-quarters of those present in the meeting, the presence of which must surpass three-quarters of all members of the Legislative Yuan, followed by the approval of more than half (50%) of all eligible voters in a referendum .

Turkey [ edit ] In Turkey, constitutional amendments need a three fifths majority (360 votes) to be put forward to a referendum and a two-thirds majority (400 votes) to be ratified directly.

Ukraine [ edit ] Constitutional amendments [ edit ] According to Article 155 of the Constitution of Ukraine , amendments to the constitution, except for Chapter I — "General Principles," Chapter III — "Elections. Referendum", and Chapter XIII — "Introducing Amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine", must be previously approved by a simple majority of the constitutional composition of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine and then passed by a two-thirds majority of the constitutional composition of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine at the succeeding regular session of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.

According to Article 156 of the Constitution of Ukraine, amendments to Chapter I — "General Principles," Chapter III — "Elections. Referendum", and Chapter XIII — "Introducing Amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine" must be passed by a two-thirds majority of the constitutional composition of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine and then approved by voters at a referendum in order to become effective.

United Kingdom [ edit ] UK Parliament [ edit ] A rare example of a supermajority requirement affecting the Parliament of the United Kingdom is the need for a two-thirds supermajority vote in both the House of Commons and the House of Lords to amend or dissolve the Royal Charter on self-regulation of the press , insofar as it applies in England and Wales .

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Before its repeal, the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011 provided that the United Kingdom House of Commons could be dissolved and an election held before the expiry of its 5-year term by a vote of two-thirds of the membership of the House of Commons. The Act also provided that Parliament could alternatively be dissolved if the House of Commons passed a motion of no-confidence in the government and no new government were to win a motion of confidence within two weeks of the original vote of no-confidence.

The two-thirds supermajority provision for an early dissolution and election was triggered only once, resulting in the 2017 United Kingdom General Election . The previous election in 2015 had occurred due to the natural expiry of the 5-year term of the House of Commons.

Parliamentary supremacy meant that theoretically the Act could be circumvented by a government with a majority that wanted to bypass the requirement for a two-thirds vote by passing an act that stated, "Notwithstanding the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011, a general election will be called on DATE". This was precisely what was done to initiate the election in 2019 , the final election held whilst the Fixed-term Parliaments Act was in effect.

During the 2019 election, both the governing Conservative Party and the opposition Labour Party expressed a desire to repeal the Fixed-term Parliaments Act and restore the traditional, centuries-old system under which elections could be held at any time, subject to the 5-year maximum term limit established by the Parliament Act 1911 . Such a repeal would only require a simple majority.

Ultimately, the Fixed-term Parliaments Act was repealed by the Dissolution and Calling of Parliament Act 2022 , thereby removing any supermajority requirement and restoring the previous royal prerogative power to dissolve the House of Commons at any time during its 5-year term.

Devolved parliaments [ edit ] The devolved legislatures in Northern Ireland , Scotland and Wales all usually operate with fixed intervals between ordinary elections. However, the acts governing the operation of those legislatures all allow for an early election to take place if a motion to that effect is approved by two-thirds of the total number of members of the legislature in question.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] Section 31A of the Scotland Act 1998 [ 46 ] and Section 111A of the Government of Wales Act 2006 [ 47 ] provide that certain provisions of those Acts relating to the functions of and elections to the respective Scottish and Welsh devolved legislatures are protected from amendment by those legislatures, unless a two-thirds supermajority of the total number of members votes in favour.

Regarding Scotland, the protected provisions are: [ 48 ] Who may vote at Scottish Parliament elections The system of election for members of the Scottish Parliament The number of Scottish Parliament constituencies The number of members returned by each constituency The protected provisions regarding Wales are the same as those in Scotland; in addition, there are two Wales-specific provisions: [ 47 ] The name of the legislature The number of individuals permitted to be appointed Welsh Minister or Deputy Welsh Minister A two-thirds supermajority vote is required in the Scottish Parliament in order to amend or dissolve the Royal Charter on self-regulation of the press, insofar as it applies in Scotland.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Local authorities [ edit ] Principal councils in Wales are required to pass a resolution with a two-thirds supermajority vote in order to change the system by which they are elected, with the permitted choices being first-past-the-post and single transferable vote .

[ 49 ] District councils in England are required to pass a resolution with a two-thirds supermajority vote in order to change their 'electoral scheme,' i.e. what proportion of councillors is elected at each ordinary election, with permitted proportions being one-third, one-half or all councillors.

[ 50 ] The London Assembly may, by a two-thirds supermajority vote, veto the mayor's draft strategies.

[ 51 ] United Nations [ edit ] The United Nations Security Council requires a supermajority of the fixed membership on substantive matters (procedural matters require a simple majority of those present and voting). According to Article 27 of the United Nations Charter , at least nine of the Security Council's 15 members (i.e., a three-fifths supermajority) must vote in favor of a draft resolution in order to achieve passage. Specifying the fixed membership has the effect of making abstentions count as votes against—absences are not normal but would be treated the same way.

This is useful for the five permanent members of the council ( China , France , the Russian Federation , the United Kingdom , and the United States ) because a vote against from any one of them constitutes a veto , which cannot be overridden. Permanent members who do not support a measure but are unwilling to be seen to block it against the wishes of the majority of the council, tend to abstain; abstentions by veto powers are generally seen by close observers of the UN [ according to whom?

] as the equivalent of not vetoing votes against and have the same impact on the decision of the Security Council.

United States [ edit ] Federal government [ edit ] The Constitution of the United States requires supermajorities for certain significant actions to occur.

[ 52 ] Amendments to the Constitution may be proposed in one of two ways: a two-thirds supermajority votes of each body of United States Congress or a convention called by Congress on application of two-thirds (currently 34) of the states. Once proposed, the amendment must be ratified by three-quarters (currently 38) of the states (either through the state legislatures, or ratification conventions, whichever "mode of ratification" Congress selects).

Congress may pass bills by simple majority votes. If the president vetoes a bill, Congress may override the veto by a two-thirds supermajority of both houses.

A treaty must be ratified by a two-thirds supermajority of the Senate to enter into force and effect .

Section 4 of the Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution gives Congress a role to play in the event of a presidential disability. If the vice president and a majority of the president's cabinet declare that the president is unable to serve in that role, the vice president becomes acting president. Within 21 days of such a declaration (or, if Congress is in recess when a president is disabled, 21 days after Congress reconvenes), Congress must vote by two-thirds supermajorities to continue the disability declaration; otherwise, such declaration expires after the 21 days and the president would at that time "resume" discharging all the powers and duties of the office. As of January 2025 [update] , Section 4 has never been invoked.

The House may, by a simple majority vote, impeach a federal official (such as, but not limited to, the president, vice president, or a federal judge). Removal from office requires a two-thirds supermajority of the Senate. In 1842, the House failed to impeach president John Tyler . In 1868, the Senate fell one vote short of removing president Andrew Johnson following his impeachment . In 1999, efforts to remove Bill Clinton following his impeachment in 1998 fell just short of a simple majority, and 17 votes short of the two-thirds supermajority. The impeachment procedure was last used in 2021, when president Donald Trump was impeached for a second time during his first term and subsequently acquitted. Each chamber may expel one of its own members by a two-thirds supermajority vote; this last happened when the House expelled George Santos in 2023.

The 14th Amendment (section 3) bars a person from federal or state office if, after having previously taken an oath to support the Constitution as a federal or state officer, " shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof ". However, both the House and Senate may jointly override this restriction with a two-thirds supermajority vote each.

A two-thirds supermajority in the Senate is 67 out of 100 senators, while a two-thirds supermajority in the House is 290 out of 435 representatives. However, since many votes take place without every seat in the House filled and representatives participating, it does not often require 67 senators or 290 representatives to achieve this supermajority.

Apart from these constitutional requirements, a Senate rule (except in cases covered by the nuclear option , or of a rule change) requires an absolute supermajority of three-fifths to move to a vote through a cloture motion, which closes debate on a bill or nomination, thus ending a filibuster by a minority of members. In current practice, the mere threat of a filibuster prevents passing almost any measure that has less than three-fifths agreement in the Senate, 60 of the 100 senators if every seat is filled.

State government [ edit ] For state legislatures in the United States , Mason's Manual says, "A deliberative body cannot by its own act or rule require a two-thirds vote to take any action where the constitution or controlling authority requires only a majority vote. To require a two-thirds vote, for example, to take any action would be to give to any number more than one-third of the members the power to defeat the action and amount to a delegation of the powers of the body to a minority." [ 53 ] Some states require a supermajority for passage of a constitutional amendment or statutory initiative.

[ 54 ] Many state constitutions allow or require amendments to their own constitutions to be proposed by supermajorities of the state legislature; these amendments must usually be approved by the voters at one or more subsequent elections. Michigan, for instance, allows the Legislature to propose an amendment to the Michigan Constitution; it must then be ratified by the voters at the next general election (unless a special election is called).

[ 55 ] In most states, the state legislature may override a governor 's veto of legislation. In most states, a two-thirds supermajority of both chambers is required.

[ 56 ] However, in some states (e.g., Illinois , Maryland and North Carolina ), only a three-fifths supermajority is required, [ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] while in Kentucky and West Virginia only a normal majority is needed.

One common provision of so-called " taxpayer bill of rights " laws (either in state statutes or state constitutions ) is requirement of a supermajority vote in the state legislature to increase taxes. The National Conference of State Legislatures reported in 2010 that fifteen states required a supermajority vote (either a three-fifths, two-thirds or three-quarters majority vote in both chambers) to pass some or all tax increases.

[ 60 ] Supermajority requirements for tax increases have been criticized as "deeply flawed" by a report by the progressive Center on Budget and Policy Priorities because such requirements empower a minority of legislators, making it difficult to close tax loopholes or fund transportation infrastructure , and also may encourage pork-barrel spending as a trade-off to ensure passage of a tax increase (see logrolling ).

[ 61 ] International agreements [ edit ] The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court requires a seven-eighths majority of participating states to be amended.

See also [ edit ] Consensus decision-making Double majority Group decision-making Minoritarianism Unanimity Voting in the Council of the European Union —described the "qualified majority voting" requirement in that body References [ edit ] ^ Schwartzberg, Melissa (2013).

"Prelude: Acclamation and Aggregation in the Ancient World - The Origin of Supermajority Rules" .

Counting the Many: The Origins and Limits of Supermajority Rule . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

44– 46.

ISBN 978-0-521-19823-3 . Retrieved December 5, 2016 .

Although a supermajority was necessary to demonstrate the sufficiency of the case – the presence of adequate information to form a judgment – a majority sufficed to convict. (p. 46) ^ Schwartzberg (2013) , pp. 51, 58–59 ^ Bensel, Richard Franklin (2008).

Passion and Preferences: William Jennings Bryan and the 1896 Democratic Convention . Cambridge University Press. p.

131 .

^ Schulman, Bruce J. (1994).

From Cotton Belt to Sunbelt: Federal Policy, Economic Development, and the Transformation of the South, 1938–1980 . Duke University Press. p. 45.

^ "Founders Online: The Federalist No. 22, [14 December 1787]" .

^ "Founders Online: The Federalist No. 58, [20 February 1788]" .

^ See dictionary definition of "supermajority" at thefreedictionary.com . " Qualified majority " redirects to this definition.

^ Schermers, Henry G.; Blokker, Niels M. (2011).

International Institutional Law: Unity Within Diversity (Fifth Revised ed.). Leiden, The Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. pp.

561– 563.

ISBN 978-90-04-18798-6 .

^ a b Robert (2011) , p. 402.p ^ a b c Robert, Henry M.; et al. (2011).

Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised (in Zenaga) (11th ed.). Philadelphia: Da Capo Press . p. 401.

ISBN 978-0-306-82020-5 .

^ "Frequently Asked Questions about RONR (Question 5)" .

The Official Robert's Rules of Order Web Site . The Robert's Rules Association. Archived from the original on December 24, 2018 . Retrieved December 30, 2015 .

^ Robert (2011) , p. 406 ^ "Frequently Asked Questions about RONR (Question 6)" .

The Official Robert's Rules of Order Web Site . The Robert's Rules Association. Archived from the original on December 24, 2018 . Retrieved December 30, 2015 .

^ Robert (2011) , p. 403 ^ "Il sistema elettorale per il Senato" .

web2003.senato.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on June 18, 2009 . Retrieved June 5, 2025 .

^ "Florida Amendment 3, 60% Majority Requirement for Constitutional Amendments Amendment (2006)" .

Ballotpedia .

^ "Konwencja PO. Budka proponuje Koalicję 276. "Tyle głosów potrzebnych do przejęcia władzy" " .

gazetapl (in Polish). February 6, 2021 . Retrieved July 6, 2021 .

^ "Colorado Imposition of Distribution and Supermajority Requirements for Citizen-Initiated Constitutional Amendments, Amendment 71 (2016)" .

Ballotpedia . Retrieved January 15, 2017 .

^ "Referendums and plebiscites" .

Parliamentary Education Office . June 16, 2023.

Archived from the original on August 8, 2023 . Retrieved August 25, 2023 .

Section 128 of the Constitution says a referendum is passed if it is approved by a majority of voters across the nation and a majority of voters in a majority of states — a double majority.

^ "COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA CONSTITUTION ACT - SECT 128. Mode of altering the Constitution" .

Australasian Legal Information Institute .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2023 . Retrieved August 25, 2023 .

No alteration diminishing the proportionate representation of any State in either House of the Parliament, or the minimum number of representatives of a State in the House of Representatives, or increasing, diminishing, or otherwise altering the limits of the State, or in any manner affecting the provisions of the Constitution in relation thereto, shall become law unless the majority of the electors voting in that State approve the proposed law.

^ a b Pedersen, Susannah; Christensen, Jens Peter (November 2015). "03 - Regeringen".

Min grundlov - Grundloven med forklaringer (PDF) (13 ed.). Folketingets Kommunikationsenhed. pp.

27– 28.

ISBN 978-87-7982-172-9 .

Til vedtagelse af lovforslag herom kræves et flertal på fem sjettedele af Folketingets medlemmer. Opnås et sådant flertal ikke, men dog det til vedtagelse af almindelige lovforslag nødvendige flertal, og opretholder regeringen forslaget, forelægges det folketingsvælgerne til godkendelse eller forkastelse efter de for folkeafstemninger i §42 fastsatte regler.

^ "Intergovernmental decision-making procedures - EU fact sheets - European Parliament" .

www.europarl.europa.eu . Archived from the original on December 1, 2017 . Retrieved May 9, 2017 .

^ See Article 294(7) of the Treaty on the functioning of the European Union .

^ "The Constitution of Japan" .

japan.kantei.go.jp . Retrieved December 30, 2015 .

^ "Electoral Act 1993" .

New Zealand Legislation . Retrieved September 10, 2021 .

^ "Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria" .

Nigeria law . Retrieved November 12, 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g h 1987 Constitution of the Philippines , Official Gazette .

^ Elliot Bulmer, International IDEA Constitution-Building Primer 14: Presidential Veto Powers Primer , International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance , 2d ed. 2017, p. 14.

^ Impeachment in the Philippines: Joseph Estrada faces a tough fight to hold on to his presidency , The Economist (November 9, 2000).

^ Seth Mydans, Philippine Congress Impeaches President on Graft Charges , New York Times (November 14, 2000).

^ Constitution, Art. 5(2).

^ Constitution, Art. 57(1).

^ Neo & Lee, p. 165.

^ "The Tyranny of the Minority in South Korea" .

The Diplomat . Retrieved December 30, 2015 .

^ "Controversial South Korean 'anti-leaflet' bill delayed after filibuster attempt" .

NK News . December 9, 2020.

^ a b c d "Constitution of the Republic of Korea" .

Refworld .

^ "Title X of the Constitution: Constitutional Reform (in Spanish)" .

Constitución.es . Retrieved June 9, 2018 .

^ a b "The Constitution (in Spanish)" .

Constitución.es . Retrieved June 9, 2018 .

^ "The Congress passes that the president RTVE will be appointed by consensus again (in Spanish)" .

eldiario.es . June 22, 2017 . Retrieved June 9, 2018 .

^ "Statute of Autonomy of the Canary Islands (in Spanish)" (PDF) . Retrieved June 9, 2018 .

^ a b "Press regulation: What you need to know" .

BBC News . April 13, 2016 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

While an act of parliament can be amended with a simple majority, it was possible to insert a clause in the Royal Charter requiring any changes to be approved by a two-thirds majority.

^ a b Burrell, Ian (October 29, 2013).

"Press regulation: Judge for yourself - the Royal Charter in full" .

The Independent . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ "Northern Ireland Act 1998: Section 32" , legislation.gov.uk , The National Archives , November 19, 1998, 1998 c. 47  (s. 32) , retrieved July 7, 2024 ^ "Scotland Act 1998: Section 3" , legislation.gov.uk , The National Archives , November 19, 1998, 1998 c. 46  (s. 3) , retrieved July 7, 2024 ^ "Government of Wales Act 2006: Section 5" , legislation.gov.uk , The National Archives , July 25, 2006, 2006 c. 32  (s. 5) , retrieved July 7, 2024 ^ "Scotland Act 1998: Section 31A" , legislation.gov.uk , The National Archives , November 19, 1998, 1998 c. 46  (s. 31A) , retrieved July 29, 2023 ^ a b "Government of Wales Act 2006: Section 111A" , legislation.gov.uk , The National Archives , July 25, 2006, 2006 c. 32  (s. 111A) , retrieved July 29, 2023 ^ "Scotland Act 1998: Section 31" , legislation.gov.uk , The National Archives , November 19, 1998, 1998 c. 46  (s. 31) , retrieved July 29, 2023 ^ "Local Government and Elections (Wales) Act 2021 (2021 asc. 1): Voting systems for elections to principal councils" .

legislation.gov.uk .

The National Archives . January 20, 2021 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ "Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007 (2007 c. 28), part 2 chapter 1: Power of district councils in England to change electoral scheme" .

legislation.gov.uk .

The National Archives . October 30, 2007 . Retrieved July 7, 2024 .

^ "Greater London Authority Act 1999: Section 42B" , legislation.gov.uk , The National Archives , November 11, 1999, 1999 c. 29  (s. 42B) , retrieved July 7, 2024 ^ Hudiburg, Jane A. (July 24, 2018).

Supermajority Votes in the House (PDF) . Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service . Retrieved September 8, 2018 .

^ National Conference of State Legislatures
    (2000).

Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure , 2000 ed., p. 353 ^ "Supermajority Vote Requirements" .

www.ncsl.org . National Conference of State Legislatures . Retrieved December 31, 2015 .

^ "Article XII § 1" .

Constitution of Michigan of 1963 . Michigan Legislature . Retrieved December 30, 2015 .

^ Shanton, Karen (October 28, 2013).

"Wrapup of Veto Overrides in States with Veto-Proof Legislatures and Divided Government" .

NCSL Blog . National Conference of State Legislatures.

^ Friedman, Dan (2006).

The Maryland State Constitution: A Reference Guide . Reference Guides to the State Constitutions of the United States, No. 41. Praeger. p. 75.

^ Lousin, Ann M. (2011).

The Illinois State Constitution . Oxford Commentaries on the State Constitutions of the United States. Oxford University Press. pp.

119– 21.

^ "North Carolina State Constitution" . Retrieved May 3, 2016 .

^ Waisanen, Bert (2010).

"State Tax and Expenditure Limits—2010" .

National Conference of State Legislatures .

^ Johnson, Nicholas (April 25, 2006).

"A Super Bad Idea: Requiring a Two-thirds Legislative Supermajority to Raise Taxes Protects Special Interest Tax Breaks and Gives Budget Veto Power to a Small Minority of Legislators" .

Center on Budget and Policy Priorities .

v t e Types of majority Single member Plurality (relative majority) Majority (absolute majority) Supermajority Double majority v t e Parliamentary procedure Major concepts History of parliamentary procedure Principles of parliamentary procedure Deliberative assembly Committee Chair Gridlock Filibuster Floor Recognition Motion Second Debate Majority Main motion Minutes Obstructionism Order of business Quorum Session Unanimous consent Voting methods in deliberative assemblies Subsidiary motions Postpone indefinitely Amend Commit Postpone to a certain time Limit or extend limits of debate Previous question Cloture Lay on the table Privileged motions Call for the orders of the day Raise a question of privilege Recess Adjourn Fix the time to which to adjourn Incidental motions Point of order Appeal Suspend the rules Objection to the consideration of a question Division of a question Consideration by paragraph or seriatim Division of the assembly Motions relating to methods of voting and the polls Motions relating to nominations Prayer motion Request to be excused from a duty Requests and inquiries ( Parliamentary inquiry , Request for information , Request for permission to withdraw or modify a motion , Request to read papers , Request for any other privilege ) Motions that bring a question again before the assembly Take from the table Rescind, repeal, annul or amend something previously adopted Discharge a committee Reconsider Legislative procedures Call of the house Hoist Motion to pass on Recall of Parliament Disciplinary procedures Censure Declare the chair vacant Impeach Naming Parliamentary authorities Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised (RONR) The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure (TSC or Sturgis) Demeter's Manual of Parliamentary Law and Procedure Riddick's Rules of Procedure Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure Erskine May: Parliamentary Practice Jefferson's Manual Lex Parliamentaria Odgers' Australian Senate Practice House of Representatives Practice Bourinot's Rules of Order Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms Morin code ABC of Chairmanship Politics portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐br9vb
Cached time: 20250816114745
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.728 seconds
Real time usage: 0.856 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5761/1000000
Revision size: 52194/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 164451/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10022/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 207081/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.421/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9275394/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  723.650      1 -total
 48.32%  349.672      1 Template:Reflist
 15.74%  113.895     29 Template:Cite_web
 14.82%  107.245      9 Template:Cite_book
 13.30%   96.256      1 Template:Politics
 13.00%   94.069      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
 12.80%   92.638      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.54%   61.831      1 Template:Short_description
  6.03%   43.649      7 Template:Cite_legislation_UK
  5.65%   40.859      7 Template:Citation Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:638313:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816114745 and revision id 1303305157. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Supermajority&oldid=1303305157 " Categories : Elections Voting theory Majority Power sharing Hidden categories: CS1 foreign language sources (ISO 639-2) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles that cite the 2000 edition of Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2016 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Articles with limited geographic scope from January 2021 United States-centric Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from June 2022 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2016 Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2025 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 05:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Supermajority 29 languages Add topic

