Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Lead ores 2 Secondary lead processing 3 Lead exposure 4 History Toggle History subsection 4.1 Historic mining and smelting sites 4.1.1 Asia 4.1.2 Australia 4.1.3 Europe 4.1.4 North America 4.1.5 South America 5 Active lead mines and smelters Toggle Active lead mines and smelters subsection 5.1 Africa 5.2 Australia 5.3 Asia 5.4 Europe 5.5 North America 5.6 South America 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Lead smelting 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of refining lead metal The now closed Doe Run primary lead smelting facility in Herculaneum, Missouri Plants for the production of lead are generally referred to as lead smelters .

Primary lead production [ clarification needed ] begins with sintering . Concentrated lead ore is fed into a sintering machine with iron, silica, limestone fluxes , coke , soda ash , pyrite , zinc , caustics or pollution control particulates.

Smelting uses suitable reducing substances that will combine with those oxidizing elements to free the metal. Reduction is the final, high-temperature step in smelting. It is here that the oxide becomes the elemental metal. A reducing environment (often provided by carbon monoxide in an air-starved furnace) pulls the final oxygen atoms from the raw metal.

Lead is usually smelted in a blast furnace , using the lead sinter produced in the sintering process and coke to provide the heat source. As melting occurs, several layers form in the furnace. A combination of molten lead and slag sinks to the bottom of the furnace, with a layer of the lightest elements referred to as speiss , including arsenic and antimony floating to the top of the molten material. The crude bullion and lead slag layers flow out of the 'furnace front' and into the 'forehearth', where the two streams are separated. The lead slag stream, containing most of the 'fluxing' elements added to the sintering machine (predominantly silica, limestone, iron and zinc) can either be discarded or further processed to recover the contained zinc.

The crude lead bullion, containing significant quantities of copper will then undergo 'copper drossing'. In this step elemental sulphur, usually in solid form is added to the molten crude lead bullion to react with the contained copper. A " matte " layer forms in this step, containing most of the copper originating from the crude lead bullion and some other impurities as metal sulfides. The speiss and the matte are usually sold to copper smelters where they are refined for copper processing.

The lead from the blast furnace, called lead bullion, then undergoes the drossing process. The bullion is agitated in kettles then cooled to 700–800 degrees. This process results in molten lead and dross . Dross refers to the lead oxides , copper, antimony and other elements that float to the top of the lead. Dross is usually skimmed off and sent to a dross furnace to recover the non-lead components which are sold to other metal manufacturers. The Parkes process is used to separate silver or gold from lead.

Finally, the molten lead is refined. Pyrometallurgical methods are usually used to remove the remaining non-lead components of the mixture, for example the Betterton-Kroll process and the Betts electrolytic process . The non-lead metals are usually sold to other metal processing plants. The refined lead may be made into alloys or directly cast.

[ 1 ] People who operate or work in such plants are also referred to as smelters or casters [ 2 ] .

Lead ores [ edit ] Evolution of the extracted lead ores grade in different countries (Canada, Australia).

Galena , the most common mineral of lead, is primarily lead sulfide (PbS). The sulfide is oxidized to a sulfite (PbSO 3 ) which thermally decomposes into lead oxide and sulfur dioxide gas. (PbO and SO 2 ) The sulfur dioxide (like the carbon dioxide in the example above) is expelled, and the lead oxide is reduced.

Anglesite , Cerussite , Pyromorphite , Mimetite and Wulfenite are other lead ores.

Other elements frequently present with lead ores include zinc and silver .

[ 3 ] Secondary lead processing [ edit ] Most of the lead produced comes from secondary sources. Lead scrap includes lead-acid batteries, cable coverings, pipes, sheets and lead coated, or terne bearing, metals. Solder, product waste and dross may also be recovered for its small lead content. Most secondary lead is used in batteries.

To recover lead from a battery, the battery is broken and the components are classified. The lead containing components are processed in blast furnaces for hard lead or rotary reverberatory furnaces for fine particles. The blast furnace is similar in structure to a cupola furnace used in iron foundries . The furnace is charged with slag, scrap iron, limestone, coke, oxides, dross, and reverberatory slag. The coke is used to melt and reduce the lead. Limestone reacts with impurities and floats to the top. This process also keeps the lead from oxidizing. The molten lead flows from the blast furnace into holding pots. Lead may be mixed with alloys, including antimony, tin, arsenic, copper and nickel. It is then cast into ingots .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Lead exposure [ edit ] Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Humans have been smelting lead for thousands of years, poisoning themselves in the process. Although lead poisoning is one of the oldest known work and environmental hazards, the modern understanding of the small amount of lead necessary to cause harm did not come about until the latter half of the 20th century. No safe threshold for lead exposure has been discovered—that is, there is no known amount of lead that is too small to cause the body harm.

The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization state that a blood lead level of 10 μg/dL or above is a cause for concern; however, lead may impair development and have harmful health effects even at lower levels, and there is no known safe exposure level.

[ 6 ] Authorities such as the American Academy of Pediatrics define lead poisoning as blood lead levels higher than 10 μg/dL.

Lead smelters with little pollution controls contribute to several environmental problems, especially raised blood lead levels in the surrounding population. The problem is particularly significant in many children who have grown up in the proximity to a lead smelter.

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] The earliest known cast lead beads were thought found in the Çatalhöyük site in Anatolia ( Turkey ), and dated from about 6500 BC. They were later identified in fact to be made from cerussite and galena , minerals rich in, but distinct from, lead.

[ 8 ] Ancient smelting was done using loads of lead ore and charcoal in outdoor hearths and furnaces.

Although lead is a common metal, its discovery had relatively little impact in the ancient world. It is too soft to be used for weapons (except possibly as sling projectiles) or for structural elements.  However, being easy to cast and shape, it came to be extensively used in the classical world of Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome for piping and storage of water. It was also used as a mortar in stone buildings, and as a writing material .

Smeltmills were water-powered mills used to smelt lead or other metals.  The Roman lead smelting has led to evidence of global pollution.  Greenland ice cores from 500 BC to 300 AD show measurably elevated lead content in the atmosphere.

[ 9 ] Researchers studying an ice core from Colle Gnifetti, in the Swiss part of the Monte Rosa massif , have found that higher historical European airborne lead pollution levels are associated with changes in the monetary system from gold to silver from the year 640 AD, with the principal source likely to be the Melle mines in France . Later airborne pollution, between the years 1170 and 1216, correlates even more strongly with contemporaneous records of lead and silver production from mines in the Peak District of England, at levels similar to those seen in the Industrial Revolution .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Georgius Agricola (1494–1555) presented details of lead smelting methods and facilities current in Europe in the first half of the 16th century in Book IX of his treatise on mining and metallurgy, De Re Metallica .  Methods ranged from primitive open-hearth arrangements (essentially bonfires on which lead ore was piled) to blast furnaces capable of continuous operation.

[ 13 ] In the US there are 400 forgotten lead smelting firms that operated in the 1930s to 1960s and may have deposited dangerous levels of lead contamination in nearby soil.

[ 14 ] Historic mining and smelting sites [ edit ] Asia [ edit ] Gazimursky Zavod Bupyeong silver mine Australia [ edit ] Boolaroo, New South Wales Argenton, New South Wales Cockle Creek Smelter Europe [ edit ] Grinton Smelt Mill , North Yorkshire , England Milford, Derbyshire Mendip Hills Wirksworth The tin and lead smelter in Arnhem , the Netherlands , was shut down in the 1990s.

Upper Harz , Germany Copșa Mică works , Transylvania Rammelsberg , Germany Ballycorus Leadmines Dalnegorsk Eas Anie Silberhütte (Harzgerode) North America [ edit ] Noonday Camp, California Tri-State district (SE Kansas, SW Missouri, NE Oklahoma) Southeast Missouri Lead District Old Mines, Missouri ASARCO Murray, Utah Midvale, Utah International Smelting and Refining Company Tooele , Utah Silver City, Utah Carondelet, St. Louis Bunker Hill Mine and Smelting Complex , Idaho Ketchum, Idaho El Paso, Texas Dewey-Humboldt, Arizona Priest Mine , Canada Cerro Gordo Mines Butte, Montana Harbor Island (Seattle) Sinsinawa, Wisconsin East Chicago, Indiana [ 15 ] South America [ edit ] Active lead mines and smelters [ edit ] Africa [ edit ] Kitwe, Zambia Australia [ edit ] Nyrstar Port Pirie Broken Hill, New South Wales Mount Isa Mines Asia [ edit ] Chanderiya Smelter Complex in the Chittorgarh district of Rajasthan state of India Europe [ edit ] Rönnskär copper smelter is in Skelleftehamn , Sweden and its main products are copper, zinc clinker, lead and precious metals.

Bergsöe lead smelter outside Landskrona in southern Sweden extracts lead from scrap car batteries.

Tara Mine KCM in Plovdiv which has produced lead for over 60 years using a blast furnace and is now in the process of bringing a new 60 million euro smelter TSL furnace online in order to replace the ageing blast furnace.

North America [ edit ] Doe Run Resources Corporation is the largest integrated lead producer in North America and the largest primary lead producer in the western world .

Hayden Smelter , Arizona Belledune, New Brunswick Red Dog mine , Alaska Teck Trail Operations , Trail, BC, Canada.

South America [ edit ] La Oroya Cerro de Pasco , Peru See also [ edit ] 2009 Chinese lead poisoning scandal Aluminium smelting Cast iron Desloge Lead Company Mining in Roman Britain Mining in Tajikistan Mining in the United Kingdom Molybdomancy Trail Smelter dispute Zinc smelting References [ edit ] ^ USEPA, Profile of The Nonferrous Metals Industry. EPA 310-R-95-010 as shown in [1] ^ "CASTER (nonfer. metal)" .

Dictionary of Occupational Titles . Archived from the original on 2025-06-14 . Retrieved 2025-08-13 .

^ Nicole Fobi, MD, LEAD SMELTING International Review, Morehouse School of Medicine , Atlanta, GA May 15, 2007 ^ USEPA, Profile of The Nonferrous Metals Industry. EPA 310-R-95-010 ^ Smelting US, Occupational Safety and Health Administration e-tool ^ Barbosa Jr, F; Tanus-Santos, JE; Gerlach, RF; Parsons, PJ (2005).

"A Critical Review of Biomarkers Used for Monitoring Human Exposure to Lead: Advantages, Limitations, and Future Needs" .

Environmental Health Perspectives .

113 (12): 1669– 74.

Bibcode : 2005EnvHP.113.1669B .

doi : 10.1289/ehp.7917 .

PMC 1314903 .

PMID 16330345 .

^ ":: WorstPolluted.org : Projects Reports" .

www.worstpolluted.org .

^ https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/79498371.pdf [ bare URL PDF ] ^ MALCOLM W. BROWNE Ice Cap Shows Ancient Mines Polluted the Globe New York Times December 09, 1997 ^ Loveluck, Christopher P.; McCormick, Michael; Spaulding, Nicole E.; Clifford, Heather; Handley, Michael J.; Hartman, Laura; Hoffmann, Helene; Korotkikh, Elena V.; Kurbatov, Andrei V.; More, Alexander F.; Sneed, Sharon B.; Mayewski, Paul A. (2018).

"Alpine ice-core evidence for the transformation of the European monetary system, AD 640–670" .

Antiquity .

92 (366): 1571– 1585.

doi : 10.15184/aqy.2018.110 .

^ "Alpine glacier reveals lead pollution from 12thC Britain as bad as Industrial Revolution" .

www.nottingham.ac.uk . Retrieved 8 April 2020 .

^ Loveluck, Christopher P.; More, Alexander F.; Spaulding, Nicole E.; Clifford, Heather; Handley, Michael J.; Hartman, Laura; Korotkikh, Elena V.; Kurbatov, Andrei V.; Mayewski, Paul A.; Sneed, Sharon B.; McCormick, Michael (2020).

"Alpine ice and the annual political economy of the Angevin Empire, from the death of Thomas Becket to Magna Carta, c. AD 1170–1216" .

Antiquity .

94 (374): 473– 490.

doi : 10.15184/aqy.2019.202 . Retrieved 8 April 2020 .

^ Georgius Agricola, De re metallica , translated from the first Latin edition of 1556, Herbert Clark Hoover and Lou Henry Hoover, tr., New York: Dover Publications, 1950, (reprint of the London: Mining Magazine edition of 1912), pp. 388–394 ^ A government's failure to protect USA Today ^ US EPA, REG 05 (September 8, 2016).

"Background about the USS Lead Site" .

US EPA .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) External links [ edit ] The Charles Bathurst Smelt Mill, Arkengarthdale, England v t e Extractive metallurgy Metallurgical assay Non-ferrous extractive metallurgy Mineral processing (by physical means) Extraction Geological survey Natural resources Ore Economic geology Mineral Base metal Precious metal Mining Surface Underground in hard rock Underground in soft rock Recycling Scrap Comminution Stamp mill Arrastra Crusher AG mill SAG mill Pebble mill Ball mill Rod mill IsaMill Sizing Ore sorting Vanning Hydrocyclone Trommel Cyclonic separation Gyratory equipment Mechanical screening Concentration Froth flotation Jameson cell Panning Jig concentrators Gravity Concentration Magnetic separation ( Magnetation ) Rocker box Dry washing Buddle pit Pyrometallurgy (by heat) Smelting Iron smelting Lead smelting Zinc smelting Flash smelting ISASMELT furnace Refractory linings Refining Cupellation Parkes process Bottom-blown oxygen converter Poling IsaKidd process Other Calcination Roasting Liquation Hydrometallurgy (by aqueous solution) Leaching Lixiviant Heap leaching Dump leaching Tank leaching In situ leaching Gold chlorination Gold cyanidation Bayer process Amalgamation Patio process Pan amalgamation Electrometallurgy (by electricity) Electrolysis Electrowinning Hall–Héroult process Castner process Downs cell Co-products Tailings Gangue Slag Clinker Chat Red mud Stamp sand NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐7cd47f8c57‐d2zpt
Cached time: 20250813084824
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.420 seconds
Real time usage: 0.531 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1612/1000000
Revision size: 16054/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 86164/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1580/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 55855/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.246/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6294381/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  402.898      1 -total
 38.06%  153.346      1 Template:Reflist
 24.07%   96.963      1 Template:Pollution_sidebar
 23.56%   94.921      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 22.89%   92.230      4 Template:Cite_web
 17.70%   71.328      1 Template:Short_description
 11.15%   44.933      5 Template:Navbox
 10.44%   42.065      1 Template:Extractive_metallurgy
  9.89%   39.860      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.07%   32.520      1 Template:Clarify Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37745974:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250813084824 and revision id 1305650172. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lead_smelting&oldid=1305650172 " Categories : Lead Smelting Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2024 Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citations CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2021 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 08:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lead smelting 1 language Add topic

