Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 1.1 Epistemology 1.2 Ontology 1.3 Axiology 2 History 3 Structure of a postpositivist theory 4 Main publications 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Postpositivism 11 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Ελληνικά فارسی Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Metatheoretical stance on scientific inquiry For one of its specific applications, see Postpositivism (international relations) .

Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e Postmodernism Preceded by Modernism Postmodernity Deconstruction Hypermodernity Hyperreality Posthumanism Post-structuralism Fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Criminology Dance Feminism Film Television Literature ( Picture books ) Music International relations Philosophy Anarchism Marxism Postpositivism Psychology Political science Theatre Theology and Religion Reactions Criticism Metamodernism Post-postmodernism Remodernism v t e Part of a series on Research Research design Ethics Proposal Question Writing Argument Referencing Research strategy Interdisciplinary Multimethodology Qualitative Art-based Quantitative Philosophical schools Antipositivism Constructivism Critical rationalism Empiricism Fallibilism Positivism Postpositivism Pragmatism Realism Critical realism Subtle realism Methodology Action research Art methodology Critical theory Grounded theory Hermeneutics Historiography Human subject research Narrative inquiry Phenomenology Pragmatism Scientific method Methods Analysis Case study Content analysis Descriptive statistics Discourse analysis Ethnography Autoethnography Experiment Field experiment Social experiment Quasi-experiment Field research Historical method Inferential statistics Interviews Mapping Cultural mapping Phenomenography Secondary research Bibliometrics Literature review Meta-analysis Scoping review Systematic review Scientific modelling Simulation Survey Tools and software Argument technology GIS software LIS software Bibliometrics Reference management Science software Qualitative data analysis Simulation Statistics Philosophy portal v t e Postpositivism or postempiricism is a metatheoretical stance that critiques and amends positivism [ 1 ] and has impacted theories and practices across philosophy , social sciences , and various models of scientific inquiry . While positivists emphasize independence between the researcher and the researched person (or object), postpositivists argue that theories, hypotheses, background knowledge and values of the researcher can influence what is observed.

[ 2 ] Postpositivists pursue objectivity by recognizing the possible effects of biases.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] While positivists emphasize quantitative methods, postpositivists consider both quantitative and qualitative methods to be valid approaches.

[ 4 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Epistemology [ edit ] Postpositivists believe that human knowledge is based not on a priori assessments from an objective individual, [ 4 ] but rather upon human conjectures . As human knowledge is thus unavoidably conjectural, the assertion of these conjectures are warranted , or more specifically, justified by a set of warrants , which can be modified or withdrawn in the light of further investigation.  However, postpositivism is not a form of relativism , and generally retains the idea of objective truth .

Ontology [ edit ] Postpositivists believe that a reality exists, but, unlike positivists, they believe reality can be known only imperfectly.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Postpositivists also draw from social constructionism in forming their understanding and definition of reality.

[ 3 ] Axiology [ edit ] While positivists believe that research is or can be value-free or value-neutral, postpositivists take the position that bias is undesired but inevitable, and therefore the investigator must work to detect and try to correct it. Postpositivists work to understand how their axiology (i.e. values and beliefs) may have influenced their research, including through their choice of measures, populations, questions, and definitions, as well as through their interpretation and analysis of their work.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Historians identify two types of positivism: classical positivism, an empirical tradition first described by Henri de Saint-Simon and Auguste Comte in the first half of the 19th century, [ 5 ] [ 1 ] and logical positivism , which is most strongly associated with the Vienna Circle , which met near Vienna, Austria, in the 1920s and 1930s.

[ 3 ] Postpositivism is the name D.C. Phillips [ 3 ] gave to a group of critiques and amendments which apply to both forms of positivism.

[ 3 ] One of the first thinkers to criticize logical positivism was Karl Popper . He advanced falsification in lieu of the logical positivist idea of verificationism .

[ 3 ] Falsificationism argues that it is impossible to verify that beliefs about universals or unobservables are true, though it is possible to reject false beliefs if they are phrased in a way amenable to falsification.

In 1965, Karl Popper and Thomas Kuhn had a debate as Thomas Kuhn's theory did not incorporate this idea of falsification. It has influenced contemporary research methodologies.

Thomas Kuhn is credited with having popularized and at least in part originated the post-empiricist philosophy of science.

[ 6 ] Kuhn's idea of paradigm shifts offers a broader critique of logical positivism, arguing that it is not simply individual theories but whole worldviews that must occasionally shift in response to evidence.

[ 3 ] Postpositivism is not a rejection of the scientific method , but rather a reformation of positivism to meet these critiques.  It reintroduces the basic assumptions of positivism: the possibility and desirability of objective truth , and the use of experimental methodology . The work of philosophers Nancy Cartwright and Ian Hacking are representative of these ideas.

[ citation needed ] Postpositivism of this type is described in social science guides to research methods.

[ 7 ] Structure of a postpositivist theory [ edit ] Robert Dubin describes the basic components of a postpositivist theory as being composed of basic "units" or ideas and topics of interest, "laws of interactions" among the units, and a description of the "boundaries" for the theory.

[ 3 ] A postpositivist theory also includes "empirical indicators" to connect the theory to observable phenomena, and hypotheses that are testable using the scientific method.

[ 3 ] According to Thomas Kuhn, a postpositivist theory can be assessed on the basis of whether it is " accurate ", " consistent ", "has broad scope", " parsimonious ", and "fruitful".

[ 3 ] Main publications [ edit ] Karl Popper (1934) Logik der Forschung , rewritten in English as The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1959) Thomas Kuhn (1962) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions Karl Popper (1963) Conjectures and Refutations Ian Hacking (1983) Representing and Intervening Andrew Pickering (1984) Constructing Quarks Peter Galison (1987) How Experiments End Nancy Cartwright (1989) Nature's Capacities and Their Measurement See also [ edit ] Antipositivism Jurisprudence of values – School of legal philosophy Philosophy of science Scientism Sociology of scientific knowledge Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Bergman, Mats (2016). "Positivism".

The International Encyclopedia of Communication Theory and Philosophy . pp.

1– 5.

doi : 10.1002/9781118766804.wbiect248 .

ISBN 9781118766804 .

^ a b c Robson, Colin (2002).

Real World Research. A Resource for Social Scientists and Practitioner-Researchers (Second ed.). Malden: Blackwell. p. 624.

ISBN 978-0-631-21305-5 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Miller, Katherine (2007).

Communication theories : perspectives, processes, and contexts (2nd ed.). Beijing: Peking University Press. pp.

35– 45.

ISBN 9787301124314 .

^ a b c Taylor, Thomas R.; Lindlof, Bryan C. (2011).

Qualitative communication research methods (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE. pp.

5– 13.

ISBN 978-1412974738 .

^ "Auguste Comte" .

Sociology Guide .

Archived from the original on 7 September 2008 . Retrieved 2 October 2008 .

^ Thomas, David 1979 Naturalism and social sciences , ch. Paradigms and social science, p.161 ^ Trochim, William.

"Social Research Methods Knowledge Base" .

socialresearchmethods.net .

References [ edit ] Alexander, J.C. (1995),   Fin De Siecle Social Theory:  Relativism, Reductionism and The Problem of Reason, London; Verso.

Phillips, D.C. & Nicholas C. Burbules (2000): Postpositivism and Educational Research.

Lanham & Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

Zammito, John H. (2004): A Nice Derangement of Epistemes. Post-positivism in the study of Science from Quine to Latour.

Chicago & London: The University of Chicago Press.

Popper, K. (1963), Conjectures and Refutations:  The Growth of Scientific Knowledge, London; Routledge.

Moore, R. (2009), Towards the Sociology of Truth, London; Continuum.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Postpositivism Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Positivism and Post-positivism v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach C. P. Snow Berlin Circle Vienna Circle Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Postpositivism&oldid=1282775676 " Categories : Positivism Metatheory of science Epistemological theories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012 Articles containing German-language text Use Oxford spelling from August 2016 This page was last edited on 28 March 2025, at 14:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Postpositivism 11 languages Add topic

