Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Authorities 3 Memorials and representations 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Aristides 38 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Latina Magyar မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Athenian general and statesman (530–468 BC) For the first Kentucky Derby winner, see Aristides (horse) . For other people named Aristides, see Aristides (disambiguation) .

Aristides Statue of Aristides in Boston, United States Native name Ἀριστείδης Born 530 BC Died 468 BC (aged c.

62) Allegiance Athens Years of service 490 – 479 BC Battles / wars First Persian invasion of Greece Battle of Marathon Second Persian invasion of Greece First Battle of Salamis First Battle of Plataea An ostrakon bearing the name "Aristeides [son] of Lysimachus", displayed in the Ancient Agora Museum in Athens Aristides ( / ˌ æ r ɪ ˈ s t aɪ d iː z / ARR -ih- STY -deez ; Ancient Greek : Ἀριστείδης , romanized : Aristeídēs , Attic Greek : [aristěːdɛːs] ; 530–468 BC) was an ancient Athenian statesman .  Nicknamed "the Just" (δίκαιος, díkaios ), he flourished at the beginning of Athens' Classical period and is remembered for his generalship in the Persian War .  The ancient historian Herodotus cited him as "the best and most honourable man in Athens", [ 1 ] and he received similarly reverent treatment in Plato 's Socratic dialogues.

Biography [ edit ] Aristides and the citizens Aristides was a member of a family of moderate fortune; his father's name was Lysimachus. Early in life he became a follower of the statesman Cleisthenes . He probably first came to notice as strategos in command of his native tribe Antiochis at the Battle of Marathon of 490 BC. In consequence of the distinction which he then achieved he is said to have won the election as archon eponymos for the ensuing year (489–488).

[ 2 ] Pursuing a conservative policy to maintain Athens as a land power, he was one of the chief opponents of the naval policy proposed by Themistocles .

[ 3 ] According to Plutarch , citing the philosopher Ariston of Ceos , the rivalry between Aristides and Themistocles began in their youth when they competed over the love of a boy : "... they were rivals for the affection of the beautiful Stesilaus of Ceos, and were passionate beyond all moderation." [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The conflict between the two leaders ended in the ostracism of Aristides at a date variously given between 485 and 482 BC. It is said that, on this occasion, an illiterate voter who did not recognise Aristides approached the statesman and requested that he write the name of Aristides on his voting shard to ostracize him. The latter asked if Aristides had wronged him. "No," was the reply, "and I do not even know him, but it irritates me to hear him everywhere called 'the Just'." [ 3 ] Aristides then wrote his own name on the ballot.

[ 6 ] Early in 480, Aristides profited by the decree recalling exiles to help in the defence of Athens against Persian invaders , and was elected strategos for the year 480–479 BC. In the Battle of Salamis of September 480 BC, he gave loyal support to Themistocles, and crowned the victory by landing Athenian infantry on the island of Psyttaleia and annihilating the Persian garrison stationed there.

[ 3 ] Aristides warned by Alexander I of Macedon of the impending Persian attack at the Battle of Plataea , 479 BC In 479 BC, he was re-elected strategos , and given special powers as commander of the Athenian forces at the Battle of Plataea of August 479 BC; he is also said to have suppressed a conspiracy among some in the army. He so won the confidence of the Ionian allies that, after they had revolted from the Spartan admiral Pausanias , [ 7 ] they gave him the chief command and left him with absolute discretion in fixing the contributions of the newly formed (478 BC) confederacy, the Delian League . His assessment, universally accepted as equitable, continued as the basis of taxation for the greater part of the League's duration. He continued to hold a predominant position in Athens. At first he seems to have remained on good terms with Themistocles, whom he allegedly helped in outwitting the Spartans over the rebuilding of the walls of Athens.

[ 3 ] Some authorities state that Aristides died at Athens, others that he perished on a journey to the Black Sea ; the date of his death is given by Nepos as 468 BC. He lived to witness the ostracism of Themistocles, towards whom he always displayed generosity, but he died before the rise of Pericles . His estate seems to have suffered severely from the Persian invasions, for apparently he did not leave enough money to defray the expenses of his burial, and it is known that his descendants – even in the 4th century – received state pensions.

[ 3 ] Authorities [ edit ] Answer of Aristides to the ambassadors of Mardonius .

Herodotus is not the only ancient author to evaluate Aristides' life. He is also the subject of one of Plutarch 's Parallel Lives (in which he is compared to Cato the Elder ), although Plutarch, writing during the Roman Empire , was several centuries removed. Aristides is praised by Socrates in Plato 's dialogues Gorgias and Meno as an exceptional instance of good leadership.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In Plato's dialogue Theaetetus , Socrates refers to Aristides, the grandson of the famous Aristides, less positively, bringing him as an example of a student who leaves his care too soon and realizes later that he is a fool.

[ 10 ] Memorials and representations [ edit ] There is a statue of Aristides in Louisburg Square in the American city of Boston . An 1806 painting of Aristides by Charles Brocas [ fr ] is at the Musée des Augustins in the French City of Toulouse .

References [ edit ] ^ Herodotus, Histories , 8.79 ^ On that debate, see Lang, Anna (2015). Aristeides der ‚Gerechte‘ – sein Archontat und seine Rolle bei Marathon, in R. Lafer & K. Strobel (eds.) Antike Lebenswelten. Althistorische und papyrologische Studien (Berlin/Boston 2015) 212–222.

^ a b c d e One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Caspari, Maximilian Otto Bismarck (1911). " Aristides ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

494– 495.

^ Plutarch, Themistocles, 3 ^ Plutarch, Aristides, 2 ^ Plutarch.

Life of Aristeides , VII, 5–6.

^ Nudell, Joshua P. (6 March 2023). "Orienting toward Athens and the Aegean System: 480-454".

Accustomed to Obedience?: Classical Ionia and the Aegean World, 480–294 BCE . University of Michigan Press. p. 27.

ISBN 9780472133376 . Retrieved 15 May 2023 .

Thucydides says that it was the Ionians as a group [...] who came to resent the violent [...] leadership of Pausanias and therefore requested that Athenians lead a new alliance that would better serve their interests, while [Aristotle] says that Aristides stoked the flames of frustration on the part of the Ionians after Pausanias' fall [...].

^ Plato, Gorgias , 526a–b ^ Plato, Meno , 94a1 ^ Plato, Theaetetus 150d–151a Bibliography [ edit ] Brun, Patrice (2023).

Aristide 'le Juste'. L'art et la manière de fabriquer un héros dans la cité démocratique.

Scripta antiqua, 175. Bordeaux: Ausonius Éditions, ISBN 9782356135902 .

Lang, Anna (2015). Aristeides der ‚Gerechte‘ – sein Archontat und seine Rolle bei Marathon, in R. Lafer & K. Strobel (eds.) Antike Lebenswelten. Althistorische und papyrologische Studien (Berlin/Boston 2015) 212–222.

Macgregor Morris, Ian (2022).

“Aristeides the Just?” , in A. Konecny & N. Sekunda (eds.) The Battle of Plataiai 479 BC (Vienna 2022) 133-49.

Proietti, Giorgia (2015).

"War and Memory: the Battle of Psyttaleia Before Herodotus’ Histories" , Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies 58 (2015) 43– 54.

Torello, Giulia  (2008).

"The Resurrection of Aristeides, Miltiades, Solon and Perikles in Eupolis’ Demes" , Antichthon 42 (2008) 40– 55.

Tuci, Paolo A. (2018).

"Aristide 'imperialista' nell’Athenaion Politeia aristotelica" , in C. Bearzot – M. Canevaro – T. Gargiulo – E. Poddighe (eds.), Athenaion Politeiai tra storia, politica e sociologia: Aristotele e Pseudo-Senofonte (Milan 2018) 231–251.

Zaccarini, Matteo (2020).

"Aristide il Giusto e l’arche ateniese: la giustizia al potere" , Rivista di Filologia e Istruzione Classica 148 (2020) 5–33.

External links [ edit ] Plutarch 's Life of Aristides in English Translation Plutarch 's Life of Aristides in English Translation at the Internet Classics Archive Plutarch 's Life of Aristides in English Translation at the Perseus Project v t e Ancient Athenian politicians Aeschines Agyrrhius Alcibiades Andocides Archinus Aristides Aristogeiton Aristophon Autocles Callistratus Charmides Chremonides Cimon Cleisthenes Cleophon Cleon Critias Demades Demetrius of Phalerum Demochares Democles Demosthenes Draco Echedemos Ephialtes Eratosthenes Eubulus Hagnon Hyperbolus Hypereides Laches Lycurgus Lysicles Miltiades Moerocles Nicias Pericles Philinus Phocion Pisistratus Solon Themistocles Theramenes Thrasybulus Thucydides Timoleon Timotheus Xanthippus Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Sweden Poland People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aristides&oldid=1305917211 " Categories : 530 BC births 468 BC deaths 5th-century BC Athenians 5th-century BC Greek politicians Ancient Athenian generals Ancient Greek LGBTQ people Athenians of the Greco-Persian Wars Battle of Marathon Battle of Plataea Battle of Salamis Eponymous archons Ostracized Athenians Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from February 2025 Use dmy dates from February 2025 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with Attic Greek IPA This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 21:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aristides 38 languages Add topic

