Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Derivation and use 2 Method 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Confrontation analysis 1 language 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Operational analysis derived from game theory Screenshot illustrating the use of confrontation analysis in a computer-aided role play depicting the Siege of Sarajevo .  The software was written by Professor Nigel Howard for General Rupert Smith in 1996.

Confrontation analysis (also known as dilemma analysis ) is an operational analysis technique used to structure, understand, and analyze multi-party interactions, such as negotiations or conflicts . It serves as the mathematical foundation for drama theory .

While based on game theory , confrontation analysis differs in that it focuses on the idea that players may redefine the game during the interaction, often due to the influence of emotions . In traditional game theory, players generally work within a fixed set of rules (represented by a decision matrix ). However, confrontation analysis sees the interaction as a sequence of linked decisions, where the rules or perceptions of the game can shift over time, influenced by emotional dilemmas or psychological factors that arise during the interaction.

[ 1 ] Derivation and use [ edit ] Confrontation analysis was devised by Professor Nigel Howard in the early 1990s drawing from his work on game theory and metagame analysis . It has been turned to defence, [ 2 ] political, legal, financial [ 3 ] and commercial applications.

[ 4 ] Much of the theoretical background to General Rupert Smith 's book The Utility of Force drew its inspiration from the theory of confrontation analysis.

I am in debt to Professor Nigel Howard, whose explanation of Confrontation Analysis and Game Theory at a seminar in 1998 excited my interest. Our subsequent discussions helped me to order my thoughts and the lessons I had learned into a coherent structure with the result that, for the first time, I was able to understand my experiences within a theoretical model which allowed me to use them further — General Rupert Smith, The Utility of Force (p.xvi) Confrontation analysis can also be used in a decision workshop as structure to support role-playing [ 3 ] for training, analysis and decision rehearsal.

Method [ edit ] An interaction as a sequence of confrontations where the card table [ 5 ] changes as the parties struggle to eliminate their dilemmas [ 1 ] Confrontation analysis looks on an interaction as a sequence of confrontations. During each confrontation the parties communicate until they have made their positions [ 6 ] clear to one another.  These positions can be expressed as a card table (also known as an options board [ 5 ] ) of yes/no decisions. For each decision each party communicates what they would like to happen (their position [ 6 ] ) and what will happen if they cannot agree (the threatened future ). These interactions produce dilemmas [ 1 ] and the card table changes as players attempt to eliminate these.

Initial Card Table: [ 5 ] The UN threatens to use air strikes, but is not believed by the Bosnian Serbs: The UN has three dilemmas [ 1 ] The Bosnians have none Consider the example on the right (Initial Card Table), taken from the 1995 Bosnian Conflict .

[ 7 ] This represents an interaction between the Bosnian Serbs and the United Nations forces over the safe areas. The Bosnian Serbs had Bosniak enclaves surrounded and were threatening to attack.

Each side had a position as to what they wanted to happen: The Bosnian Serbs wanted (see 4th column): To be able to attack the enclaves NOT to withdraw their heavy weapons from the enclaves For the UN NOT to use air strikes The UN wanted (See 5th column): The Bosnian Serbs NOT to attack the enclaves The Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their heavy weapons The Bosnian Serbs NOT to take hostages.

If no further changes were made then what the sides were saying would happen was (see 1st column): The Bosnian Serbs said they would attack the enclaves The Bosnian Serbs said they would NOT withdraw their heavy weapons The Bosnian Serbs said they would take hostages if the UN uses air strikes The UN said it would initiate air strikes.  However the Bosnian Serbs DID NOT BELIEVE them. (Hence the question mark on the Card Table).

Confrontation analysis then specifies a number of precisely defined dilemmas [ 1 ] that occur to the parties following from the structure of the card tables.  It states that motivated by the desire to eliminate these dilemmas, the parties involved will CHANGE THE CARD TABLE, to eliminate their problem.

In the situation at the start the Bosnian Serbs have no dilemmas, but the UN has four. It has three persuasion dilemmas [ 8 ] in that the Bosnian Serbs are not going to do the three things they want them to (not attack the enclaves, withdraw the heavy weapons and not take hostages). It also has a rejection dilemma [ 9 ] in that the Bosnian Serbs do not believe they will actually use the air strikes, as they think the UN will submit to their position, for fear of having hostages taken.

Faced with these dilemmas, the UN modified the card table to eliminate its dilemmas.  It took two actions: Firstly, it withdrew its forces from the positions where they were vulnerable to being taken hostage.  This action eliminated the Bosnian Serbs' option (card) of taking hostages.

Second Card Table: [ 5 ] The UN eliminated the Bosnian "hostage" card and brought in an additional, credible "Artillery" card, changing the situation in their favour: The Bosnian Serbs now have two persuasion dilemmas [ 8 ] and two rejection dilemmas [ 9 ] Secondly, with the addition of the Rapid Reaction Force , and in particular its artillery the UN had an additional capability to engage Bosnian Serb weapons; they added the card "Use artillery against Bosnian Serbs". Because of this, the UN's threat of air strikes became more credible.  The situation changed to that of the Second Card Table: The Bosnian Serbs wanted (see 4th column): To be able to attack the enclaves NOT to withdraw heavy weapons from the enclaves For the UN NOT to use air strikes For the UN NOT to use artillery The UN wanted (See 5th column): The Bosnian Serbs NOT to attack the enclaves The Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their heavy weapons If no further changes were made then what the sides were saying would happen was (see 1st column): The Bosnian Serbs said they would attack the enclaves, but the UN did not believe them.

The Bosnian Serbs said they would NOT withdraw their heavy weapons, but the UN did not believe them.

The UN said it would use artillery.  The Bosnian Serbs believed this.

The UN said it would use air strikes.  This time, however, the Bosnian Serbs believed them.

Final Card Table: [ 5 ] The final situation. The Bosnian Serbs modified their position to eliminate their dilemmas. This involved accepting their initial goals as unobtainable Faced with this new situation, the Bosnian Serbs modified their position to accept the UN proposal.  The final table was an agreement as shown in the Final Card table (see thumbnail and picture).

Confrontation analysis does not necessarily produce a win-win solution (although end states are more likely to remain stable if they do); however, the word confrontation should not necessarily imply that any negotiations should be carried out in an aggressive way.

The card tables are isomorphic to game theory models, but are not built with the aim of finding a solution . Instead, the aim is to find the dilemmas facing characters and so help to predict how they will change the table itself. Such prediction requires not only analysis of the model and its dilemmas, but also exploration of the reality outside the model; without this it is impossible to decide which ways of changing the model in order to eliminate dilemmas might be rationalized by the characters.

Sometimes analysis of the ticks and crosses can be supported by values showing the payoff to each of the parties.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e See definition of Dilemma ^ See The future of Libya ^ a b "role playing... can also be used by investors in the form of "confrontation analysis' such as that organised by former military analyst Mike Young's [1] " – Greek Dungeons and German Dragons , James Macintosh, Financial Times , 9 November 2011.

^ See Letting agency case study Archived 2019-09-15 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d e See definition of Options Board/Card table ^ a b See definition of Position ^ This example developed from that described in Smith R , Tait A, Howard N (1999) Confrontations in War and Peace .

Proceedings of the 6th international Command and Control Research and Technology Symposium , U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland, 19–20 June 2001 ^ a b See definition of Persuasion Dilemma ^ a b See definition of Rejection Dilemma ^ See understanding the tables used in confrontation analysis Archived 2019-09-15 at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] Dilemmas Galore – A user discussion group.  Deals with applications of Confrontation analysis to current politics, military campaigns, business problems, psychology, etc. Also contains a good introduction and glossary of the terms used in Confrontation Analysis.

Dilemma Explorer - A software application to do Confrontation Analysis Confrontation Manager — A software application using an earlier version of Confrontation Analysis.

Confronteer an iPhone app to do Confrontation Analysis.

N. Howard, ' Confrontation Analysis: How to win operations other than war ', CCRP Publications, 1999.

P. Bennett, J. Bryant and N. Howard, 'Drama Theory and Confrontation Analysis' — can be found (along with other recent PSM methods) in: J. V. Rosenhead and J. Mingers (eds) Rational Analysis for a Problematic World Revisited: problem structuring methods for complexity, uncertainty and conflict, Wiley, 2001.

J. Bryant, The Six Dilemmas of Collaboration: inter-organisational relationships as drama, Wiley, 2003.

N. Howard, Paradoxes of Rationality ', MIT Press, 1971.

How to structure disputes using Confrontation Analysis contains an illustrated explanation of Confrontation Analysis.

Speed Confrontation Management a brief "How to" manual on doing Confrontation Analysis without using an Options Table.

v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Confrontation_analysis&oldid=1305429037 " Categories : Formal sciences Game theory Operations research Problem structuring methods Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from December 2011 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 01:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Confrontation analysis 1 language Add topic

