Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Citations and footnotes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Dinostratus 15 languages تۆرکجه Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Română Русский Slovenščina Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek mathematician and geometer (c. 390–320 BC) Dinostratus Born c. 390 BCE Died c. 320 BCE Nationality Greek Known for Quadratrix of Dinostratus Dinostratus' theorem Scientific career Fields Mathematics Dinostratus ( Greek : Δεινόστρατος ; c. 390 – c. 320 BCE) was a Greek mathematician and geometer , and the brother of Menaechmus . He is known for using the quadratrix to solve the problem of squaring the circle .

Life and work [ edit ] Dinostratus' chief contribution to mathematics was his solution to the problem of squaring the circle. To solve this problem, Dinostratus made use of the trisectrix of Hippias , for which he proved a special property ( Dinostratus' theorem ) that allowed him the squaring of the circle. Due to his work the trisectrix later became known as the quadratrix of Dinostratus as well.

[ 1 ] Although Dinostratus solved the problem of squaring the circle, he did not do so using ruler and compass alone, and so it was clear to the Greeks that his solution violated the foundational principles of their mathematics.

[ 1 ] Over 2,200 years later Ferdinand von Lindemann would prove that it is impossible to square a circle using straight edge and compass alone.

Citations and footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b Boyer (1991). "The age of Plato and Aristotle".

A History of Mathematics . Wiley. pp.

96–97 .

ISBN 9780471543978 .

Dinostratus, brother of Menaechmus, was also a mathematician, and where one of the brothers "solved" the duplication of the cube, the other "solved" the squaring of the circle. The quadrature because a simple matter once a striking property of the end point Q of the trisectrix of Hippias had been noted, apparently by Dinostratus. If the equation of the trisectrix (Fig. 6.4) is πrsin θ = 2aθ, where a is the side of the square ABCD associated with the curve, [...] hence, Dinostratus' theorem is established - that is, AC/AB = AB/DQ. [...] Inasmuch as Dinostratus showed that the trisectrix of Hippias serves to square the circle, the curve more commonly came to be known as the quadratrix. It was, of course, always clear to the Greeks that the use of the curve in the trisection and quadrature problems violated the rules of the game - that circles and straight lines only were permitted. The "solution" of Hippias and Dinostratus, as their authors realized, were sophistic; hence, the search for further solutions, canonical or illegitimate, continued with the result that several new curves were discovered by Greek geometers.

References [ edit ] Boyer, Carl B.

(1991).

A History of Mathematics (Second ed.). John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

ISBN 0-471-54397-7 .

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Dinostratus" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 WorldCat National Germany People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dinostratus&oldid=1286429685 " Categories : Ancient Greek geometers 390s BC births 320s BC deaths 4th-century BC Greek mathematicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 19 April 2025, at 21:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dinostratus 15 languages Add topic

