Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Mechanism 3 Basic parts 4 Designs Toggle Designs subsection 4.1 Space Shuttle Waste Collection System 4.2 International Space Station 4.3 Other designs 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Space toilet 18 languages العربية Aragonés Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Nederlands Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Toilet used in weightless environments Space toilet A space toilet or zero-gravity toilet is a toilet that can be used in a weightless environment. In the absence of weight, the collection and retention of liquid and solid waste is directed by use of airflow. Since the air used to direct the waste is returned to the cabin, it is filtered beforehand to control odor and cleanse bacteria. In older systems, wastewater is vented into space, and any solids are compressed and stored for removal upon landing. More modern systems expose solid waste to vacuum pressures to kill bacteria, which prevents odor problems and kills pathogens .

[ 1 ] Background [ edit ] Astronauts say that they are most often asked how they go to the bathroom in space.

[ 2 ] In space, weightlessness causes fluids to distribute uniformly around human bodies.

Kidneys detect the fluid movement and a physiological reaction causes the humans to need to relieve themselves within two hours of departure from Earth . The space toilet was thus the first device activated on shuttle flights, after astronauts unbuckled themselves.

[ 3 ] Mechanism [ edit ] In the absence of gravity, space toilets use air flow to pull urine and feces away from the body and into the proper receptacles. A new feature of the space toilet is the automatic start of air flow when the toilet lid is lifted, which also helps with odor control. By popular (astronaut) demand, it also includes a more ergonomic design requiring less clean-up and maintenance time, with corrosion-resistant, durable parts to reduce the likelihood of maintenance outside of the set schedule. Less time spent on plumbing means more time for the crew to spend on science and other high-priority exploration focused tasks.

[ 4 ] The crew use a specially shaped funnel and hose for urine (suction cup) and the seat for bowel movements. The funnel and seat can be used simultaneously, reflecting feedback from female astronauts. The space toilet seat may look uncomfortably small and pointy, but in microgravity, it is ideal. It provides ideal body contact to make sure that everything goes where it should.

[ 4 ] The space toilet includes foot restraints and handholds for astronauts to keep themselves from floating away. Everyone positions themselves differently while "going", and consistent astronaut feedback indicated that the traditional thigh straps were a hassle.

[ 4 ] Toilet paper, wipes, and gloves are disposed of in water-tight bags. Solid waste in individual water-tight bags is compacted in a removable fecal storage canister. A small number of fecal canisters are returned to Earth for evaluation, but most are loaded into a cargo ship that burns up on re-entry through Earth's atmosphere. Currently, fecal waste is not processed for water recovery, but NASA is studying this capability.

[ 4 ] Basic parts [ edit ] Diagram of the elements of the Space Shuttle WCS [ 5 ] There are four basic parts in a space toilet: the liquid-waste vacuum tube, the vacuum chamber, the waste storage drawers, and the solid-waste collection bags. The liquid-waste vacuum tube is a 2-to-3-foot (61 to 91 cm) long rubber or plastic hose that is attached to the vacuum chamber and connected to a fan that provides suction. At the end of the tube is a detachable urine receptacle, which comes in different versions for male and female astronauts. The male urine receptacle is a plastic funnel 2 to 3 inches (5 to 8 cm) in width and about 4 inches (10 cm) deep. A male astronaut urinates directly into the funnel from a distance of 2 to 3 inches (5 to 8 cm) away. The female funnel is oval and is 2 by 4 inches (5 by 10 cm) wide at the rim. Near the funnel's rim are small holes or slits that allow air movement to prevent excessive suction. The vacuum chamber is a cylinder about 1-foot (30 cm) deep and 6 inches (15 cm) wide with clips on the rim, where waste collection bags may be attached and a fan that provides suction. Urine is pumped into and stored in waste storage drawers. Solid waste is stored in a detachable bag made of a special fabric that lets gas (but not liquid or solid) escape, a feature that allows the fan at the back of the vacuum chamber to pull the waste into the bag. When the astronaut is finished, he or she then twists the bag and places it in a waste storage drawer. Samples of urine and solid waste are frozen and taken to Earth for testing.

Designs [ edit ] Space Shuttle Waste Collection System [ edit ] The toilet used on the Space Shuttle is called the Waste Collection System (WCS). In addition to air flow, it also uses rotating fans to distribute solid waste for in-flight storage. Solid waste is distributed in a cylindrical container, which is then exposed to vacuum to dry the waste. Liquid waste was disposed of by discharging it into space.

[ 6 ] [ citation needed ] The WCS required many hours of training. For urination, a hose was used. For defecation, with a 4 inches (100 mm) diameter for the hole in the seat—much smaller than in a conventional toilet—the user's bottom needed to be exactly centered on the seat. NASA built a simulator with a video camera in the hole; those training used a crosshair to learn how to position their bodies, while other astronauts watched and made jokes.

[ 7 ] [ 2 ] The WCS had several malfunctions in flight. On the eight-day STS-3 test flight, the toilet had broken down, and its two-man crew ( Jack Lousma and Gordon Fullerton ) resorted to fecal containment devices (FCD) for waste elimination and disposal.

[ citation needed ] An anomaly of the liquid disposal system on Discovery during its maiden flight resulted in a buildup of frozen excrements outside the orbiter, which was then removed by means of Canadarm .

[ 6 ] During STS-46 , one of the fans malfunctioned, and crew member Claude Nicollier was required to perform in-flight maintenance (IFM).

International Space Station [ edit ] Expedition 65 Flight Engineers Mark Vande Hei (from left) and Shane Kimbrough partner together for orbital plumbing tasks as they install a new toilet inside the International Space Station's Tranquility module.

There are three toilets on the International Space Station , located in the Zvezda , Nauka and Tranquility modules.

[ 8 ] They use a fan-driven suction system similar to the Space Shuttle WCS. Liquid waste is collected in 20-litre (5.3 US gal) containers. Solid waste is collected in individual micro-perforated bags, which are stored in an aluminum container.

[ 9 ] Full containers are transferred to Progress for disposal. An additional Waste and Hygiene Compartment is part of the Tranquility module launched in 2010. In 2007, NASA purchased a Russian-made toilet similar to the one already aboard ISS rather than develop one internally.

[ 10 ] On May 21, 2008, the gas–liquid separator pump failed on the 7-year-old toilet in Zvezda, although the solid-waste portion was still functioning. The crew attempted to replace various parts, but was unable to repair the malfunctioning part. In the interim, they used a manual mode for urine collection.

[ 11 ] The crew had other options: to use the toilet on the Soyuz transport module (which only has capacity for a few days of use) or to use urine-collection bags as needed.

[ 12 ] A replacement pump was sent from Russia in a diplomatic pouch , so that Space Shuttle Discovery could take it to the station as part of mission STS-124 on June 2.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Other designs [ edit ] The Soviet / Russian space station Mir 's toilet also used a system similar to the WCS.

[ 16 ] While the Soyuz spacecraft had an onboard toilet facility since its introduction in 1967 (due to the additional space in the Orbital Module), all Gemini and Apollo spacecraft required astronauts to urinate in a so-called "relief tube", in which the contents were dumped into space, while fecal matter was collected in specially designed bags.

[ 17 ] The facilities were so uncomfortable that, to avoid using them, astronauts ate less than half the available food on their flights .

[ 18 ] The Skylab space station, used by NASA between May 1973 and March 1974, had an onboard WCS facility, which served as a prototype for the Shuttle's WCS, but also featured an onboard shower facility. The Skylab toilet, which was designed and built by the Fairchild Republic Corp. on Long Island, was primarily a medical system to collect and return to Earth samples of urine, feces and vomit, so that calcium balance in astronauts could be studied.

Even with the facilities, astronauts and cosmonauts for both launch systems employ pre-launch bowel clearing and low-residue diets to minimize the need for defecation .

[ 19 ] The Soyuz toilet has been used on a return mission from Mir.

[ 16 ] NPP Zvezda is a Russian developer of space equipment, which includes zero-gravity toilets.

[ 20 ] A $23 million next-generation space toilet called the Universal Waste Management System (UWMS) is being developed by NASA for Orion and the International Space Station.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] The UWMS is the first space toilet designed specifically for women as well as men, easing the use of space toilets for women and use for stool and urine at the same time. It is designed to be fully automated, quieter, lighter, more reliable, more hygienic and more compact than previous systems.

[ 21 ] [ 23 ] Among its innovations, the UWMS relies on a 3D printing technique to incorporate metals including Inconel , Elgiloy , and titanium that can withstand the acids used to treat urine within the toilet.

[ 23 ] The UWMS was first delivered to the ISS in October 2020.

[ 24 ] Toilet device on Soyuz spacecraft Space Shuttle toilet Russian space toilet used in space station Mir A mockup of the toilet that would be carried on MOL Zero-gravity toilet on the International Space Station in the Zvezda Service Module Space toilet inside Node 3, after relocation from the US lab ISS Universal Waste Management System See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Space toilets .

Maximum Absorbency Garment Head (watercraft) Space Poop Challenge Vacuum toilet References [ edit ] ^ "Gigapan: Space Shuttle Discovery Toilet" .

National Geographic . National Geographic Society.

Archived from the original on September 5, 2013 . Retrieved September 8, 2013 .

^ a b Shuttle's Toilet Requires Special Training ( YouTube ). NASA. May 5, 2010.

Archived from the original on December 14, 2021.

^ Walker, Charles D. (March 17, 2005).

"Oral History 2 Transcript" (PDF) .

NASA Johnson Space Center Oral History Project (Interview). Interviewed by Ross-Nazzal, Jennifer . Retrieved December 29, 2011 .

^ a b c d Elburn, Darcy (August 2, 2019).

"Boldly Go! NASA's New Space Toilet" .

NASA . Retrieved February 7, 2022 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ NASA (November 15, 2001).

"Configuration Changes and Certification Status – Shuttle Urine Pre-treat Assembly" (PDF) .

STS-108 Flight Readiness Review . Archived from the original (PDF) on November 8, 2004 . Retrieved December 28, 2006 .

^ a b "35 Years Ago: STS-41D – First Flight of Space Shuttle Discovery - NASA" . August 30, 2019 . Retrieved December 16, 2023 .

^ Croft, Melvin; Youskauskas, John (2019).

Come Fly with Us: NASA's Payload Specialist Program . Outward Odyssey: a People's History of Spaceflight. University of Nebraska Press. p. 15.

ISBN 9781496212252 .

^ Cheryl L. Mansfield (November 7, 2008).

"Station Prepares for Expanding Crew" . NASA . Retrieved September 17, 2009 .

^ Lu, Ed (September 8, 2003).

"HSF – International Space Station – "Greetings Earthling" " . Archived from the original on September 6, 2003 . Retrieved December 21, 2006 .

^ Fareastgizmos.com (July 6, 2007).

"19 million US Dollars for a space station toilet" . Retrieved July 9, 2007 .

^ "Toilet trouble for space station" .

BBC News . May 29, 2008 . Retrieved January 4, 2010 .

^ "Space station struggles with balky toilet" .

NBC News . May 27, 2008.

^ "Astronauts To Fix Space Station Toilet" . Archived from the original on September 19, 2008.

^ "ISS – Zvezda Bathroom Repairs and Shuttle Preps for Crew" . Archived from the original on July 15, 2012.

^ "Space Station Toilet Parts Set for Liftoff" .

RedOrbit . May 29, 2008.

^ a b Shuttleworth, Mark (February 9, 2002).

"Toilet Training" .

First African in Space . Retrieved December 28, 2006 .

^ Sandra Häuplik-Meusburger: Architecture for astronauts : an activity-based approach . Springer, 2011, ISBN 978-3-7091-0666-2 , Hygiene Apollo – Resume Toilett, p. 134–137.

^ Bourland, Charles T. (April 7, 2006).

"Charles T. Bourland" .

NASA Johnson Space Center Oral History Project (Interview). Interviewed by Ross-Nazzal, Jennifer . Retrieved December 24, 2014 .

^ "Low Residue Diet" . Buzzle.com. December 15, 2011. Archived from the original on April 20, 2008 . Retrieved May 24, 2012 .

^ "Assenisation Sanity Unit ASU-8A" . Zvezda-npp.ru. Archived from the original on February 13, 2012 . Retrieved May 24, 2012 .

^ a b James L. Broyan Jr.; Michael K. Ewert; Patrick W. Fink (August 4, 2014).

"Logistics Reduction Technologies for Exploration Missions" (PDF) . NASA. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 6, 2014 . Retrieved September 28, 2014 .

^ Grush, Loren (October 1, 2020).

"NASA is about to launch an upgraded microgravity toilet to the International Space Station" .

The Verge . Retrieved October 3, 2020 .

^ a b Thomas J. Stapleton; Shelley Baccus; James L. Broyan Jr. (January 1, 2013).

"Development of a Universal Waste Management System" (PDF) . NASA. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 6, 2014 . Retrieved September 28, 2014 .

^ Melissa McKinley; Melissa Borrego; James Lee Broyan, Jr. (July 10, 2022).

"NASA Universal Waste Management System and Toilet Integration Hardware Operations on ISS -- Issues, Modifications and Accomplishments" (PDF) . Retrieved February 7, 2024 .

v t e Spaceflight General Astrodynamics History Timeline Space Race Records Accidents and incidents Space launch Space policy Australia China European Space Agency European Union India Japan North Korea South Korea Russia Soviet Union United States Space law Outer Space Treaty Rescue Agreement Space Liability Convention Registration Convention Moon Treaty Space warfare Space command Space force Militarisation of space Private spaceflight Billionaire space race Applications Astronomy Earth observation Archaeology Imagery and mapping Reconnaissance Weather and environment monitoring Communications satellite Internet Radio Telephone Television Satellite navigation Commercial use of space Space launch market competition Space architecture Space exploration Space research Space technology Space weather Human spaceflight General Astronaut commercial Life-support system Animals in space Bioastronautics Space suit Extravehicular activity Overview effect Weightlessness Space toilet Space tourism Space colonization Space diving Programs Vostok Mercury Voskhod Gemini Soyuz Apollo Skylab Apollo–Soyuz Space Shuttle Mir Shuttle–Mir International Space Station Shenzhou Tiangong New Shepard Artemis Health issues Effect of spaceflight on the human body Space adaptation syndrome Health threat from cosmic rays Space psychology Psychological and sociological effects Space and survival Space medicine Space nursing Space sexology Spacecraft Launch vehicle Rocket Space capsule Orbital module Reentry capsule Service module Spaceplane Robotic spacecraft Satellite Space probe Lander Rover Self-replicating spacecraft Space telescope Spacecraft propulsion Rocket engine Electric propulsion Solar sail Gravity assist Destinations Sub-orbital Orbital Geocentric Geosynchronous Interplanetary Interstellar Intergalactic Space launch Direct ascent Escape velocity Expendable and reusable launch systems Launch pad Non-rocket spacelaunch Spaceport Ground segment Flight controller Ground station Pass Mission control center Category Portal v t e Toilets Equipment Ballcock Bedpan Bidet Bidet shower Brush Cistern Commode Electronic bidet Flushometer Seat Toilet seat riser Toilet Toilet cleaner Toilet paper Holder/dispenser Orientation Toilet rim block Trap (U-bend) Types Aircraft Arborloo Blair Bucket Cathole Chemical Composting Container-based Dry Dual flush EToilet Flush Freezing Head (boat) Hudo (Scouting) Incinerating Intelligent Latrine Low-flush On-board Passenger train Pay Pig Pit Portable Potty Public Sanisette (self-cleaning) Sink Space Squat Telescopic Treebog Urine-diverting dry Vacuum Vermifilter Washlet (combined toilet and bidet) Cultural and policy aspects Accessible Adult diaper Bathroom privileges Bathroom reading Honeywagon (vehicle) Incontinence pad Islamic toilet etiquette Istinja Latrinalia Privatization of public toilets Swachh Bharat Mission Toilet god Toilet humour Skibidi Toilet Toilet meal Toilet plume Toilet-related injuries and deaths Toilet Revolution in China Toilet Twinning Unisex public Vacuum truck Jobs and activities Groom of the Stool Manual scavenging Restroom attendant Sanitation worker Slopping out Toilet training Toileting Urine-related aspects Female urinal Female urination device Interactive urinal Pissoir Pee curl Pollee Sanistand Urinal Urinal deodorizer block Urinal (health care) Urination Urine collection device Urine deflector Urine diversion Feces-related aspects Anal hygiene Defecation Defecation postures Fecal sludge management Flying toilet Open defecation Scatology Places Haewoojae Hundertwasser Toilets Madison Museum of Bathroom Tissue Modern Toilet Restaurant National Poo Museum Outhouse Rest area Shit Museum Sulabh International Museum of Toilets Toilet (room) Toilet History Museum Toilets in Japan Toilets in New York City Bryant Park restroom Historical terms Aphedron Chamber pot Close stool Dansker Garderobe Gong farmer Groom of the Stool Night soil Pail closet Privy midden Reredorter See also Changing room Unisex changing rooms Ecological sanitation History of water supply and sanitation Human right to water and sanitation Improved sanitation Infection prevention and control Public health Reuse of human excreta Sanitary bin Sanitation Sewage treatment Sustainable sanitation Waste management World Toilet Day Workers' right to access the toilet v t e ... in space Biology Human The human body Hygiene Locomotion Medicine Neuroscience Psychology Psychological and sociological effects Sex Sleep Non-human Animals Cats Cockroaches Dogs Frogs Fruit flies Mice Primates Tardigrades Tortoises Extraterrestrial life Microorganisms Plants Astrobotany Environment Climate Corrosion Debris Dust Magnetosphere Weather Weathering Society Advertising Alcohol Archaeology of Earth of items in space Art Burial Colonization Economy Mining Trade Ethics Exploration Food Law Military Music Religion Christmas Selfies Tourism Voting War Women Technology Human spaceflight Accidents Architecture Farming Food Carbonated drinks Toilets Writing Other technologies Logistics Manufacturing Mining Power Batteries Nuclear Solar for Earth for spacecraft Radar Telescopes Weapons Outer space portal Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Space_toilet&oldid=1295736082 " Categories : Toilets Spacecraft life support systems Hidden categories: Source attribution CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from May 2012 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2009 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 14:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Space toilet 18 languages Add topic

