Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 1.1 Self-sufficiency 2 History 3 Reasons for solo scuba diving 4 Comparison to alternative systems Toggle Comparison to alternative systems subsection 4.1 Arguments in favour of solo diving 4.2 Advantages of buddy and team diving 5 Risks and their mitigation Toggle Risks and their mitigation subsection 5.1 Equipment 6 Training Toggle Training subsection 6.1 Self-reliance skills 6.2 Certifications in solo and self-reliant diving 7 Legal status 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Solo diving 2 languages Čeština Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Recreational diving without a dive buddy Solo diver surveying a dive site. The bailout cylinder can be seen slung at the diver's left side Solo diving is the practice of self-sufficient underwater diving without a " dive buddy ", particularly with reference to scuba diving , but the term is also applied to freediving . Professionally, solo diving has always been an option which depends on operational requirements and risk assessment.

Surface supplied diving and atmospheric suit diving are commonly single diver underwater activities but are accompanied by an on-surface support team dedicated to the safety of the diver, including a stand-by diver , and are not considered solo diving in this sense.

Solo freediving has occurred for millennia as evidenced by artifacts dating back to the ancient people of Mesopotamia when people dived to gather food and to collect pearl oysters.

[ 1 ] It wasn't until the 1950s, with the development of formalised scuba diving training, that recreational solo diving was deemed to be dangerous, particularly for beginners. In an effort to mitigate associated risks, some scuba certification agencies incorporated the practice of buddy diving into their diver training programmes. The true risk of solo diving relative to buddy diving in the same environmental conditions has never been reliably established, and may have been significantly overstated by some organisations, though it is generally recognised that buddy and team diving, when performed as specified in the manuals, will enhance safety to some extent depending on circumstances.

Some divers, typically those with advanced underwater skills , prefer solo diving over buddy diving and acknowledge responsibility for their own safety.

[ 2 ] One of the more controversial reasons given being the uncertain competence of arbitrarily allocated dive buddies imposed on divers by service providers protected from liability by waivers. Others simply prefer solitude while communing with nature, or find the burden of continuously monitoring another person reduces their enjoyment of the activity, or engage in activities which are incompatible with effective buddy diving practices, and accept the possibility of slightly increased risk, just as others accept the increased risk associated with deeper dives, planned decompression, or penetration under an overhead.

The recreational solo diver uses enhanced procedures, skills and equipment to mitigate the risks associated with not having another competent diver immediately available to assist if something goes wrong. The skills and procedures may be learned through a variety of effective methods to achieve appropriate competence, including formal training programmes with associated assessment and certification. Recreational solo diving, once discouraged by most training agencies, has been accepted since the late 1990s [ 3 ] by some agencies that will train and certify experienced divers skilled in self-sufficiency and the use of redundant backup scuba equipment . In most countries there is no legal impediment to solo recreational diving, with or without certification.

Definition [ edit ] Solo diving is defined as diving planned to be conducted entirely or partly without a buddy.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The term may also be applied to dives that begin with a buddy but continue after separation, and to dives where other divers are nearby but are either not responsible for the safety of the solo diver, or known not to be competent to deal with the consequences of a foreseeable contingency. The term has also been used to describe dives where buddies are insufficiently attentive or close enough to function effectively as a buddy pair, [ 6 ] a situation commonly referred to as "same ocean buddy diving".

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The term is not used for diving where at least one of the buddies consistently strives to remain together and assist the other in an emergency, but fails in one or both of these goals, or dives where a buddy pair is split by a developing emergency which they are unable to manage.

Self-sufficiency [ edit ] To be acceptably safe, solo divers must be self-sufficient, well trained , prepared, practiced and prudent.

[ 9 ] They should have a completely redundant set of all life support equipment – a complete, self-contained backup breathing gas supply sufficient to return to the surface from any point of the planned dive profile. In addition, responsible solo divers adhere to a relatively conservative dive profile , both in depth and level of difficulty. Unlike the buddy system, which can encourage divers to rely on others in the event of an emergency, solo diving encourages divers to prepare themselves to overcome emergencies by their own efforts. The divers who engage in solo diving are typically those who are experienced, equipped and skilled enough to handle problems themselves. Solo divers must feel comfortable and relaxed in doing this sort of diving, and nobody should seriously consider diving solo if they are not both competent and comfortable in doing so.

[ 10 ] [ 6 ] History [ edit ] The history of solo diving stands in stark contrast to the relatively new concept of buddy diving that was developed for recreational diving in the early to mid-20th century.

[ 11 ] Artifacts dating back some 4,500 years provide evidence of solo diving for food and commerce by the ancient people of Mesopotamia .

[ 1 ] [ 6 ] There are written accounts from 2nd century BC that describe commercial sponge fishing, including notes about sponge divers, their lifestyle and fear of predatory sharks.

[ 12 ] In 350 BC, Aristotle wrote about "an 'elephant nose-like tube' that allowed sponge fishermen to breathe during diving", [ 12 ] and in 8th–6th century BC, there are references to solo diving in the writings of Homer .

[ 1 ] Freedivers traditionally dived alone or with an attendant on the surface to assist with the harvest, and many of the early diving bells were only large enough for a single occupant. When surface supplied diving was first developed, it was common to have only one diver unless the work required more. Those early traditions continue and customarily include a standby diver, and a working diver who is in constant communication with the surface control crew.

[ 13 ] The sport of scuba diving is rooted in a multitude of small enthusiastic snorkelling and spearfishing clubs that date back to the decades just before and after World War II .

[ 14 ] : ch.12 In the late 1940s, after the invention of the Aqua-lung by Cousteau and Gagnan , the first retail underwater breathing apparatus for sport was commercially marketed. As the sport expanded through the 1950s, several sporting organisations – notably the Young Men's Christian Association ( YMCA ) – began scuba training programmes for swimming enthusiasts, thus began the codification of what was believed to be proper practices for the expanding amateur sport of scuba diving.

[ 14 ] : 292–295 The buddy system was thought to be a useful corollary to the "never swim alone" edicts of the YMCA swimming and lifesaving programmes. Cousteau independently implemented a buddy system after a number of harrowing diving incidents that date back to the earliest days of exploratory scuba diving.

[ 15 ] The buddy system's useful aspects have long been established, including the cross-checking of equipment before dives, the facilitating of assistance for possible entanglement problems or equipment failures, and enhancement of the social nature of diving. The YMCA was a substantial influence in the development of diver certification during the first 50 years of the sport. As various scuba programmes were adopted by emerging scuba certification agencies, such as the National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI), Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI), and British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC), the practise of buddy diving inspired one of the two main mantras of recreational scuba: "never hold your breath" and "never dive alone".

[ 16 ] [ 6 ] By the early to mid-1990s, solo divers became more visible and increasingly open about their alternative dive safety philosophy, despite the recreational industry's established adherence to the buddy system.

[ 6 ] It wasn't until 2001 that Scuba Diving International (SDI) initiated formal certification training specifically for solo diving.

[ 17 ] Several other agencies eventually followed suit with certificates titled Self-reliant Diver and variations of that theme; all with the intention of improving diver competence without necessarily going solo, and recognising that the buddy system does not always comply with the ideal.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] At the 2012 "Rebreather Forum 3", a significant minority of attendees were of the opinion that, in some circumstances, it would be acceptable to dive solo on rebreathers.

[ 21 ] Reasons for solo scuba diving [ edit ] An underwater photographer intent on the composition of his next photograph The intention of using the buddy system when scuba diving is to improve the chances of avoiding or surviving accidents in or underwater .

[ 6 ] Diving together in close groups of two or sometimes three divers, and co-operating with each other to help or perform a rescue in an emergency situation may save a life; [ 22 ] however, it is most effective when each buddy is competent in all the relevant skills and remains consistently and sufficiently aware in order to respond in time.

[ 10 ] [ 23 ] [ 6 ] Some divers, such as instructors , are effectively acting as self-sufficient divers because they dive with students who may not yet be trained in or capable of rescue .

[ 24 ] [ 6 ] Others, such as underwater photographers and videographers , dive solo as it allows them to focus more on capturing selected images rather than relying on buddies to remain close at hand. Photographers or videographers who dive with buddies are often effectively "same ocean" buddies, implying they may be far enough apart physically, or sufficiently focused on their camera-related tasks, to be ineffective as a designated dive buddy. This practice has led to many highly experienced underwater photographers diving solo since they don't commit to provide timely support to a buddy nor expect such support from a buddy.

[ 10 ] [ 23 ] Underwater hunters often elect to dive solo in order to focus on their prey.

[ 9 ] [ 6 ] Solo diving was considered technical diving by most recreational diver certification agencies and discouraged as more dangerous than buddy diving, but many experienced divers and some certification agencies [ 3 ] [ 2 ] consider it an acceptable practice for suitably trained, equipped, and competent recreational divers; [ 9 ] some others consider it occasionally inevitable.

[ 25 ] In place of relying on the buddy diving safety system, solo divers try to be self-sufficient and are willing to take responsibility for their own safety while diving.

[ 24 ] [ 3 ] [ 2 ] The first training agency to offer a Solo diver certification was SDI in 1999. In 2011, the Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) started offering a solo specialty called "Self-Reliant Diver", [ 19 ] which in many respects (entry requirements, for example) is very similar to the course offered by SDI.

[ 19 ] [ 26 ] In professional diving, solo diving is normal procedure when one diver is sufficient to perform the required task, particularly on surface supplied equipment, to the extent that it is not even noted as an exception. However, a standby diver is required at the surface or at the bell, the working diver must be in communication with the supervisor at the surface, and the diver's airway is relatively secure in a helmet or full-face mask. Procedures for the dive are based on assessed risk.

[ 13 ] In recreational diving, solo diving is an option chosen by the diver, for any combination of several reasons.

[ 6 ] Solo divers don't need to work around a buddy's diving schedule, and can dive when no trusted and familiar buddy is available.

[ 6 ] Some divers will dive in a buddy pair if diving with a known and trusted buddy but otherwise dive solo in preference to being paired up with a potentially unreliable, incompetent, or otherwise dangerous partner.

[ 2 ] In the United States, the added risk of becoming a respondent in litigation in the event of a diving accident with such a "dangerous buddy" can be a motivation to dive alone.

[ 27 ] [ 6 ] The diver may simply prefer to dive alone.

[ 2 ] Diving professionals Wes Skiles and Ken Loyst, among others, take pleasure in the solitude of solo diving and in the feeling of self-sufficiency for this style of diving, that one is not dependent on others, but is relying solely on one's own skills and capabilities.

[ 28 ] [ 6 ] Other experienced professionals, including Bret Gilliam and Darren Webb, enjoy the sense of freedom, of not being impeded by the need to look after anyone but oneself and therefore being able to achieve one's own goal in the dive without compromising.

[ 29 ] There are divers who enjoy specific underwater activities but are unable to find anyone who shares the specific interest sufficiently to dive with them, and where the activity is incompatible with a less than dedicated buddy. The option of simply not diving is not a practical solution, as the diver is then almost permanently prevented from pursuing the interest. Diving with buddies who get bored or tired quickly also does not lead to enhanced enjoyment for either party. When the underwater activity is of interest only to one person, diving solo is the only option that allows the activity to be undertaken.

[ 9 ] [ 6 ] When photographing or shooting video of shy animals which are easily disturbed, it is more likely to be successful if there is only one diver potentially disturbing the subjects.

[ 23 ] [ 6 ] The disturbance can also be reduced by buddy diving on rebreathers , which cuts down on bubble noise, but at the cost of increased risk due to the inherently higher number of failure modes characteristic of rebreathers. It is not clear which system has the lower overall risk.

[ 4 ] Most scuba depth records are set by solo divers. There is usually a substantial backup team on site and standing by, but for the record breaking part of the dive, the diver is almost always alone, and beyond the reasonable expectation of rescue.

[ 30 ] Comparison to alternative systems [ edit ] See also: Buddy diving Scuba diving is done in a hostile environment for which humans are not adapted, breathing from a portable and limited capacity life support system. Under these conditions fatality is always a possible outcome, as even simple equipment or procedural problems can be mishandled. In dealing with this reality a number of major concerns about potentially inherent flaws or negative impacts that can exist within the buddy system have been identified.

[ 10 ] Few, if any, of these problems are defects in the concept of the buddy system, they are problems with the application of the system.

[ 10 ] [ 6 ] Arguments in favour of solo diving [ edit ] The amount of discipline, effort and attention needed from both divers in a buddy pair, and the even greater input required in a three diver team, is unattractive to a confident diver who has other things to do during a straightforward, low risk, recreational dive, and the system is undermined when any one of the divers fails to put in the effort, putting the burden on the remaining diver who takes the responsibilities more seriously. Familiarity with the environment, and the very low incidence of life-threatening accidents is likely to lead to a confidence that there will not be a problem on any given dive, so the divers may pay less attention to good buddy practices, and this may become habitual . This may be exacerbated by the divers being strangers thrown together by chance and the whims of the divemaster, who have no real interest in each other, and whose reasons to dive may be incompatible.

[ 10 ] [ 6 ] [ 23 ] Pairing an explorer with a macro photographer will annoy at least one, probably both, if they comply with recommended buddy diving practices.

[ 31 ] Many nominally buddy dives effectively become solo dives soon after entering the water, with the buddies occasionally checking for the presence of each other and often being beyond direct view of each other. In spite of this, very few of these divers die as a consequence.

[ 10 ] Critics of the buddy system [ 32 ] [ 10 ] [ 6 ] state that the proponents project the image of a "totally reliable buddy" that does not generally exist in reality.

[ 23 ] Some buddies lack skills or experience and some are unfit, and some personality types are outright dangers; these types have been described as "the untrained diver", "the high-flyer", "the falsely confident diver", "the angry diver", [ 32 ] "the buddy from hell" [ 10 ] and several others. The bad buddy problem is compounded by training that pressurises the diver to "stick with his buddy" at all times, [ 2 ] leading to the situation that the bad buddy sets the criteria of how (badly) the dive is carried out. The solo diver avoids this problem altogether.

[ 32 ] [ 6 ] Advantages of buddy and team diving [ edit ] There are disadvantages to solo diving that are not seriously disputed. Many of them occur in comparison with buddy diving when it is done according to the theoretically accepted standards, not necessarily when those standards are observed in name alone. In recreational scuba diving, the presence of a competent and attentive buddy can provide advantages to a diver who experiences any of a range of incidents which may be difficult or impossible to manage alone.

[ 33 ] These are all advantages to the diver in trouble, and at best, inconveniences to the buddy, as assisting another diver almost always increases risk to the rescuer.

[ 6 ] [ 34 ] Situations where a competent buddy can make a real difference include: Some types of medical emergency involving a reduced state of consciousness or major disorientation Situations where excessive exertion or a medical condition reduces the diver's capacity to cope.

Some types of entrapment, particularly entanglement where the diver cannot see or reach the point of attachment to the snag Emergencies where the backup equipment also fails.

Situations where the diver is physically or psychologically unable to cope alone.

Teamwork may also simplify and facilitate tasks and save time in specific circumstances such as penetration diving in caves and wrecks.

[ 33 ] Risks and their mitigation [ edit ] The generic risks of recreational scuba diving include: [ 23 ] : 15–18 running out of breathing gas equipment failure and inappropriate response loss of buoyancy control causing uncontrolled rapid ascent or inability to ascend unawareness of decompression status, causing missed decompression.

inability to return to the surface – getting lost under an overhead, or physically trapped overestimating ability to successfully complete a dive – including environmental, physical fitness and medical concerns.

medical emergencies in a hostile environment.

These risks can be reduced and the consequences mitigated by correct application of knowledge, skills, fitness and equipment. Where a single point of failure is likely to seriously compromise safety, redundant equipment can be carried, and the skills learned to effectively use the equipment without undue delay.

[ 23 ] There has been much disagreement over the relative safety and merits of solo diving.

[ 2 ] Up to 2003, very few statistics existed regarding the impact of solo diving on safety, as the subject had not been specifically studied.

[ 35 ] A 2006 report from the British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) concluded that "BSAC currently takes the view that based on evidence from available statistics and risk assessment, the increased risk attendant to allowing planned solo diving is unacceptable".

[ 36 ] The data underlying the statistics which are used to point to the dangers of solo diving are questionable: for example, divers who end up dying alone but originally had started out as part of a buddy pair are often considered to be "diving solo" in such statistics, but whether the separation was a consequence of the triggering incident rather than a cause is not analyzed.

[ 10 ] Studies have shown that with fatal buddy diving incidents, 57% of deaths happened after the buddy pair had separated from one another during the emergency. These cases could be attributed to failure of the buddy system rather than failure of any solo diving or self-sufficient diving system.

[ 37 ] A further complication in such statistics is that certain more dangerous diving activities such as cave diving , are frequently carried out solo, and, it is questionable whether a death in these circumstances should be attributed to solo diving, or to cave diving, or to a combination of these factors. Analysis of the figures used by BSAC to categorise solo diving as dangerous shows that during 2001–2008 all but one of these "solo diving deaths" were actually paired buddy divers who became separated during or before the fatal incident (75%), or else were divers diving far outside of the limits set by both SDI and PADI for the practice of solo diving (20%) (i.e. deep dives, rebreather dives, and/or cave dives, as well as being solo dives). Two further "solo-diving deaths" were not scuba divers at all, but snorkellers .

[ 10 ] In almost all circumstances, two highly competent, totally self-sufficient divers diving a specific dive profile as a buddy pair are at lower risk than those same two divers diving exactly the same profile separately, but this raises the questions "how often do normal buddy divers both really fit into this particular description", [ 6 ] "How much additional risk is incurred", and "Which option gives the diver the most advantage overall, considering both risk and reward"?  When considering the risks in solo diving the alternative risks found predominantly in buddy diving should also be considered. The greatest risk factor in recreational diving is inexperience – 60% of all diving fatalities involve divers having less than 20 completed dives.

[ 38 ] The buddy system itself can be a source of risk – a 2006 survey showed that 52% of buddy divers were at some time actually endangered by a buddy's behavior or actions.

[ 34 ] As part of mitigating risks in solo diving the following specific practices have been adopted by SDI for solo diving or are key recommendations by Robert von Maier—author of the 1991 book Solo Diving: The Art of Underwater Self-Sufficiency : [ 9 ] [ 39 ] All solo diving is to be done within recreational dive limits (no deep, decompression, penetration, or rebreather dives while solo).

[ 39 ] [ 9 ] No dives which significantly exceed one's personal experience limits are to be undertaken while solo [ 9 ] [ 39 ] No solo dives are to be undertaken in areas where there are known hazards of entanglement/entrapment [ 40 ] Solo dives will only be undertaken to depths at which the bailout system used carries an acceptable level of risk, the appropriate equipment is carried, and where the relevant bailout procedures have been practiced successfully by the diver.

[ 9 ] [ 39 ] The solo diver's maximum distance to point of exit (shore, boat) will never exceed a distance that can be easily and comfortably swum at the surface in full scuba gear – and the diver will maintain and exercise his/her navigational practices in solo dives to ensure that this is the case.

[ 9 ] [ 39 ] A solo diver needs to be particularly aware of overall personal fitness and health and the limitations it may impose on their ability to manage an emergency.

[ 10 ] Finally, the solo diver may plan a more conservative dive than they might dive with an equally competent buddy diver.

[ 9 ] Equipment [ edit ] While there are hazards specifically associated with solo diving, most of these can be planned for and their consequences mitigated by the use of appropriate equipment. In technical diving , where redundancy of critical equipment is standard policy, self-sufficiency is emphasised and taught more extensively than in most recreational diving. This philosophy should also be followed by solo divers.

[ 10 ] Additional equipment carried may include a bailout gas supply, a backup dive computer, a backup dive light and a backup dive mask. The diver must be familiar with the equipment configuration used and be able to access the equipment easily if it is needed.

[ 10 ] A solo diver operating beyond the range for acceptable risk for a controlled emergency swimming ascent needs to carry a second, independent source of suitable breathing gas, which includes a regulator and preferably a submersible pressure gauge. This emergency gas supply typically takes the form of a bailout cylinder , or a twin tank set with the capability of independent operation of each tank. Most of the equipment needed for solo diving is the same as that which would be used for buddy diving the same dive profile at the same place. The single most important item of additional equipment required is the redundant breathing gas supply, which must be sufficient to get the diver safely to the surface from any point of the planned dive. There is more than one way to achieve this, and they each have their advantages and disadvantages.

[ 6 ] [ 23 ] : Ch6 Isolation-manifolded twin cylinders . The standard technical diving back mount configuration allows access to all the gas through either regulator, but the valves may be difficult to reach for the less supple diver, and it must be possible to reach the isolation valve to shut it off in case of a catastrophic leak. It is heavy and bulky, and requires a suitable harness and BCD.

Back mounted Independent twin cylinders are also heavy and bulky, and require a suitable harness and BCD. Enough gas to surface safely must be left in each cylinder at all times.

Sidemount with two cylinders. This arrangement is standard for sidemount diving. It requires a suitable harness and BCD. Enough gas to surface safely must be left in each cylinder at all times.

Single back mounted primary cylinder with a cylinder mounted pony bailout set. This is convenient when in the water and keeps the bailout set out of the way, but makes the scuba set heavier than a single when out of the water, and may need trim weights for lateral balance. Accessibility of the pony cylinder valve must be appropriate. Enough gas to surface safely must be left in each cylinder until the ascent is started.

Single back mounted primary cylinder with side-slung bailout set . Reasonably convenient, easily accessible demand valve, pressure gauge and valve knob, but the bailout can get in the way a bit and mounting the cylinder takes a bit of practice. The arrangement is very portable between dives, as the same bailout set can be used for a large number of dives without any modification, adjustment, or need to refill. Trim weight may be needed for lateral balance. Size can be whatever is available - as long as it is sufficient and is not too heavy. Even an aluminium 80 can be comfortably carried this way by a moderately large diver. An aluminium 40 is enough for almost any recreational dive, and is one of the more popular options for acceptable bulk and buoyancy, and remains useful for most recreational dive profiles even when partly used.

Harness mounted " spare air " type miniature bailout set. These are light and compact but carry a very limited gas supply and are only suitable for fairly shallow dives. An advantage is that they can easily be refilled from a primary gas cylinder on site.

Other more complex arrangements of three or more cylinders are possible, but not usually of any advantage for recreational solo diving. Arrangements using H- and Y-valved back gas cylinders with two first stages may be useful if there is a significant risk of regulator freezing, but do not provide full redundancy. For solo diving an octopus regulator is not needed, as it is intended for supplying gas to another diver, [ 23 ] : Ch6 though some consider a secondary regulator on the primary gas supply valuable as a backup in case of primary regulator malfunction.

[ 6 ] An alternative ascent system may be required (as in Queensland, Australia), and is a useful safety adjunct in many situations both in solo and buddy diving, where better control of ascent rate is desirable. In Queensland law it is defined as "A highly visible buoyancy device such as a delayed surface marker buoy that provides a submerged diver with an ascent line that the diver may follow to the surface and use to complete any decompression requirements." [ 41 ] Training [ edit ] The core objective in training to be a solo diver is to become as self-sufficient and self-reliant as possible, to be able to deal with any reasonably foreseeable problems without assistance, and to have the competence, fitness, discipline, skills and equipment that will achieve this result.

[ 6 ] This requires competence at risk-assessment and the ability to plan dives and select equipment that limit the risks.

[ 25 ] An additional benefit of these disciplines is that they will improve the safety of buddy diving whenever the competent solo diver pairs up with another diver in a buddy team by reducing the risk of the second diver being exposed to an emergency which they may not be capable of managing. Agencies training solo divers also recommend the self-sufficiency training in their courses for all divers as their diving experience grows, so as to achieve greater safety in all diving – buddy and solo.

[ 26 ] Solo divers are taught to extend their experience gradually, and to ensure that they remain within their personal comfort zone where possible. This reduces the risk of excessive task loading and possible panic reaction to an otherwise manageable contingency. This is not unique to solo diver training, it is a common training practice for any hazardous activity, but when exposing oneself to circumstances where there is no backup it is more important. This means that changes to environment, depth, or equipment are best made one at a time, and in reasonably small steps, so that the diver can become familiar with one small change in circumstances before adding another. Simulating emergencies for practice and ensuring that one's response is prompt, appropriate and effective will reduce the risk of inappropriate response if the real emergency occurs.

[ 23 ] : Ch4 Formal solo diving training as provided by SDI emphasises the need for experience and maturity in diving. In particular the student prerequisites for the solo diving certification course are: [ 39 ] a minimum age of 21 years a minimum certification of SDI Advanced Diver (or equivalent) proof of a minimum of 100 logged open-water dives depending on the country – a certificate of medical fitness to dive .

Another item which is very useful for the solo diver is the delayed surface marker buoy (DSMB) with a reel or spool suited to the depth of the planned dive. The primary function is to mark the position of the ascending diver, but it can also be used to control ascent rate, and to mitigate buoyancy loss malfunctions. A secondary use is to control ascent rate in case of a positive buoyancy event due to loss of ballast weights.

[ 25 ] Self-reliance skills [ edit ] Besides competence in the standard set of scuba skills , there are a few more advanced self-reliance and self-rescue skills required by some of the training agencies. The diver should be able to select and correctly use all equipment needed for the dive, including self-extrication gear for cutting loose from entanglement. A solo diver needs to be able to prepare, dress in and check all equipment used without buddy assistance.

[ 39 ] [ 25 ] The diver must have an acceptable alternative breathing gas configuration, redundant gauges and/or computers, DSMB and reel, compass, and depending on the certification agency and training centre, signalling device and line cutting device. During the course tests are conducted on swimming skills and swimming endurance, scuba skills associated with solo diving such as the use of redundant air and bailout to emergency gas supply, navigation skills and dive planning skills, and breathing gas management.

[ 39 ] [ 25 ] The CMAS Self-Rescue Diver training includes the deployment of colour-coded DSMBs – red for position indication, and yellow to indicate a problem, the use of a ratchet dive reel to control ascent rate in the event of unplanned positive buoyancy due to loss of weights – the end of the line is fastened to a heavy object on the bottom, and deployed under tension to control depth, and the use of a backup mask.

[ 25 ] Certifications in solo and self-reliant diving [ edit ] Several diver certification organisations offer training and certification in solo and self reliant diving skills, in some cases tailored for a particular type of diving environment: CDG – ( Cave Diving Group ) – the UK organisation prepares divers for solo cave diving in sub-optimum conditions as part of their cave diving skills requirement.

[ 42 ] CMAS – ( Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) – Self-Rescue Diver : [ 18 ] prerequisite – Two star diver.

[ 25 ] DIWA – ( Diving Instructor World Association ) – Self-reliant diver: prerequisite – Advanced open-water diver.

[ 43 ] SDI – ( Scuba Diving International ) – Solo diver: prerequisite – SDI Advanced Diver or equivalent, 21 years of age, 100 logged dives.

[ 44 ] IANTD – ( International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers ) – Self-sufficient diver: prerequisite – IANTD Deep Diver or equivalent.

[ 20 ] PADI – ( Professional Association of Diving Instructors ) – Self Reliant Diver: prerequisites: Advanced Open Water Diver, at least 18 years old and 100 logged dives.

[ 19 ] ProTec – ( Professional Technical and Recreational Diving ) – Self Reliant Diver [ 45 ] and Solo Diver: [ 46 ] Prerequisites for both: 1* Diver, at least 18 years old, 100 logged dives, having "good diving fitness" (not defined).

RAID – ( Rebreather Association of International Divers ) – Independent Diver:  A recreational  program for no-decompression open-circuit diving. Prerequisites: certified diver with at least 50 hours or 100 logged dives.

[ 47 ] SSI – ( Scuba Schools International ) – Independent Diving: prerequisites:	Night & Limited Visibility, Navigation, Deep Diving and Stress & Rescue Certification.

[ 48 ] Legal status [ edit ] In most countries there is no government regulation of recreational diving and solo diving is at the discretion of the diver in publicly accessible waters.

[ 6 ] There are some exceptions: In the Republic of Maldives , recreational solo diving is illegal under any circumstances, as is recreational diving to depths greater than 30 m and any recreational diving which requires decompression stops.

[ 49 ] In Israel , a person may not take part in a recreational scuba dive unless accompanied by at least one other qualified diver.

[ 50 ] In Queensland, Australia , solo diving is specifically recognised and provided for in the state legislation under the Recreational Diving, Recreational Technical Diving and Snorkelling Code of Practice, 2024 (previously 2011), for qualified and appropriately equipped divers.

[ 51 ] [ 41 ] See also [ edit ] Buddy check – Pre-dive safety checks carried out by two-diver dive teams Buddy diving – Practice of mutual monitoring and assistance between two divers Dive leader – Recreational diving certification and role Dive planning – Process of planning an underwater diving operation Diving procedures – Standardised methods of doing things that are known to work effectively and acceptably safely Diving safety – Risk management of underwater diving activities Rescue Diver – Recreational scuba certification emphasising emergency response and diver rescue Scuba skills – Skills required to scuba-dive safely References [ edit ] ^ a b c "A Brief History of Diving: Free Divers, Bells and Helmets - Scuba Diving - Dive Training Magazine" .

Scuba Diving - News, Gear, Education | Dive Training Magazine .

Archived from the original on 14 September 2018 . Retrieved 13 September 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g Halstead, Bob (September 1997). "Assume the risk and take the blame".

SPUMS Journal .

27 (3): 153– 4.

^ a b c Lewis, Steve .

SDI Solo Diver Manual . Scuba Diving International.

^ a b Lonne, Torben.

"Solo Diving: Would You?" .

Safety in diving . DIVE.in.

Archived from the original on 24 February 2017 . Retrieved 23 February 2017 .

^ "Learn more about diving alone" .

DIVE.in . 11 July 2011.

Archived from the original on 24 February 2017 . Retrieved 23 September 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y Brylske, Alex (1994).

"Solo Diving: Perspectives on going it alone" . Dive Training magazine.

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .

^ Francis, John (19 October 2006).

"Buddy System Breakdown" . Scuba diving.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2017 . Retrieved 15 October 2017 .

^ Layton, Rick (15 July 2012).

"When The Buddy System Fails" . DAN Europe.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2017 . Retrieved 15 October 2017 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j von Maier, Robert (2002).

Solo Diving, The Art of Underwater Self-Sufficiency (2nd ed.). Aqua Quest Publications. p.

128 .

ISBN 1-881652-28-9 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Powell, Mark (October 2011).

"Solo Diving—Coming out of the Closet" .

Seminar: Dive 2011 Birmingham . Dive-Tech.

Archived from the original on 22 October 2019 . Retrieved 18 August 2016 .

^ Booth, Tony (6 October 2007).

Admiralty Salvage in Peace and War 1906 – 2006: Grope, Grub and Tremble . Pen and Sword. p. 9.

ISBN 978-1-78337-470-0 .

^ a b Pronzato, Roberto; Manconi, Renata (2008).

"Mediterranean commercial sponges: over 5000 years of natural history and cultural heritage" .

Marine Ecology .

29 (2). Wiley: 146– 166.

Bibcode : 2008MarEc..29..146P .

doi : 10.1111/j.1439-0485.2008.00235.x .

ISSN 0173-9565 .

^ a b "Diving Regulations 2009" .

Occupational Health and Safety Act 85 of 1993 – Regulations and Notices – Government Notice R41. Annexure B – Minimum manning levels . Pretoria: Government Printer. Archived from the original on 4 November 2016 . Retrieved 3 November 2016 – via Southern African Legal Information Institute.

^ a b Dugan, James (1965).

Man Under the Sea . Collier Books.

Library of Congress Number: 64-18390 ^ Hanna, Nick (2006).

The Art of Diving . Ultimate Sports Publications. p. 107.

ISBN 0-9545199-2-2 . Archived from the original on 13 September 2011.

^ Brennan, Michael (1970).

Underwater Swimming . Mayflower Books. pp.

49– 52.

ISBN 978-0-583-19608-6 .

^ Taylor, David (19 October 2006).

"Solo Certification: It's Time" . Scuba Diving magazine.

Archived from the original on 20 May 2015 . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .

Originally published in Rodale's Scuba diving: An interview with Brian Carney, Training Manager, Scuba Diving International.

^ a b "Self-Rescue Diver Training Programme" .

CMAS .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2017 . Retrieved 12 April 2017 .

^ a b c d Staff (2016).

"PADI Self-Reliant Diver" .

Distinctive Specialty Courses . Professional Association of Diving Insructors.

Archived from the original on 20 September 2020 . Retrieved 22 February 2017 .

^ a b Staff (2010).

"IANTD Self-Sufficient Diver (OC, SCR, CCR)" .

IANTD Tek Lite Programs . IANTD. Archived from the original on 4 June 2016 . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

^ Mitchell, Simon J. (18–20 May 2012). Vann, Richard D.; Denoble, Petar J.; Pollock, Neal W. (eds.).

Rebreather Forum 3 Consensus (PDF) . Rebreather Forum 3 Proceedings. Durham, North Carolina: AAUS/DAN/PADI. pp.

287– 302.

ISBN 978-0-9800423-9-9 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2014 . Retrieved 31 January 2018 .

^ Halstead, B. (2000).

"Line dancing and the buddy system. reprinted with permission from Dive Log 1999; 132(July): 52-54" .

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

30 (1).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 . Archived from the original on 16 April 2013 . Retrieved 5 September 2008 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Scuba Diving International (2007). Brian Carney (ed.).

SDI Solo Diving Manual . Scuba Diving International.

ISBN 978-1-931451-50-5 .

^ a b DAN SA Legal Team (23 June 2016).

"Waivers, Children & Solo Diving" .

Legal tips . Divers Alert Network South Africa.

Archived from the original on 20 December 2016 . Retrieved 4 December 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g Staff (4 March 2014).

"CMAS Self-Rescue Diver" .

Standard Number: 2.B.31 / BOD no 181 ( 04-18-2013 ) . CMAS.

Archived from the original on 14 April 2017 . Retrieved 13 April 2017 .

^ a b Brian Carney, ed. (2011).

SDI Solo Diving Manual (2nd Revised ed.). Scuba Diving International. pp.

13– 18.

ISBN 978-1-931451-50-5 .

^ Coleman, Phyllis G. (2008).

"Scuba Diving Buddies: Rights, Obligations, and Liabilities" .

University of San Francisco Maritime Law Journal .

20 (1).

Archived from the original on 27 September 2012 . Retrieved 14 August 2011 .

^ von Maier, Robert (1991).

Solo Diving: The Art of Underwater Self-Sufficiency . Watersport Publishing. pp.

88– 89, 95.

ISBN 0-922769-13-3 .

[Wes Skiles:] The second primary reason I solo dive is to be alone, to be with myself and the underwater environment ... I enjoy facing fear and anxiety alone. When I do so successfully I feel more alive, more in control of myself ... [Ken Loyst:] There is a degree of pleasant solitude while diving alone.

^ von Maier, Robert (1991).

Solo Diving: The Art of Underwater Self-Sufficiency . Watersport Publishing. pp.

80– 81, 91.

ISBN 0-922769-13-3 .

[Bret Gilliam:] [In some situations] I prefer to dive solo and not bear the responsibility for another diver's safety. This allows me more personal and professional freedom in the circumstances of the dive and I derive more pleasure from the experience ... [Darren Webb:] Why solo dive? Because I'm not forced to depend on or be responsible for a dive partner. This extra freedom allows time to concentrate on just me and my objectives.

^ Lord, Jenny.

"Job Profile: Deep Support Diver" .

divemagazine.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2017 . Retrieved 10 November 2017 .

^ Mueller, Brandi (15 November 2015).

"Solo Diving" .

Opinions Articles from X-Ray Mag . X-Ray Mag.

Archived from the original on 25 April 2016 . Retrieved 23 February 2017 .

^ a b c Halstead, Bob.

"On Your Own: The Buddy System Rebutted" (PDF) . Anaspides.net. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 September 2016 . Retrieved 18 August 2016 .

^ a b Jablonski, Jarrod (2006).

Doing It Right: The Fundamentals of Better Diving . Global Underwater Explorers.

ISBN 0-9713267-0-3 .

^ a b Coutanche, Andrew Philip (2006).

"Does the buddy system really make recreational scuba diving any safer?" (PDF) .

Chilterns University College Thesis : 31. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 March 2012 . Retrieved 14 August 2011 .

^ Caruso, J.L.; Uguccioni, D.M.; Ellis, J.E.; Dovenbarger, J.A.; Bennett, Peter B. (2003).

"Buddy versus solo diving in fatal recreational diving accidents" .

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

30 (1 supplement). Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society.

ISSN 1066-2936 .

OCLC 26915585 . Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 23 July 2008 .

^ BSAC.

"BSAC Talk – Solo Diving" .

Archived from the original on 2 May 2010 . Retrieved 4 June 2011 .

^ Edmonds, Carl (2010). "4: Why Divers Die".

Diving Medicine for Scuba Divers (3rd ed.).

ISBN 978-0-646-52726-0 .

^ Elliot, D.; Bennett (1993).

Underwater Accidents, The Physiology and Medicine of Diving (4th ed.). W.B. Saunders. p. 240.

^ a b c d e f g h Staff (1 January 2018).

"Solo Diver" (PDF) .

SDI Instructor Manual - Specialties Standards Version 18.0 . Scuba Diving International. pp.

75– 78.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 June 2017 . Retrieved 15 October 2017 .

^ Gurr, Kevin (2002).

Technical Diving from the Bottom Up . Periscope Publishing. p. 19.

ISBN 1-904381-20-0 .

^ a b "Recreational Diving, Recreational Technical Diving and Snorkelling Code of Practice 2024" (PDF) .

www.worksafe.qld.gov.au/ . State of Queensland. 2024.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 November 2024 . Retrieved 20 February 2025 .

^ "Cave Diver Education & Qualification" .

www.cavedivinggroup.org.uk .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2017 . Retrieved 26 February 2019 .

^ Staff.

"Education system" . Diving Instructor World Association. Archived from the original on 23 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 September 2013 .

^ Staff.

"Solo Diver course" . Topham ME.: International Training.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2013 . Retrieved 30 September 2013 .

^ "Self Reliant" .

ProTec International Professional Technical & Recreational Diving .

Archived from the original on 25 April 2022 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 .

^ "Solo Diver" .

ProTec International Professional Technical & Recreational Diving .

Archived from the original on 16 April 2023 . Retrieved 25 April 2022 .

^ "Independent Diver Overview" .

diveraid.com . 19 March 2024 . Retrieved 11 March 2025 .

^ "Independent Diving: Description" .

www.divessi.com . Retrieved 29 May 2020 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Maldives Recreational Diving Regulation (PDF) . Ministry of Tourism, Republic of Maldives. 2003.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved 12 October 2019 .

^ "Recreational diving Act, 1979" (in Hebrew). Knesset. 1979.

Archived from the original on 1 October 2015 . Retrieved 16 November 2016 – via WikiSource.

^ "Recreational Diving, Recreational Technical Diving and Snorkelling Code of Practice 2011" (PDF) .

Queensland Government Gazette . The State of Queensland (Department of Justice and Attorney-General). 2 December 2011.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 March 2021 . Retrieved 23 March 2021 .

v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Solo_diving&oldid=1279904874 " Category : Underwater diving procedures Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from January 2020 Use dmy dates from January 2020 Good articles This page was last edited on 11 March 2025, at 07:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Solo diving 2 languages Add topic

