Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Museums Toggle Museums subsection 1.1 Europe 1.1.1 Northern Europe 1.1.2 Central Europe 1.1.3 Western Europe 1.1.4 Southern Europe 1.1.5 Eastern Europe 1.2 North America 1.3 Oceania 1.4 South America 2 Laboratories Toggle Laboratories subsection 2.1 Europe 2.2 North America 2.2.1 DOE Laboratories 2.2.2 Other Laboratories 3 Observatories Toggle Observatories subsection 3.1 Europe 3.2 North America 3.3 South America 3.4 Africa 3.4.1 South Africa 3.4.2 Namibia 4 Universities 5 Other 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Science tourism 5 languages العربية বাংলা Bahasa Indonesia Português Simple English Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "Science tourism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Travel to notable science locations Main articles: tourism and travel List of places for scientific tourism is a list of notable scientific places to visit worldwide. It covers interests in visiting and exploring scientific landmarks, including museums , laboratories , observatories and universities .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It also includes visits to see events of scientific interest, such as solar eclipses . A laboratory is a workplace and many have ongoing scientific research. They may not be open to the general public, or may only offer occasional special opportunities for public access. Many observatories are open to the public at regular hours, and have tours showcasing their astronomical research.

[ citation needed ] Museums [ edit ] Main articles: Science museum and List of science museums Europe [ edit ] Northern Europe [ edit ] Nobel Museum It has exhibitions about the Nobel Prize.

Sweden Solar System in greater Stockholm , contains the world's largest scale model of the Solar System.

Heureka in Vantaa is an interactive science museum, with different kinds of exhibitions about technology, physics, chemistry, medicine, astronomy and so on. Really exciting for children interested in science.

Central Europe [ edit ] Deutsches Museum Peenemünde – A place where the Germans developed some of the world's first rockets before and during WW2.

Marie Curie Museum – History of radioactivity Auto & Technik Museum in Sinsheim , Baden-Württemberg (southwestern Germany). Has interesting displays of many vintage and historic cars, motorcycles, other machinery, and an extensive collection of aircraft, including a Soviet Tu 144 and French/Britain Concorde.

Deutsches Museum – A museum of "everything technology" and more.  A scientific and technical museum and one of the most important sights in the Munich area, visited by roughly 1.5 million visitors per year.  Topics include brewing, computer sciences and bridge building.  There are guided tours on specific themes and in different languages.  There is a planetarium and two branch offices in other locations, which show vehicles that found no place in downtown Munich.

Zeppelin Museum in the city of Friedrichshafen offers a museum dedicated to zeppelins, and another to Dornier aircraft.

Western Europe [ edit ] Science Museum London The Down House – Charles Darwin lived here when he worked out the theory of evolution by natural selection.  Darwin wrote 'On the Origin of Species' in this house. The house has also carnivorous plants and exotic orchids.

James Clerk Maxwell's Birthplace and Museum – Edinburgh's answer to Newton and Einstein.  His equations unified the forces of Electricity and Magnetism and paved the way for Einstein's theory of special relativity.   Modern technology in electricity and electronics, derive from Maxwell's discovery of the laws of the electromagnetic field, bringing a fundamental change in concept that influenced greatly the modern scientific and industrial revolution." Southern Europe [ edit ] Leonardo da Vinci Museum of Science and Technology – Located in Milan . As the name tells, it is a museum to learn more about science and technology. Hosted in a former monastery, San Vittore al Corpo.

South Tyrol Museum of Archaeology Eastern Europe [ edit ] Memorial Museum of Cosmonautics in the outskirts of Moscow there are a couple of sites dedicated to the Soviet and Russian contributions to science and technology. These include the Memorial Museum of Cosmonautics , the All-Russia Exhibition Centre and the Monument to the Conquerors of Space .

Ostankino Tower – 540 m (1,770 ft) high concrete transmission tower, Ostankino Tower.

Akademgorodok – Out in the Siberian taiga near Novosibirsk , Akademgorodok (literally "academy town") was built during the Soviet era, so that the academic elite could conduct their research in relative freedom, prosperity, and isolation. The planned city with tree lined streets hosts several museums, institutes, as well as a beach on the Ob Sea, an artificial reservoir.

North America [ edit ] Exploratorium in San Francisco Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral - The launch site for NASA's space missions. All 12 persons who have traveled to the Moon so far have started their journeys from here.

National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C.

National Museum of Mathematics or MoMath in New York National Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C.

Space Center Houston in Webster, Texas - NASA space museum, plus tram tours of Johnson Space Center, including astronaut training facilities, Mission Control, and the actual Apollo and Mercury launch vehicles.

Ontario Science Centre in Toronto - Canada's first and largest Science Centre Oceania [ edit ] Powerhouse Museum – The Powerhouse Museum is a large museum, essentially of popular culture. It has displays on the history of fashion and transport, decorative arts, music, and space exploration exhibits. It also partly plays on a sci-tech theme, with interactive hands-on and discovery displays of technology, design and industry There is usually a special exhibition on as well. There are in-depth displays for all ages, but also displays especially created for young children to discover and play.

Questacon – an interactive museum of science with exhibits illustrating scientific ideas from the principles of physics to the motion of an earthquake. Great for kids and excellent science books can be picked up here. Allow at least half a day.

South America [ edit ] Alcântara in Northeast Brazil, is the rocket launch site for the Brazilian Space Agency, and hosts a museum on the site Kourou in French Guiana hosts the Guyana Space Centre, the primary rocket launch site for the European Space Agency.

Gold Museum in Bogotá , Colombia The Archeology Museum in Bogotá , Colombia Casa Marqués de San Jorge in Bogotá , Colombia Laboratories [ edit ] Europe [ edit ] Many European countries participate on the European Organization for Nuclear Research, which has his laboratories including the famous Large Hadron Collider on the French/Swiss border. Plus the bigger European countries like France, Germany, Italy and UK operate national laboratories. Most laboratories have open days for public visits.

CERN Aerial View of LHC accelerator and its experiments (Lake Geneva in the background) Commissariat à l'énergie atomique et aux énergies alternatives – The CEA has 5 divisions: nuclear energy, technological research, life sciences, sciences of matter and military applications. It has one of the top 100 supercomputers in the world, the Tera-100.

CEA Saclay – The biggest research center of the CEA hosts nuclear research reactors.

CERN – the European Organization for Nuclear Research, physicists and engineers are probing the fundamental structure of the universe. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is the world's largest experiment and most complex scientific accelerator. Founded in 1954, the CERN laboratory sits astride the Franco-Swiss border near Geneva . The weak force got discovered here in 1973 and in 1983 subsequently the W and Z bosons. In 1995 it created the first Anti-Hydrogen atoms of which the ASACUSA experiment can since 2014 produce a beam of. In 2012 the ATLAS and CMS experiment announced the discovery of a boson with 125 GeV, whose properties got confirmed to be the long-sought Higgs boson.

Microcosm – In front of the entrance of the CERN laboratory there is a permanent exposition retracing its history.

CERN Guided Tours – Both as individual or as group it is possible from time to time to visit the experiments.

DESY (Hamburg) FAIR Gran Sasso National Physical Laboratory – the birthplace of atomic timekeeping. In the 1950s, Louis Essen and John Parry constructed the atomic clock, Caesium Mk. 1. This new clock kept time more accurately. It paved the way for redefining the second in 1967, based on the fundamental properties of CS atoms, rather than the quite irregular Earth rotation. The facilities in Teddington are among the world's most extensive and sophisticated for measurement science.

Rutherford Appleton Laboratory – a national scientific research laboratories in the UK operated by the Science and Technology Facilities Council. It is a multidisciplinary centre for research both in physical and life sciences. It had in 1957 a 50 MeV proton linear accelerator. RAL hosts ISIS, a spallation neutron source and the Central Laser Facility. RAL organises a monthly public scientific lecture: Talking Science.

North America [ edit ] DOE Laboratories [ edit ] In the United States of America overseen by the United States Department of Energy (DOE) the Office of science operates ten national laboratories. In total there are 17 national laboratories funded by the DOE. Most of the sites hold open houses where the public can come in for free and see how American tax dollars are invested in research. This used to include nuclear facilities, but those have been restricted since 9/11.

Ames Laboratory – conducts research into various areas, including the synthesis and study of new materials, energy resources, high-speed computer design, and environmental cleanup and restoration. The Ames Project purpose was to produce high purity uranium for the Manhattan Project .  Its most notable faculty member Dan Shechtman won the 2011 Chemistry Nobel prize.  Individual visits and group tours can be arranged through the public affairs office.

Argonne National Laboratory – founded in 1946 to carry out Enrico Fermi's work on nuclear reactors as part of the Manhattan Project.  Today Argonne is a science and engineering research center.  Argonne welcomes visitors age 16 or older to take guided tours of the scientific and engineering facilities and grounds.  Tours last about two and a half hours and are by reservation only.

Brookhaven National Laboratory – a multipurpose research institution funded primarily by the U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Science. Located on the center of Long Island, New York, Brookhaven Lab operates large-scale facilities for studies in physics, chemistry, biology, medicine and applied science. It is the home of the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider , which first observed/created the Quark-Gluon-Plasma. Brookhaven scientists won 7 Nobel prizes including the Ribosome discovery (2009).  The lab is open to the public on Sundays during the summer for tours and special programs.

Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory – a US Department of Energy national laboratory specializing in high-energy particle physics. Hence many components of the Large Hadron Collider got engineered and tested here. The Top quark was discovered in 1995 by both the CDF and DØ experiments of the Tevatron accelerator at Fermilab. The 2008 Nobel prize was given for the prediction of the third generation of quarks (Bottom and Top quarks). Fermilab visitors are allowed to visit two buildings on their own: the first and ground floor of Wilson Hall and the Lederman Science Center, Groups of six or more must book a visit by calling the center.

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory – founded in 1931 by Ernest Orlando Lawrence. 13 Nobel prizes have been awarded to LBNL scientists, the most recent one (2011) for the discovery of the accelerated expansion of the Universe. It started as a particle physics laboratory, became involved for the study of nuclear matter and discovered 16 chemical elements. It is today a multi-program research site.

Oak Ridge National Laboratory – a multiprogram science and energy laboratory, with scientific and technical capabilities spanning from basic to applied research. ORNL is famous to host the Titan supercomputer. The Spallation Neutron Source is an accelerator-based neutron source facility that provides the most intense pulsed neutron beams in the world for scientific research and industrial development. Oak Ridge National Laboratory hosts thousands of visitors every year.

Pacific Northwest National Laboratory – has many research projects for the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the National Nuclear Security Administration.

Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory – researches plasma physics and nuclear fusion science. PPPL is located on Princeton University's Forrestal Campus. The free tours are led by engineers and physicists who can answer questions about magnetic fusion.

SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory – does experimental and theoretical research in elementary particle physics using electron beams and a broad program of research in atomic and solid-state physics, chemistry, biology, and medicine using synchrotron radiation. It discovered the charm quark, the quark structure inside the protons and neutrons and the tau lepton (3 Nobel prizes). At this time, all public and educational tours of the laboratory have been suspended. SLAC hopes to have them back and asks to check their website periodically for updates.

Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility – the Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility, which is 1400m in length and accelerates electrons up to 6 GeV. The most powerful free-electron laser in the world has an output of over 14 kilowatts. The lab has an open house once a year that includes a tour of the accelerator tunnel and the free electron laser.

Other Laboratories [ edit ] Biosphere 2 – designed as an artificially closed complete ecology, and was the setting for research on human interaction with natural systems. The site is now owned and maintained by the University of Arizona, which conducts tours for the public. Beware that the scientific credentials of the initial project phase are quite unclear as it started as theatre group. For example, no input was taken from the Antarctic research stations, where researchers experienced extreme confinement.

Observatories [ edit ] See also: Astronomy Europe [ edit ] ESO Supernova Planetarium & Visitor Centre – is an astronomy centre for the public located at the site of ESO Headquarters in Garching near Munich.

European Space Agency's Columbus Control Centre – used to control the Columbus research laboratory of the International Space Station, as well as a ground control centre for the Galileo satellite navigation system. It is located at a large research facility of the German Aerospace Centre. (DLR).

Stjerneborg observatory on Hven Island, Sweden - Tycho Brahe's observatory.

University Observatory Vienna – The Institute of Astronomy is part of the University of Vienna, located inside a historic building. The building and the Sternwartepark were closed for visitors up until recently. The park contains many rare trees. It has a mini observatory on the roof. Guided tours are available.

North America [ edit ] Mt Graham International Observatory – Operated by the University of Arizona and situated in the Pinaleño Mountains west of Safford , this observatory offers periodic tours for the public. Reservations required, preferably two or more weeks in advance. Tours depart from the Discovery Park Campus in Safford.

Kitt Peak National Observatory – Operates several astronomical telescopes plus a large solar telescope. Several guided tours are available, as well as a nightly observation program (reservations required).

McDonald Observatory Fred Lawrence Whipple Observatory Lowell Observatory – Among other historical achievements, this is the observatory where Clyde Tombaugh discovered Pluto.

NRAO Very Large Array – Huge radio telescope array featured in numerous films and TV shows, which still performs observations. Self-guided tour.

Green Bank Observatory – In the middle of the National Radio Quiet Zone , the Robert C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope is the largest fully steerable single dish radio telescope in the world.

South America [ edit ] While the headquarters of the European Southern Observatory are in Garching near Munich , Germany the observatories are located in northern Chile .

European Southern Observatory La Silla Observatory , Atacama Desert , Coquimbo Region , Chile.

[ 3 ] Paranal Observatory , Cerro Paranal , Chile.

[ 4 ] Atacama Large Millimeter Array /submillimeter Array, Llano de Chajnantor, Chile.

[ 5 ] Africa [ edit ] South Africa [ edit ] Southern African Large Telescope – The SALT telescope is largest single optical telescope in the southern hemisphere and among the largest in the world.

KAT-7 , MeerKAT , PAPER , and SKA Africa – The SKA Telescope is the most powerful telescope ever conceived. Its precursor, MeerKAT, is already the most powerful telescope every built. Most of it is to be built in Africa under the auspices of SKA Africa.  The African precursor, MeerKAT, is already the most powerful radio telescope every built.  The core of the telescope is located near Carnarvon, on the Northern Cape, with more dishes located in Botswana , Madagascar , Mozambique , Zambia , Namibia , Mauritius and Ghana .

South African Astronomical Observatory – The national centre for optical and infrared astronomy in South Africa.  The Observatory has a fascinating history dating back to 1820, which is when our main building was constructed, making it one of the oldest permanent structures in Cape Town.  Owing to light and air pollution in the city, most of the actual observing happens in Sutherland in the Northern Cape, about 380 km from Cape Town.  Some of the telescopes in Cape Town are still used for outreach and public events.

Namibia [ edit ] H.E.S.S. Telescope – One of the leading observatories studying very high energy (VHE) gamma-ray astrophysics.

Universities [ edit ] The most prestigious universities generally attract excellent scientists and have fine science programs. University campuses are usually open to the public, though permission from guards is sometimes required, and there may be some café or cafeteria or mensa or restaurant or even a university shop on site. Universities usually offer public lectures about ongoing research. Otherwise, their seminars and buildings are reserved for the students and the working faculty including post-doctoral researchers or professors. On weekends or holidays, many universities require special permits to enter. Universities compete on a worldwide basis; hence, they are not ordered by geographical position or alphabetized.

Other [ edit ] Boltzmann's grave – The Boltzmann equation was originally formulated by Ludwig Boltzmann between 1872 and 1875. It relates the entropy S of an ideal gas to the quantity W, which is the number of microstates corresponding to a given macrostate. In the ideal gas limit it exactly corresponds to the proper thermodynamic entropy.

Schwinger's grave – The first order correction to the fine structure constant (alpha) is engraved on Julian Schwinger's headstone at Mount Auburn Cemetery .

Schrödinger's grave – The Schrödinger equation is a partial differential equation that describes how the quantum state of some physical system evolves with time. It was formulated in late 1925. It is inscribed above his name on his grave site.

Hofmeyr Skull , The Hofmeyr Skull is a specimen of a 36,000-year-old skull found in the 1950s near Hofmeyr , South Africa. The samples age supports the so-called "Out of Africa" theory that modern humans evolved from Africa.

[ 6 ] Groote Schuur Hospital , On 3 December 1967, 53-year-old Lewis Washkansky received the first human heart transplant at Groote Schuur Hospital in Cape Town, South Africa. The procedure was performed by Christiaan Barnard .

See also [ edit ] Amateur astronomy Archaeological sites Birdwatching Ecotourism Geotourism Cultural landscape Industrial tourism List of astronomical observatories List of science museums Museums Northern lights Nuclear tourism Paleontology Protected areas Science park Science tourism (simple wiki) Solar eclipses Space Steam engine Volcanoes Urbex Wildlife observation References [ edit ] ^ Kujawinski, Peter (28 May 2018).

"Colliders, Sundials and Wonder: When Science Is Your Destination - At CERN in Switzerland and Fermilab in Illinois, there is always a sense of discovery — about the past, present and future. - Science Tourism - part 1 of 2" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 12 November 2018 .

^ Kujawinski, Peter (12 November 2018).

"Where Will Science Take Us? To the Stars - A monthlong visit to observatories in Chile, Hawaii and Los Angeles revealed spellbinding visions of the heavens. - Science Tourism - part 2 of 2" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 12 November 2018 .

^ "Weekend Visits to the La Silla Observatory" .

www.eso.org . Retrieved 17 March 2019 .

^ "Weekend visits to Paranal" .

www.eso.org . Retrieved 17 March 2019 .

^ "Public Visits to the ALMA OSF" .

www.eso.org . Retrieved 17 March 2019 .

^ supports the out of Africa-theory Content in this article was copied from Science tourism at Wikivoyage, which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 (Unported) (CC-BY-SA 3.0) license .

External links [ edit ] Science tourism at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage 5 Science destinations (OpenMinds; 2017) 8 Science destinations (Inverse; 2017) v t e Tourism Types Accessible Adventure Agritourism Alternative Astrotourism Atomic Backpacking Beachgoing Bicycle touring Birth Business Crime Culinary Enotourism Cultural Archaeological Film Literary Bookstore Tolkien Music Pop-culture Dark Disaster Holocaust War Domestic Ecotourism Shark Experiential Extreme Fashion Garden Genealogy Heritage Identity Geotourism Industrial Instagram tourism International Volunteering Jungle Justice LGBT Medical MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions) Nautical Orphanage Recreational drug Red Religious Christian Halal Kosher Pilgrimage Rural Science Sensory Sleep Slum Smart Space Lunar Sports Sustainable Urban Virtual Visiting friends and relatives Wellness Wildlife Safari Scuba Yoga Hospitality industry Bed and breakfast Boutique hotel Convention center Cruise ship Destination spa Front desk Guest house Guest ranch Heuhotel Homestay Hospitality management studies Hostel Hotel Manager Inn Motel Pension Referral chain Resort Hotel Island Seaside Ski Town Restaurant Terminology College tour Convention (meeting) Destination marketing organization Escorted tour Excursion Factory tour Gift shop Grand Tour Holiday Honeymoon Hypermobility Journey planner Package tour Passport Perpetual traveler Road trip Roadside attraction Souvenir Staycation Tour bus service Tour guide Tour operator Tourism geography Tourism minister Tourism region Tourist attraction Tourist gateway Tourist trap Touron Transport Travel Travel agency Travel behavior Travel document Travel insurance Travel medicine Travel survey Travel technology Travel visa Travel warning Vacation Visitor center Travel literature Guide book Outdoor literature Tourism journals Travel magazines Wikivoyage Trade associations American Bus Association American Hotel and Lodging Association American Hotel & Lodging Educational Institute BEST Education Network Caribbean Tourism Organization European Travel Commission Historical Archive on Tourism Life Beyond Tourism Musement Pacific Asia Travel Association South-East Asian Tourism Organisation Tourism Radio Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report World Federation of Travel Journalists and Writers World Tourism Organization World Tourism rankings World Travel and Tourism Council World Travel Monitor Trade fairs and events Akwaaba African Travel Market Arabian Travel Market Cruise of the Kings Festival del Viaggio FITUR ITB Berlin World Tourism Day Issues Heritage commodification Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on tourism Impacts of tourism Leakage effect Overtourism Tourism improvement district Tourist tax Lists Adjectival tourisms Attractions Bibliography Casino hotels Casinos Cities by international visitors Convention and exhibition centers Cruise lines Hotels Largest Motels Passenger airlines UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists World Heritage Sites by country Category v t e Space tourism Organizations Active Axiom Space Blue Origin Airbus D&S Mojave Aerospace Ventures Orbital Technologies PDAS Redwire Sierra Nevada Corporation Space Adventures SpaceX The Spaceship Company Virgin Galactic CAS Space ARCA Association of Autonomous Astronauts Astronaute Club Européen Commercial Spaceflight Federation Copenhagen Suborbitals Space Frontier Foundation Space Tourism Society Defunct Armadillo Aerospace Bigelow Aerospace Canadian Arrow Golden Spike Company MirCorp Orion Span PlanetSpace RocketShip Tours Space Island Group ( Space Island Project ) XCOR Aerospace Vehicles Current Soyuz Dragon 2 New Shepard Future New Glenn Starliner Starship Retired SpaceShipTwo Living in space Commercialization of space Space colonization Space medicine Space settlement Space station Suborbital spaceplane Space competitions America's Space Prize Ansari X Prize Google Lunar X Prize Space elevator competitions Space tourists Past Dennis Tito Mark Shuttleworth Gregory Olsen Anousheh Ansari Charles Simonyi Richard Garriott Guy Laliberté Oliver Daemen Jared Isaacman Sian Proctor Hayley Arceneaux Christopher Sembroski Yusaku Maezawa Yozo Hirano Larry Connor Mark Pathy Eytan Stibbe John Shoffner Space tourism missions Past Inspiration4 Blue Origin NS-16 Blue Origin NS-18 Blue Origin NS-19 Blue Origin NS-20 Blue Origin NS-21 Blue Origin NS-22 Blue Origin NS-25 Blue Origin NS-26 Blue Origin NS-28 Blue Origin NS-30 Blue Origin NS-31 Blue Origin NS-32 Blue Origin NS-33 Blue Origin NS-34 Galactic 02 Galactic 03 Galactic 04 Galactic 05 Galactic 06 Galactic 07 Axiom-1 Axiom-2 Polaris Dawn Fram2 Cancelled dearMoon Related Axiom Station Tourism on the Moon Tourism on Mars Haven-1 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐744bd5f668‐x4lwd
Cached time: 20250812123145
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.380 seconds
Real time usage: 0.517 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1593/1000000
Revision size: 24050/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 79339/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1455/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 40702/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.220/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7151977/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  397.382      1 -total
 22.98%   91.302      1 Template:Reflist
 20.89%   83.008      5 Template:Navbox
 18.85%   74.896      1 Template:Tourism
 16.91%   67.182      1 Template:Notability
 16.76%   66.584      2 Template:Cite_news
 14.02%   55.694      1 Template:Ambox
 10.84%   43.065      1 Template:Sister_project_links
  9.78%   38.863      1 Template:Short_description
  4.94%   19.620      1 Template:Convert Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:59034292:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812123145 and revision id 1290518043. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Science_tourism&oldid=1290518043 " Categories : American inventions Russian inventions Space tourism Types of tourism Hidden categories: Articles with topics of unclear notability from May 2025 All articles with topics of unclear notability Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 15 May 2025, at 08:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Science tourism 5 languages Add topic

