Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Vocabulary Toggle Vocabulary subsection 2.1 Mainstream 2.2 Casual 2.3 Jewish adaptation 2.4 Slavic languages 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents -nik Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English suffix from Slavic languages The English suffix -nik is of Slavic origin. It approximately corresponds to the suffix "-er" and nearly always denotes an agent noun (that is, it describes a person related to the thing, state, habit, or action described by the word to which the suffix is attached).

[ 1 ] In the cases where a native English language coinage may occur, the "-nik"-word often bears an ironic connotation, [ 2 ] as in the case of the terms coined for the failed rocket launch of the U.S. satellite rival to Sputnik , such as kaputnik, dudnik and flopnik among others.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] The suffix existed in English for a long time. An example is raskolnik , recorded by the Oxford English Dictionary as known since 1723.

[ 1 ] There have been two main waves of the introduction of this suffix into English language. The first was driven by Yinglish words contributed by Yiddish speakers from Eastern Europe . The second surge was observed after the launch of the first Sputnik satellite by the Soviet Union on October 4, 1957.

In the fourth edition of his book The American Language , H. L. Mencken (1880–1956) credited the mania for adding "-nik" to the ends of adjectives to create nouns to Al Capp 's American comic strip Li'l Abner (1934–1977) [ 4 ] rather than to the influence of "Sputnik", first recorded in 1957, [ 5 ] or "beatnik", first recorded in 1958.

[ 6 ] Vocabulary [ edit ] Mainstream [ edit ] Words of significant context or usage: Beatnik Chainik Potatonik , Jewish potato dish Refusenik Sputnik Casual [ edit ] Casual neologisms : Alrightnik: one who has been successful; nouveau riche , especially one who forgot his friends and origins; used as an insult [ 7 ] Artnik, a UK publisher (defunct); [ 8 ] the word predates its establishment Muttnik , the first dog in space Neatnik: a neat-freak Nogoodnik : a lazy, incompetent or malicious person Peacenik: a pacifist ; a hippie Wordnik Jewish adaptation [ edit ] Words originally used by Jews of Europe, America, and Israel, often referring to concepts related to their experiences or things happening in Israel or among the Jewish people: Chabadnik or Habadnik: follower of Chabad Kadimanik: member of United Synagogue Youth 's Kadima program Ka-tzetnik : a Nazi concentration camp prisoner or survivor, derived from abbreviation KZ, pronounced "Ka-tzet" Kibbutznik: member of a Kibbutz Lamedvavnik Likudnik: supporter of Israeli political party Likud Limmudnik: participant or attendee of Limmud events Mapainik: supporter of the historical Israeli labor party Mapai Moshavnik: member of a Moshav Mossadnik: Mossad agent Netzernik: Member of the Netzer Olami youth movement Nudnik : a nagging, boring or awkward person Shinuinik: supporter of Israeli political party Shinui Hamasnik : A member or supporter of Hamas Slavic languages [ edit ] Native or constructed Slavic words originating in Slavic-speaking environments: Čelnik Chetnik Druzhinnik Gopnik Kolkhoznik Kukuruznik Narodnik Namestnik Oprichnik Patatnik Peredvizhnik Podkulachnik Poglavnik Polkovnik Raskolnik Sotnik Sovkhoznik Subbotnik Syrnik Udarnik Varenik Vatnik Voskresnik Zapadnik Zolotnik There are quite a few proper nouns (surnames and place names) with this suffix.

See also [ edit ] English terms suffixed with -nik References [ edit ] ^ a b V. V. Kabakchi, Charles Clay Doyle, "Of Sputniks, Beatniks, and Nogoodniks" , American Speech , Vol. 65, No. 3 (1990), pp. 275-278 doi : 10.2307/455919 ^ Rudnyckyj, Jaroslav B. (1959).

" "Sputnik" and -nik derivatives in the present language of North America" .

Études Slaves et Est-Européennes / Slavic and East-European Studies .

4 (3/4): 142– 150.

ISSN 0014-2190 .

^ "sputnik | Etymology, origin and meaning of sputnik by etymonline" .

www.etymonline.com . Retrieved 2023-08-25 .

^ Doyle, Henry Grattan; Mencken, H. L. (May 1936).

"The American Language: An Inquiry into the Development of English in the United States" .

The Modern Language Journal .

20 (8): 535.

doi : 10.2307/316696 .

hdl : 2027/mdp.39015027579278 .

ISSN 0026-7902 .

^ Recorded in the OED from October 1957.

^ Caen, Herb (2 April 1958).

"Pocketful of Notes" .

San Francisco Chronicle . Retrieved 28 August 2012 .

^ How To Insult Someone In Yiddish ^ "Artnik Publishers" .

www.writewords.org.uk .

External links [ edit ] Look up -nik in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"-nik" .

The Mavens' Word of the Day .

Random House . June 1, 1998. Archived from the original on 2001-04-18.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=-nik&oldid=1278584708 " Categories : English suffixes Slavic languages Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 March 2025, at 09:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents -nik Add languages Add topic

