Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Process 2 History 3 Current usage 4 Intaglio artists 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Intaglio (printmaking) 39 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia עברית Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Family of printing and printmaking techniques Depressions are engraved or etched into a flat printing plate. Likely not to scale: grooves can be less than a millimetre wide.

The plate is covered in ink.

The ink is wiped off the surface of the plate, but remains in the grooves.

Paper is placed on the plate and compressed, such as by a heavy roller.

The paper is removed, and the ink has been transferred from the plate to the paper.

Micro-topography of an ordinary French post stamp (detail) showing the thickness of ink obtained by intaglio. The words la Poste appeared in white on red background and hence corresponds to areas with a lack of ink.

Banknote portrait pattern made with intaglio printing. Denomination: 1000 Hungarian forint . Depicted area: 18.1 by 13.5 millimetres (0.71 in × 0.53 in).

Intaglio ( / ɪ n ˈ t æ l i .

oʊ , - ˈ t ɑː l i -/ in- TAL -ee-oh, -⁠ TAH -lee- ; [ 1 ] Italian: [inˈtaʎʎo] ) is the family of printing and printmaking techniques in which the image is incised into a surface and the incised line or sunken area holds the ink.

[ 2 ] It is the direct opposite of a relief print where the parts of the matrix that make the image stand above the main surface.

Normally copper , or in recent times zinc , sheets called plates are used as a surface or matrix, and the incisions are created by etching , engraving , drypoint , aquatint or mezzotint , often in combination.

[ 3 ] Collagraphs may also be printed as intaglio plates.

[ 4 ] After the decline of the main relief technique of woodcut around 1550, the intaglio techniques dominated both artistic printmaking as well as most types of illustration and popular prints until the mid 19th century.

The word "intaglio" describes prints created from plates where the ink-bearing regions are recessed beneath the plate's surface. Though brass, zinc, and other materials are occasionally utilized, copper is the most common material for the plates.

[ 5 ] Process [ edit ] In intaglio printing, the lines to be printed are cut into a metal (e.g. copper) plate by means either of a cutting tool called a burin , held in the hand—in which case the process is called engraving ; or through the corrosive action of acid—in which case the process is known as etching .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In etching, for example, the plate is covered in a thin, acid-resistant resin or wax ground . Using etching needles or burins, the artist or writer (etcher) engraves their image through the ground to expose the plate beneath. The plate's ground side is then dipped into acid, or the acid poured onto it. The acid bites into the surface of the plate where it was exposed. Biting is a printmaking term to describe the acid's etching, or incising, of the image; its duration depends on the acid strength, metal's reactivity, temperature, air pressure and the depth desired.

[ 8 ] After the plate is sufficiently bitten it is removed from the acid bath, the ground is removed gently and the plate is usually dried or cleaned.

[ 9 ] To print an intaglio plate, ink or inks are painted, wiped and/or dabbed into the recessed lines (such as with brushes/rubber gloves/rollers). The plate is then rubbed with tarlatan cloth to remove most of its waste (surface ink) and a final smooth wipe is often done with newspaper or old public phone book pages, leaving it in the incisions. Dampened paper will usually be fed against the plate, covered by a blanket, so when pressed by rolling press it is squeezed into the plate's ink-filled grooves with uniform very high pressure.

[ 10 ] The blanket is then lifted, revealing the paper and printed image.  The final stages repeat for each copy needed.

History [ edit ] Main articles: Old master print and Line engraving Intaglio printmaking emerged in Europe well after the woodcut print, with the earliest known surviving examples being undated designs for playing cards made in Germany, using drypoint technique, probably in the late 1430s.

[ 11 ] Engraving had been used by goldsmiths to decorate metalwork, including armor, musical instruments and religious objects since ancient times, and the niello technique, which involved rubbing an alloy into the lines to give a contrasting color, also goes back to late antiquity. Scholars and practitioners of printmaking have suggested that the idea of making prints from engraved plates may well have originated with goldsmiths' practices of taking an impression on paper of a design engraved on an object, in order to keep a record of their work, or to check the quality.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 11 ] Martin Schongauer was one of the most significant early artists in the engraving technique, and Albrecht Dürer is one of the most famous intaglio artists. Italian and Dutch engraving began slightly after the Germans, but were well developed by 1500.

Drypoint and etching were also German inventions of the fifteenth century, probably by the Housebook Master and Daniel Hopfer respectively.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In the 15th century, woodcut and engraving served to produce both religious and secular imagery. One of the most popular secular uses of engraver's art was in the production of playing cards, a diversion enjoyed by the aristocracy and the common people.

[ 16 ] In the nineteenth century, Viennese printer Karel Klíč introduced a combined intaglio and photographic process.

Photogravure retained the smooth continuous tones of photography but was printed using a chemically etched copper plate. This permitted a photographic image to be printed on regular paper, for inclusion in books or albums.

[ 17 ] In the 1940s and 1950s, the Italian security printer Gualtiero Giori brought intaglio printing into the era of high-technology by developing the first ever six-colour intaglio printing press, designed to print banknotes which combined more artistic possibilities with greater security.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Current usage [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Today, intaglio engraving is used largely for banknotes, passports and some postage stamps.

If the letters are cut into the surface of the engraving plate, then, on the print, they stand slightly proud (see image above). The appearance of engraving is sometimes mimicked for items such as wedding invitations, by skeuomorphic embossment of lettering printed by another process (such as lithography or offset ).

Intaglio artists [ edit ] William Blake Albrecht Dürer M. C. Escher Helen Frank Francisco Goya Michael Hafftka Stanley William Hayter Paul César Helleu Edward Hopper Jasper Johns William Kentridge Max Klinger Käthe Kollwitz Mauricio Lasansky Martin Lewis Lucas van Leyden Cheryl Anne Lorance Malcolm Myers Bruce Onobrakpeya Lothar Osterburg Gabor Peterdi Gene Kloss Pablo Picasso Anton Pieck Krishna Reddy Rembrandt Félicien Rops Ludwig von Siegen Guillermo Silva Santamaria Richard Spare Donald Teskey Diane Victor James Abbott McNeill Whistler See also [ edit ] History of printing Rotogravure – a type of intaglio printing Viscosity printing References [ edit ] ^ "intaglio" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on November 23, 2021.

^ Strauss, Victor (1967).

The printing industry: an introduction to its many branches, processes, and products . Washington: Printing Industries of America.

ISBN 0835202720 .

^ Mustalish, Rachel (2003). "Printmaking Techniques of the WPA Printmakers". In Lisa Mintz Messinger (ed.).

African American Artists, 1929–1945: Prints, Drawings and Paintings in the Metropolitan of Museum of Art (Metropolitan Museum of Art) . Yale University Press. pp.

86– 88.

ISBN 0300098774 .

^ Mueller White, Lucy (2002). "Intaglio Processes".

Printmaking as Therapy: Frameworks for Freedom . Jessica Kingsley. pp.

108– 109.

ISBN 1843107082 .

^ Network, Artists (2017-09-29).

"Intaglio Printmaking Made Simple | Here Are The 5 Key Processes" .

Artists Network . Archived from the original on 2020-11-11 . Retrieved 2024-03-01 .

^ Ellis, Margaret Holben (1987).

The Care of Prints and Drawings . Nashville: The American Association for State and Local History, 1987. p. 64.

^ "Intro to Intaglio" .

Highpoint Center for Printmaking .

^ "Glossary – Magical-Secrets: A Printmaking Community" .

magical-secrets.com . Retrieved 5 June 2016 .

^ "Intaglio Printmaking – artelino" .

artelino.com . Retrieved 5 June 2016 .

^ "intaglio – printing" .

britannica.com . Retrieved 5 June 2016 .

^ a b Harrison, Charles (2006). "The printed picture in the Renaissance." In Kim Woods (Ed.), Making Renaissance Art . New Haven: Yale University Press. p. 219.

^ Ross, John (1990).

Complete Printmaker . Revised and expanded edition. New York: The Free Press. p. 65.

^ Griffiths, Antony (1996).

Prints and Printmaking: An introduction to the history and techniques . Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. p. 39.

^ "Parshall": David Landau & Peter Parshall, The Renaissance Print , Yale, 1996, pp5&23 ISBN 0-300-06883-2 ^ Cohen, Brian D.

"Freedom and Resistance in the Act of Engraving (or, Why Dürer Gave up on Etching)" Archived 2020-03-08 at the Wayback Machine , Art in Print Vol. 7 No. 3 (September–October 2017), 18.

^ "Printmaking: History and Process". Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, Inc., 1978, P.90 ISBN 0-03-085663-9 ^ "Photogravure" .

Notes on Photographs . George Eastman House. Archived from the original on March 30, 2012 . Retrieved 24 October 2015 .

^ K. M. M. de Leeuw, Jan Bergstra, The History of Information Security: a Comprehensive Handbook (2007), p. 214 ^ "Introduction to Intaglio (film)" .

Kahn Academy . April 2024.

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of intaglio at Wiktionary Media related to Intaglio (printmaking) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Writing and writing material Enduring Plant-based Amate Trema micrantha Ficus aurea Bamboo and wooden slips Birch bark ( Betula ) Folding-book manuscript Streblus asper Broussonetia papyrifera Ola leaf ( Corypha umbraculifera ) Palm leaf ( Borassus ) Paper Papyrus ( Cyperus papyrus ) Other materials Animal skin Parchment Vellum Ink Metals Intaglio Stamping Oracle bone Photographic film Stone Geoglyph Petroglyph Tablets Clay tablet Slate Wax tablet Textile printing Silk text Impermanent Electronic paper Screen Skywriting Carrier objects Book Codex Notebook Electronic media Hu / Shaku (baton) Inscription Bas-relief Manuscript Palimpsest Microform Scroll Sign Related topics Writing systems History of writing List of writing systems Written language Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intaglio_(printmaking)&oldid=1291426654 " Categories : Printmaking Printing technology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Pages with Italian IPA Articles needing additional references from September 2020 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 04:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Intaglio (printmaking) 39 languages Add topic

