Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History 3 Literature 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Republicanism in Sweden 7 languages العربية Français Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands Svenska ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political movement Old logo of the Swedish Republican Association Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Republicanism in Sweden ( Swedish : Republikanism ) is the collective term for the movement in Sweden that seeks to establish a republic and abolish the Swedish constitutional monarchy .

Overview [ edit ] A large part of the arguments for proclaiming a Swedish Republic are based on an ideological rejection of the monarchy , not necessarily on rejecting the individuals who actually exercise kingship. The effort towards a republic has been included in the early party platforms of the Social Democratic Party , the Left Party and the Green Party .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Outside of the usual party lines, there is also the Swedish Republican Association .

History [ edit ] A revolutionary republican hand-written bill from the Stockholm riots during the Revolutions of 1848 , reading: "Dethrone Oscar he is not fit to be a king – rather the Republic! Reform! Down with the Royal house – long live the Aftonbladet ! Death to the king – Republic! Republic! – the people! Brunkeberg this evening." The writer's identity is unknown.

The precise year of the formation of the Kingdom of Sweden is lost to history, but Sweden was already a kingdom prior to the year 1000 AD and has never in its history been a republic.

Because of their trade with, for example, the Dutch Republic from the 16th century and onwards, the Swedes were not entirely unfamiliar with the phenomenon of a republic, but the first attempt to developing a republican Sweden came during the French Revolution . In the early 19th century, this was still a marginal movement. In 1830, it was for the first time that a prominent Swedish politician, Lars Johan Hierta , advocated for a republic, though without using the word "republic": in the newspaper Aftonbladet , that he himself had founded that same year, he pleaded for ousting king Charles XIV John of Sweden .

The next opportunity that a republic was discussed came during the European Revolutions of 1848 . Sweden went through a short period of upheaval, the Marsoroligheterna ("March Disturbances"). On 18 and 19 March, riots broke out in Stockholm , during which about thirty people were killed by the army. During this time, controversial posters carrying the word "republic" were hung in several places in Stockholm and the surrounding region. Moreover, activists demanded equal and universal suffrage .

The Social Democratic Party had stated its intention to establish a republic in its party platform ever since its foundation in 1889. However, when it came into power in 1920, the desire had worn off. This is attributed to the pragmatism of its then leader Hjalmar Branting .

In 1997, the Swedish Republican Association was founded. In 2010, the umbrella Alliance of European Republican Movements (AERM) was founded in Stockholm, in which Swedish republicans cooperate with other European republican groups.

Literature [ edit ] Monarkin Sverige – mot alla odds , in Nationalencyklopedin online Moberg, Vilhelm, Därför är jag republikan ("Why I Am A Republican") (1955) References [ edit ] ^ 2001 party platform  of the Social Democrats , p. 11 ^ 2004 party platform of the Left Party , p. 6 ^ "Democracy Questions" .

Green Party website . Retrieved 17 October 2015 .

External links [ edit ] (in Swedish) Swedish Republican Association v t e Republicanism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Republicanism_in_Sweden&oldid=1278740157 " Categories : Republicanism in Sweden Politics of Sweden Republicanism by country Monarchy of Sweden Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles with Swedish-language sources (sv) This page was last edited on 4 March 2025, at 08:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Republicanism in Sweden 7 languages Add topic

