Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Adriaan Koerbagh 8 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano مصرى Nederlands Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Adriaan Koerbagh (1632–1669) [ 1 ] was a Dutch physician, scholar, and writer who was a critic of religion and conventional morality.

[ 2 ] He was in the circle of supporters of Baruch Spinoza .

[ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Adriaan Koerbagh and his younger brother Johannes (1634–72) were sons of a ceramics maker, who died young leaving them funds allowing them to pursue extended schooling.  Adriaan studied at the universities of respectively Utrecht , Franeker and Leiden , becoming a doctor in medicine in 1659 and master in jurisprudence in 1661.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] He was one of the most radical figures of the Age of Enlightenment , rejecting and reviling the church and state as unreliable institutions and exposing theologians' and lawyers' language as vague and opaque tools to blind the people in order to maintain their own power.  Koerbagh put the authority of reason above that of dogmas and was thus seen as a true freethinker , although twentieth century notions of him as an anarchist or libertarian cannot be applied with certainty.

Koerbagh described the Bible and dogmas like the Trinity and the divine nature of Christ as only the work of men.  Also, like his contemporary Baruch de Spinoza , he argued that God is identical with nature and that nothing exists outside of nature. Therefore, he argued, natural science , not theology , was the real theology of the world.  In his views about the secularization of the Republic of the Netherlands and the limitation of ecclesiastical powers, he argued that religion is irrational and only maintains its position through deception and violence.

He wrote in books ' t Nieuw Woorden-Boeck der Regten ( The New Dictionary of Rights , 1664), and in Een Bloemhof van allerley lieflijkheyd ( A Flower Garden of All Sorts of Delights , 1668), under the pseudonym Vreederijk Waarmond.

[ 6 ] This book explained various technical terms and foreign words. The Church authorities were offended by the dictionary's articles on religious and political topics, forcing Koerbagh to flee to Culemborg , a legally autonomous town in another province that would not extradite him, and then to Leiden .

Adriaan Koerbagh fiercely opposed the Dutch Reformed Church in his third work, "Een Ligt schynende in duystere plaatsen, om te verligten de voornaamste saaken der Godsgeleerdtheyd en Godsdienst" (A Light Shining In Dark Places, To Shed Light On Matters Of Theology and Religion).  He went to Leiden, where he was betrayed by his printer, who knew the contents of his work, and arrested by the authorities. His brother Johannes was also arrested.

In 1668, he was found guilty of blasphemy and was sentenced to 10 years in the Rasphuis jail at Amsterdam, where he had to do forced labour, followed by exile and a 4000 guilder fine. He died a few months later in 1669 in the Rasphuis due to the pressures of prison life.  His publications were largely destroyed by the authorities of the Republic.  His brother Johannes was released because of lack of evidence against him, but he never published again. He died three years later, in 1672.

Works [ edit ] 't Nieuw-woordenboek der Regten (1664) Een Bloemhof van allerley lieflijkheyd sonder verdriet (1668) Een ligt Schijnende in Duystere Plaatsen, om te verligten de voornaamste saaken der Godsgeleerdtheyd en Godsdienst (1668, reissued 1974) References [ edit ] ^ Israel, Jonathan (September 2002).

Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the Making of Modernity 1650-1750 (1st ed.). England: Oxford University Press. p. 185.

ISBN 0199254567 .

^ Frank Mertens via W. van Bunge (2011) "Introduction", in: M. Wielema " Adriaan Koerbagh. A light shining in dark places, to illuminate the main questions of theology and religion ". Leiden: Brill, p. 1-39.

^ Israel, Jonathan I.

Spinoza, Life & Legacy . Oxford: Oxford University Press 2023, 599-623 ^ Mertens, Frank (2011). "Johannes Koerbagh's Lost Album Amicorum Seen through the Eyes of Pieter de la Ruë".

Lias .

38 (1): 125.

doi : 10.2143/LIAS.38.1.2126652 .

ISSN 2033-4753 .

^ Israel, Spinoza, Life & Legacy , 600 ^ Cis van Heertum , 'A not so harmless drudge: the survival of Koerbagh's Bloemhof van allerley lieflijkheyd (1668)', Quærendo. A Journal Devoted to Manuscripts and Printed Books 50-4 (2020-4), pp. 394-426.

Sources [ edit ] Noordervliet, Nelleke: " Helden van het vrije woord ", NRC Handelsblad , 18 June 2007.

Israel, Jonathan I., Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the Making of Modernity 1650–1750 ; Oxford University Press, USA; 2002.

_____, Spinoza, Life & Legacy . Oxford: Oxford University Press 2023.

External links [ edit ] Adriaan Koerbagh, precursor of the Enlightenment?

Biography in the Koninklijke Bibliotheek van Nederland Photograph of page from "Een Bloemhof" from the library of Frederick III of Denmark Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Poland Israel Belgium People Netherlands Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adriaan_Koerbagh&oldid=1288573806 " Categories : 1633 births 1669 deaths Dutch people who died in prison custody 17th-century Dutch philosophers Enlightenment philosophers People convicted of blasphemy Writers from Amsterdam Prisoners who died in Dutch detention Secularism in the Netherlands Dutch former Christians People associated with Baruch Spinoza Pantheism Freethought Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 3 May 2025, at 15:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adriaan Koerbagh 8 languages Add topic

