Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Religious and spiritual 1.2 Secular and political 2 Practices Toggle Practices subsection 2.1 Reducing consumption, work time, and possessions 2.2 Increasing self-sufficiency 2.3 Reconsidering technology 2.4 Simplifying diet 3 Politics and activism Toggle Politics and activism subsection 3.1 Environmentalism 3.2 Arts 4 Economics 5 References 6 Additional reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Simple living 41 languages العربية বাংলা Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Novial Papiamentu Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Volapük 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Simplified, minimalistic lifestyle "Simple life" redirects here. For other uses, see Simple Life (disambiguation) .

Mahatma Gandhi spinning yarn in 1942. Gandhi believed in a life of simplicity and self-sufficiency.

Simple living refers to practices that promote simplicity in one's lifestyle. Common practices of simple living include reducing the number of possessions one owns, depending less on technology and services, and spending less money.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In addition to such external changes, simple living also reflects a person's mindset and values.

[ 3 ] Simple living practices can be seen in history, religion, art, and economics.

Adherents may choose simple living for a variety of personal reasons, such as spirituality , health , increase in quality time for family and friends, work–life balance , personal taste, financial sustainability, increase in philanthropy , frugality , environmental sustainability , [ 4 ] or reducing stress . Simple living can also be a reaction to economic materialism and consumer culture . Some cite sociopolitical goals aligned with environmentalist, anti-consumerist , or anti-war movements , including conservation , degrowth , deep ecology , and tax resistance .

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Religious and spiritual [ edit ] A number of religious and spiritual traditions encourage simple living.

[ 6 ] Early examples include the Śramaṇa traditions of Iron Age India and biblical Nazirites . These traditions were heavily influenced by both national cultures and religious ethics.

[ 7 ] [ page needed ] Simplicity was one of the primary concepts espoused by Lao Tzu, the founder of Taoism . This is most embodied in the principles of Pu and Ziran .

[ 8 ] [ full citation needed ] Confucius has been quoted numerous times as promoting simple living.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ full citation needed ] Gautama Buddha espoused simple living as a central virtue of Buddhism . The Four Noble Truths advocate detachment from desire as the path to ending suffering and attaining Nirvana .

[ 11 ] [ full citation needed ] [ 12 ] Jesus is said to have lived a simple life. He is said to have encouraged his disciples "to take nothing for their journey except a staff—no bread, no bag, no money in their belts—but to wear sandals and not put on two tunics".

[ 13 ] He also told his disciples that they cannot serve God and money at the same time, and explained that God is capable of providing them with the essentials for life (food and clothing), so long as they "seek his kingdom first".

[ 14 ] The Apostle Paul taught that people should be content with food and clothing, and that the desire to be rich is the cause of many kinds of evils.

[ 15 ] Many other notable religious individuals, such as Benedict of Nursia , Francis of Assisi , [ 16 ] Leo Tolstoy , Rabindranath Tagore , Albert Schweitzer , and Mahatma Gandhi , have claimed that spiritual inspiration led them to a simple living lifestyle.

[ 7 ] [ page needed ] Ottoman Dervish portrayed by Amedeo Preziosi , 1860s circa, Muzeul Naţional de Artă al României Sufism in the Muslim world emerged and grew as a mystical, somewhat hidden tradition in the mainstream Sunni and Shia denominations of Islam .

[ 17 ] Sufism grew particularly in the frontier areas of Islamic states , [ 17 ] [ 18 ] where the asceticism of its fakirs and dervishes appealed to populations already used to the monastic traditions of Hinduism , Buddhism , and Christianity .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Sufis were influential and successful in spreading Islam between the 10th and 19th centuries.

[ 17 ] Some scholars have argued that Sufi Muslim ascetics and mystics played a decisive role in converting the Turkic peoples to Islam, mainly because of the similarities between the extreme, ascetic Sufis ( fakirs and dervishes ) and the Shamans of the traditional Turco-Mongol religion .

[ 18 ] [ 21 ] Plain people typically belonged to Christian groups that practised lifestyles that excluded forms of wealth or technology for religious or philosophical reasons. Such Christian groups include the Shakers , Mennonites , Amish , Hutterites , Amana Colonies , Bruderhof , [ 22 ] Old German Baptist Brethren , Harmony Society , and some Quakers . A Quaker belief called Testimony of simplicity states that a person ought to live her or his life simply. Some tropes about complete exclusion of technology in these groups may not be accurate though. The Amish and other groups do use some modern technology, after assessing its impact on the community.

[ 23 ] The 18th-century French Enlightenment philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau strongly praised the simple way of life in many of his writings, especially in two books: Discourse on the Arts and Sciences (1750) and Discourse on Inequality (1754).

[ 24 ] Secular and political [ edit ] Epicureanism , based on the teachings of the Athens -based philosopher Epicurus , flourished from about the fourth century BCE to the third century CE . Epicureanism held that the paradigm of happiness was the untroubled life, which was made possible by carefully considered choices. Epicurus pointed out that troubles entailed by maintaining an extravagant lifestyle tend to outweigh the pleasures of partaking in it. He therefore concluded that what is necessary for happiness, bodily comfort, and life itself should be maintained at minimal cost, while all things beyond what is necessary for these should either be tempered by moderation or completely avoided.

[ 25 ] Reconstruction of Henry David Thoreau 's cabin on the shores of Walden Pond Henry David Thoreau , an American naturalist and author, made the classic secular advocacy of a life of simple and sustainable living in his book Walden (1854). Thoreau conducted a two-year experiment living a plain and simple life on the shores of Walden Pond . He concluded: "Our life is frittered away by detail. Simplify, simplify, simplify! I say, let your affairs be as two or three, and not a hundred or a thousand; instead of a million count half a dozen, and keep your accounts on your thumb-nail." [ 26 ] In Victorian Britain, Henry Stephens Salt , an admirer of Thoreau, popularised the idea of "Simplification, the saner method of living".

[ 27 ] : 22 Other British advocates of the simple life included Edward Carpenter , William Morris , and the members of the " Fellowship of the New Life ".

[ 27 ] : 27–28 Carpenter popularised the phrase the "Simple Life" in his essay Simplification of Life in his England's Ideal (1887).

[ 28 ] C.R. Ashbee and his followers also practised some of these ideas, thus linking simplicity with the Arts and Crafts movement .

[ 29 ] British novelist John Cowper Powys advocated the simple life in his 1933 book A Philosophy of Solitude .

[ 30 ] John Middleton Murry and Max Plowman practised a simple lifestyle at their Adelphi Centre in Essex in the 1930s.

[ 31 ] Irish poet Patrick Kavanagh championed a "right simplicity" philosophy based on ruralism in some of his work.

[ 32 ] George Lorenzo Noyes , a naturalist , mineralogist , development critic , writer, and artist, is known as the Thoreau of Maine. He lived a wilderness lifestyle, advocating through his creative work a simple life and reverence for nature. During the 1920s and 1930s, the Vanderbilt Agrarians of the Southern United States advocated a lifestyle and culture centered upon traditional and sustainable agrarian values as opposed to the progressive urban industrialism which dominated the Western world at that time.

The Theory of the Leisure Class , 1924 The Norwegian-American economist and sociologist Thorstein Veblen warned against the conspicuous consumption of the materialistic society in his The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899); Richard Gregg coined the term "voluntary simplicity" in The Value of Voluntary Simplicity (1936). From the 1920s, a number of modern authors articulated both the theory and practice of living simply, among them Gandhian Richard Gregg, economists Ralph Borsodi and Scott Nearing , anthropologist-poet Gary Snyder , and utopian fiction writer Ernest Callenbach . Economist E. F. Schumacher argued against the notion that "bigger is better" in Small Is Beautiful (1973); and Duane Elgin continued the promotion of the simple life in Voluntary Simplicity (1981).

The Australian academic Ted Trainer practices and writes about simplicity, and established The Simplicity Institute [ 33 ] at Pigface Point, some 20 km (12 mi) from the University of New South Wales to which it is attached.

[ 34 ] A secular set of nine values was developed with the Ethify Yourself project in Austria , having a simplified life style in mind. In the United States voluntary simplicity started to garner more public exposure through a movement in the late 1990s around a popular "simplicity" book, The Simple Living Guide by Janet Luhrs.

[ 35 ] Practices [ edit ] Reducing consumption, work time, and possessions [ edit ] Living simply in a small dwelling Some people practice simple living by reducing their consumption . Lowering consumption can reduce individual debt, which allows for greater flexibility and simplicity in one's life. If one spends less on goods or services, one can spend less time earning money . The time saved may be used to pursue other interests, to help others through volunteering , or to improve their quality of life , for example, by pursuing creative activities. Developing a detachment from the pursuit of money has led some individuals, such as Suelo and Mark Boyle , to live with no money.

[ 36 ] People who reduce their expenses can also increase their savings, leading to financial independence and the possibility of early retirement .

[ 37 ] The "100 Thing Challenge" is a grassroots movement to whittle personal possessions to one hundred items, aiming of de-cluttering and simplify life.

[ 38 ] People in the tiny house movement chose to live in small, mortgage-free, low-impact dwellings, such as log cabins or beach huts .

[ 39 ] Joshua Becker suggests that people who desire to simplify their lives begin by simplifying their homes.

[ 40 ] Increasing self-sufficiency [ edit ] Robert Hart 's forest garden in Shropshire, England, UK Increased self-sufficiency reduces dependency on money and the broader economy .

[ 41 ] Tom Hodgkinson believes the key to a free and simple life is to stop consuming and start producing.

[ 42 ] Writer and eco-blogger Jennifer Nini left the city to live off-grid, grow food, and "be a part of the solution; not part of the problem." [ 43 ] Forest gardening , developed by simple living adherent Robert Hart , is a low-maintenance, plant-based food production system based on woodland ecosystems. It incorporates fruit and nut trees, shrubs, herbs, vines, and perennial vegetables.

[ 44 ] : 97 Hart created a model forest garden from a 0.12-acre (490 m 2 ) orchard on his farm at Wenlock Edge in Shropshire .

[ 44 ] : 45 " Food miles " is a description of the number of miles a given item of food or its ingredients has travelled between the farm and the table. Simple living advocates use this metric to argue for locally grown food, for example in books like The 100-Mile Diet and Barbara Kingsolver 's Animal, Vegetable, Miracle: A Year of Food Life . In each of those cases, the authors devoted a year to reducing their carbon footprint by eating locally.

[ 45 ] City dwellers can produce home-grown fruit and vegetables in pot gardens or miniature indoor greenhouses. Tomatoes, lettuce, spinach, Swiss chard, peas, strawberries, and several types of herbs can all thrive in pots.

Jim Merkel says "A person could sprout seeds. They are tasty, incredibly nutritious, and easy to grow... We grow them in wide-mouthed mason jars with a square of nylon window screen screwed under a metal ring".

[ 46 ] Reconsidering technology [ edit ] People who practice simple living have diverse views on the role of technology. The American political activist Scott Nearing was skeptical about how humanity would use new technology, citing destructive inventions such as nuclear weapons .

[ 47 ] Those who eschew modern technology are often referred to as Luddites or neo-Luddites .

[ 48 ] Although simple living is often a secular pursuit, it may still involve reconsidering appropriate technology as Anabaptist groups such as the Amish or Mennonites have done.

Technology can make a simple lifestyle within mainstream culture easier and more sustainable. The internet can reduce an individual's carbon footprint through remote work and lower paper usage. Some have calculated their energy consumption to show that one can live simply and in a satisfying way by using much less energy than is typically used in Western countries.

[ 49 ] Technologies they may embrace include computers, photovoltaic systems , wind turbines , and water turbines .

Technological interventions that appear to simplify living may actually induce side effects elsewhere or in the future.

Evgeny Morozov warns that tools like the internet can facilitate mass surveillance and political repression .

[ 50 ] The book Green Illusions identifies how wind and solar energy technologies have hidden side effects and can actually increase energy consumption and entrench environmental harms over time.

[ 51 ] The authors of the book Techno-Fix criticize technological optimists for overlooking the limitations of technology in solving agricultural problems.

[ 52 ] Simplifying diet [ edit ] Figs, berries, and cheese In contrast to diets like vegetarianism, a simplified diet focuses on principles rather than a set of rules. People may use less sophisticated and cheaper ingredients, and eat dishes considered as "comfort food", including home-cooked dishes. Simple diets are usually considered to be "healthy", since they include a significant amount of fruit and vegetables.

[ 53 ] A simple diet usually avoids highly processed foods and fast-food eating.

[ 54 ] [ verification needed ] Simplicity may also entail taking time to be present while eating, such as by following rituals, avoiding multitasking when eating, and putting time aside to consume food mindfully and gratefully, potentially in the company of others.

[ 55 ] [ verification needed ] Practicing mindfulness and awareness while eating promotes a deeper sense of connection and responsibility toward understanding food as a meaningful and fulfilling process, rather than merely consuming a product.

[ 56 ] Moreover, it is common to cook one's own food, by following simple recipes that are not particularly time consuming, in an attempt to reduce the amount of energy necessary for cooking.

[ 57 ] [ verification needed ] A simple diet looks different from person to person and can be adapted to suit individual needs and desires. For instance, in the United Kingdom, the Movement for Compassionate Living was formed by Kathleen and Jack Jannaway in 1984 to spread the message of veganism and promote simple living and self-reliance as a remedy against the exploitation of humans, animals, and the planet .

Politics and activism [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( February 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Environmentalism [ edit ] Environmentalism is inspired by simple living, as harmony with nature is intrinsically dependent on a simple lifestyle.

[ according to whom?

] For example, Green parties often advocate simple living as a consequence of their "four pillars" or the "Ten Key Values" of the Green Party of the United States . This includes, in policy terms, their rejection of genetic engineering and nuclear power and other technologies they consider to be hazardous. The Greens ' support for simplicity is based on the reduction in natural resource usage and environmental impact.

[ 4 ] This concept is expressed in Ernest Callenbach 's "green triangle" of ecology , frugality , and health.

Some avoid involvement even with green politics as compromising simplicity, however, and instead advocate forms of green anarchism that attempt to implement these principles at a smaller scale, e.g. the ecovillage .

Deep ecology , a belief that the world does not exist as a resource to be freely exploited by humans, proposes wilderness preservation , human population control , and simple living.

[ 58 ] Minimalist lifestyles may contribute to reduced carbon emissions, although further research is needed to quantify their impact.

[ 59 ] The White House Peace Vigil , started by simple living adherent Ellen Thomas in 1981 Arts [ edit ] The term " bohemianism " describes a tradition of both voluntary and involuntary poverty by artists who devote their time to artistic endeavors rather than paid labor. The term was coined by the French bourgeoisie as a way to describe social non-conformists.

[ 60 ] Bohemians sometimes also expressed their unorthodoxy through simplistic art, for instance in the case of Amedeo Modigliani.

[ 61 ] Minimalistic art inspired "rebel" artistic movements into the 20th century.

[ 60 ] Positive attitudes towards living in poverty for the sake of art are becoming less common among young American artists . One recent graduate of the Rhode Island School of Design said "her classmates showed little interest in living in garrets and eating ramen noodles ." [ 62 ] Economics [ edit ] A new economics movement has been building since the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in 1972, [ 63 ] and the publications that year of Only One Earth , The Limits to Growth , and Blueprint for Survival , followed by Small Is Beautiful : Economics As If People Mattered in 1973.

[ 64 ] [ page needed ] David Wann introduced the idea of "simple prosperity" as it applies to a sustainable lifestyle. From his point of view, "it is important to ask ourselves three fundamental questions: what is the point of all our commuting and consuming? What is the economy for? And, finally, why do we seem to be unhappier now than when we began our initial pursuit for rich abundance?" [ 65 ] [ page needed ] James Robertson 's A New Economics of Sustainable Development [ 64 ] inspired work of thinkers and activists who participate in his Working for a Sane Alternative network and program. According to Robertson, the shift to sustainability is likely to require a widespread shift of emphasis from raising incomes to reducing costs.

The principles of the new economics, as set out by Robertson, are the following: [ 66 ] systematic empowerment of people (as opposed to making and keeping them dependent), as the basis for people-centred development systematic conservation of resources and the environment , as the basis for environmentally sustainable development evolution from a "wealth of nations" model of economic life to a one-world model, and from today's inter-national economy to an ecologically sustainable, decentralising, multi-level one-world economic system restoration of political and ethical factors to a central place in economic life and thought respect for qualitative values, not just quantitative values References [ edit ] ^ Linda Breen Pierce (2000).

Choosing Simplicity . Gallagher Press. p.

304 .

ISBN 978-0967206714 .

Rather than being consumed by materialism, we choose to surround ourselves with only those material possessions we truly need or genuinely cherish ^ Vernon Howard .

Quotes about Happiness .

You have succeeded in life when all you really want is only what you really need ^ "Minimalism: 7 Reasons that Keep People from Getting Started" . 29 June 2011.

^ a b Taylor, Matthew (2019-05-22).

"Much shorter working weeks needed to tackle climate crisis – study" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2021-11-02 .

^ "Low Income/Simple Living as War Tax Resistance" . NWTRCC. January 2020.

^ Echlin, Helena (December 2006).

"Be Happier With Less" .

Yoga Journal : 92.

Swift, W. Bradford (July–August 1996).

"Living Simply in a Complex World" .

Yoga Journal : 81.

^ a b Shi, David (2001).

The Simple Life . University of Georgia Press.

^ Tao Te Ching – via Wikisource .

^ "Gain Insight and Awareness With These 47 Confucius Quotes" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved 7 November 2023 .

^ Analects – via Wikisource .

^ Dhammapada – via Wikisource .

^ Mark, Joshua J.

"Four Noble Truths" .

World History Encyclopedia . Retrieved 7 November 2023 .

^ Mark 6:8–9 : English Standard Version ^ Matthew 6:24–33 ^ 1 Timothy 6:6–10 ^ Slocock, N. (May 2004).

" 'Living a Life of Simplicity?' A Response to Francis of Assisi by Adrian House" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-27.

^ a b c Cook, David (May 2015).

"Mysticism in Sufi Islam" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Religion .

Oxford : Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199340378.013.51 .

ISBN 9780199340378 .

Archived from the original on 28 November 2018 . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .

^ a b Findley, Carter Vaughn (2005).

"Islam and Empire from the Seljuks through the Mongols" .

The Turks in World History .

Oxford and New York : Oxford University Press . pp.

56– 66.

ISBN 9780195177268 .

OCLC 54529318 .

^ Hanson, Eric O. (2006).

Religion and Politics in the International System Today .

New York : Cambridge University Press . pp.

102– 104.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511616457 .

ISBN 978-0-521-85245-6 .

^ Shahzad Bashir (2013).

Sufi Bodies: Religion and Society in Medieval Islam . Columbia University Press. pp.

9– 11, 58– 67.

ISBN 978-0-231-14491-9 .

Antony Black (2011).

The History of Islamic Political Thought: From the Prophet to the Present . Edinburgh University Press. pp.

241– 242.

ISBN 978-0-7486-8878-4 .

^ Amitai-Preiss, Reuven (January 1999). "Sufis and Shamans: Some Remarks on the Islamization of the Mongols in the Ilkhanate".

Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient .

42 (1).

Leiden : Brill Publishers : 27– 46.

doi : 10.1163/1568520991445605 .

ISSN 1568-5209 .

JSTOR 3632297 .

^ Ascosi, Pete (2016-08-25).

"Learning from the Bruderhof: An Intentional Christian Community" .

ChristLife . Retrieved 2017-05-23 .

"Inside The Bruderhofe" .

BBC Media Centre . 2019-07-09 . Retrieved 2019-07-19 .

^ Crump, Dallin (2018-08-22).

"What the Amish are Teaching Me about How to Use Technology" .

Medium . Archived from the original on 2019-08-01 . Retrieved 2019-08-01 .

Novak, Kim (2019-07-20).

"Unknown Christian community in Sussex lives without electricity or possessions" .

Metro . Retrieved 2019-08-01 .

^ Marshall, Peter (1996).

Nature's Web: Rethinking Our Place on Earth . M.E. Sharpe. pp. 235, 239– 244.

^ Smith, M.F. (2001).

"Introduction to Lucretius: On the Nature of Things" .

Epicurus.info . Archived from the original on 2006-03-01.

^ Thoreau, Henry David (1854).

"Where I Lived, and What I Lived For" .

Walden .

^ a b Gould, Peter C.

Early Green Politics .

^ Delany, Paul (1987).

The Neo-pagans: Rupert Brooke and the ordeal of youth .

Free Press . p. 10.

ISBN 978-0029082805 .

^ Maccarthy, Fiona (1981).

The Simple Life: C.R. Ashbee in the Cotswolds . London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Powys, John Cowper (1933).

A Philosophy of Solitude . London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) See also Goodway, David (2006).

Anarchist Seeds Beneath the Snow . Liverpool. pp.

48– 49, 174, for Goodway's comparison of Powys' ideas of the Simple Life to Carpenter's.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) CS1 maint: postscript ( link ) ^ Hardy, Dennis.

Utopian England: Community Experiments 1900–1945 . p. 42.

Hardy's book details other simple living movements in the U.K. in this period.

^ O'Riordan, Alan (November 23, 2009).

"Kavanagh's Lessons for Simple Living" . Irish Times.

^ "Ted Trainer" .

Simplicity Institute .

^ "Arts, Design & Architecture - UNSW Sydney" .

UNSW Sites .

^ Luhrs, Janet (1997).

The Simple Living Guide . Harmony.

ISBN 978-0553067965 .

^ Osborne, Hilary (23 July 2009).

"Daniel Suelo: Free spirit or freeloader?" .

The Guardian . UK . Retrieved 20 October 2011 .

Salter, Jessica (18 August 2010).

"The man who lives without money" .

The Telegraph . U.K. Archived from the original on 20 August 2010.

^ Robinson, Nancy (2 August 2012).

"Retiring At Age 50 Is Realistic Using These Unorthodox Strategies" .

Forbes . U.S . Retrieved 20 August 2012 .

^ Lisa McClaughlin (June 5, 2008).

"How to Live with Just 100 Things" .

Time .

^ Paterson, Leigh (28 December 2011).

"Less is more: Simple living in small spaces" .

BBC News .

^ Becker, Joshua (2018).

The Minimalist Home . WaterBrook. pp.

3– 5.

^ Baharuddin, Khairul Hisyam; Mohd Nasir, Nazatul Syima; Rusdi, Fairuz A'dilah (2022).

"Self-Reliance, Simple Living, and Happiness in the Man Who Quit Money" (PDF) .

Proceeding of International Conference on Ummah – via My Scholar, Digital Library Repository, Universiti Malaysia Kelantan.

^ Tom Hodgkinson (2006).

How To Be Free . Hamish Hamilton.

ISBN 978-0241143216 .

^ Nini, Jennifer (September 2014).

"So You Think You Can Farm?" . Retrieved 1 September 2014 .

^ a b Hart, Robert (1996-09-01).

Forest gardening: Cultivating an edible landscape .

ISBN 978-1603580502 .

^ Taylor, Kate (2007-08-08).

"The Year I Saved The World" .

The Sun . New York. Archived from the original on 2009-01-14.

^ Merkel, Jim (2003).

Radical Simplicity. British Columbia: New Society . pp.

170– 171.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Scott Nearing (2006).

Civilization and Beyond . Echo Library. p. 101.

ISBN 978-1406834970 .

^ Sale, Kirkpatrick (February 1997).

"America's New Luddites" .

Le Monde diplomatique .

^ Rajvanshi, Anil K. (2012-05-27).

"How to Live Simply and in a Sustainable Way" . Archived from the original on 2013-12-19.

^ Morozov, Evgeny (2011).

The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom .

^ Zehner, Ozzie (2012).

Green Illusions: The Dirty Secrets of Clean Energy and the Future of Environmentalism .

University of Nebraska Press .

ISBN 978-0803237759 .

^ Huesemann, Michael H.; Huesemann, Joyce A. (2011).

Technofix: Why Technology Won't Save Us or the Environment . Gabriola Island, British Columbia, Canada: New Society Publishers.

ISBN 978-0865717046 .

^ Smith, Katie (February 25, 2009).

"Slow economy calls for simple living" .

Free Lance-Star .

^ "Women urged for changing culture of extra protein rich, spicy food".

Daily Messenger . Pakistan. October 18, 2020.

^ McDonald, Glenn.

"For us, simple living isn't easy—Author advocates the joy of less stuff" .

News & Observer .

[ when?

] ^ "How tweaking your diet can help save the planet" .

www.unep.org . 2021-08-23 . Retrieved 2025-05-08 .

^ Weidner, Johanna (January 8, 2005).

"Food helps define life, editor says" .

Record, The . Kitchner, Ontario, Canada.

^ Barry, John; Frankland, E. Gene, eds. (2002).

International Encyclopedia of Environmental Politics . Routledge. p. 161.

ISBN 978-0415202855 .

^ Blackburn, R., Leviston, Z., Walker, I., & Schram, A. (2023). Could a minimalist lifestyle reduce carbon emissions and improve wellbeing?

Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change , 15(2), e865.

https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.865 ^ a b Martinique, Elena (2023-04-24).

"Famous Artists of the 20th Century Who Knew How to Live" .

Widewalls . Retrieved 2022-04-03 .

^ "Amedeo Modigliani" .

The Art Story . Retrieved 2022-04-03 .

^ Neda Ulaby (Director) (2014-05-15).

"In Pricey Cities, Being A Bohemian Starving Artist Gets Old Fast" .

War On Poverty, 50 Years Later . NPR . Retrieved 2014-05-31 .

^ "Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment" .

United Nations Environment Program . Stockholm. 1972. Archived from the original on 2007-04-11 . Retrieved March 24, 2008 .

^ a b Robertson, James (1999).

The New Economics of Sustainable Development: A Briefing for Policy Makers (PDF) . Kogan Page.

ISBN 0749430931 .

^ Wann, David (2007).

Simple Prosperity: Finding Real Wealth in a Sustainable Lifestyle . New York: St. Martin's Griffin.

ISBN 978-0312361419 .

^ Ellis, Howard S. (1949).

"The State of the "New Economics" " .

The American Economic Review .

39 (2): 465– 477.

JSTOR 1812743 . Retrieved 7 November 2023 .

Additional reading [ edit ] Berry, Wendell (1990).

What Are People For?

. North Point Press.

ISBN 0865474370 .

Bruno, Dave (2010).

The 100 Thing Challenge . HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0061787744 .

Dacyczyn, Amy (1998).

The Complete Tightwad Gazette: Promoting Thrift as a Viable Alternative Lifestyle . Random House Publishing.

ISBN 0375752250 .

de Graaf, John; Wann, David; Naylor, Thomas (2002).

Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic . Berrett-Koehler Publishers.

ISBN 1576751996 .

Delany, Paul (1987).

The Neo-pagans: Rupert Brooke and the ordeal of youth .

Free Press .

ISBN 978-0029082805 .

Elgin, Duane (2010) [1981].

Voluntary Simplicity . Harper.

ISBN 978-0061779268 .

Eller, Vernard (1973).

The Simple Life . W. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company.

ISBN 0802815375 .

Fisker, Jacob Lund (2010).

Early Retirement Extreme: A philosophical and practical guide to financial independence . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.

ISBN 978-1453601211 .

Freed, Dolly (2010) [1978].

Possum Living: How to Live Well Without a Job and with (Almost) No Money . Tin House Books.

ISBN 978-0982053935 .

Kondo, Marie (2014).

The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up . Clarkson Potter/Ten Speed.

ISBN 978-1607747307 .

Long, Charles (1996) [1986].

How to Survive Without a Salary: Living the Conserver Lifestyle . Warwick.

ISBN 1894622375 .

Luhrs, Janet (1997).

The Simple Living Guide: A Sourcebook for Less Stressful, More Joyful Living . Harmony/Rodale.

ISBN 0553067966 .

Mills, Stephanie (2002).

Epicurean Simplicity . Island Press.

ISBN 978-1559636896 .

Nearing, Helen ; Nearing, Scott (1970).

The Good Life: Helen and Scott Nearing's Sixty Years of Self-Sufficient Living . Schocken.

Robin, Vicki ; Dominguez, Joe (1992).

Your Money or Your Life . Viking.

Robin, Vicki ; Tilford, Monique; Zaifman, Mark (2008).

Your Money or Your Life: Revised and Updated for the 21st Century .

Penguin Books .

Romney, Edward (2001) [1992].

Living Well on Practically Nothing . Paladin Press.

ISBN 1581602820 .

Taylor-Hough, Deborah (2000).

A Simple Choice: A practical guide for saving your time, money and sanity . SourceBooks.

ISBN 1891400495 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Simple living at Wikimedia Commons Links to related articles v t e Simple living Practices Barter Cord-cutting DIY ethic Downshifting Dry toilet Fasting Forest gardening Freeganism Frugality Gift economy Intentional community Local currency Low-impact development No frills Off-the-grid Permaculture Regift Sattvic diet Self-sufficiency Slow living Slow movement (culture) Subsistence agriculture Sustainable living Sustainable sanitation Veganism Vegetarianism War tax resistance WWOOF Religious and spiritual Amish Aparigraha Asceticism Detachment Distributism Jesus movement Mendicant Mindfulness Monasticism New Monasticism Plain dress Plain people Quakers Rastafari Temperance Testimony of simplicity Tolstoyan movement Twelve Tribes communities Secular movements Back-to-the-land Car-free Environmental Hippie Open Source Ecology Slow Small house Tiny house Transition town Notable writers Wendell Berry Ernest Callenbach G. K. Chesterton Duane Elgin Mahatma Gandhi Richard Gregg Tom Hodgkinson Harlan Hubbard Satish Kumar Helen Nearing Scott Nearing Peace Pilgrim Nick Rosen Dugald Semple E. F. Schumacher George Skene Keith Henry David Thoreau Leo Tolstoy Valluvar Modern-day adherents Mark Boyle Robin Greenfield Ted Kaczynski Pentti Linkola Jim Merkel Peace Pilgrim Suelo Thomas Media " Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral " Escape from Affluenza The Good Life The Moon and the Sledgehammer Mother Earth News The Power of Half Small Is Beautiful Walden Related Affluenza Agrarianism Amateurism Anarcho-primitivism Anti-consumerism Appropriate technology Bohemianism Consumerism Critique of work Deep ecology Degrowth Ecological footprint Food miles Front Porch Republic Green anarchism The good life Global warming Hedonophobia Intentional living commune Rainbow Gathering Itinerant Low-technology Nonviolence Peak oil Sustainability Work–life interface v t e Anti-war and peace movement Peace advocates Anti-nuclear organizations Anti-war movement Anti-war organizations Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions Coalition of Women for Peace Code Pink Conscientious objectors Counterculture Culture of Peace ECOPEACE Party Greenham Common Women's Peace Camp Iraq War resisters in Canada List of pacifist organisations List of peace activists New Socialist Party of Japan Pacifist Socialist Party Peace and conflict studies Peace camp Peace churches Peace commission Peace conference Peace congress Peace education Peace movement Peace psychology Peace treaty Peaceworker React, Include, Recycle Social Democratic Party (Japan) Unity The Women's Peace Crusade War resisters Women's International League for Peace and Freedom Ideologies Ahimsa Anarchism Anarcho-pacifism Anarcho-punks Christian anarchism Anti-imperialism Anti-nuclear movement Antimilitarism Appeasement Christian pacifism Deterrence theory Direct action Finvenkismo Green politics Hippie Isolationism Modern-war pacifism Non-interventionism Nonkilling Nonviolence Pacificism Pacifism Peace Satyagraha Soviet influence on the peace movement Testimony of peace World peace Media and cultural Art Books Concert Yutel for Peace Dances of Universal Peace Festival for Peace Films Imagine Piano Peace Project International Day of Non-Violence International Day of Peace Dialogue Among Civilizations List of peace prizes List of places named Peace Monuments and memorials Mother's Day Proclamation Nobel Peace Prize Concert Museums Peace & Love (festival) Peace journalism Peace News Promoting Enduring Peace Peace One Day Plays Promoting Enduring Peace Show of Peace Concert Songs Symbols The Non-Violence Project University for Peace World Peace Bell Association Japanese Peace Bell Women in Black World March for Peace and Nonviolence Slogans and tactics Bed-in Central Park be-ins Civil disobedience Conflict resolution Counter-recruitment De-escalation Demilitarisation Department of Peace Desertion Draft evasion Die-in Economic sanctions Flower power Global Day of Action on Military Spending Human Be-In Lesson of Munich " Make love, not war " Non-aggression principle Nonviolent resistance Non Violent Resistance (psychological intervention) Peace walk Peacebuilding Refusal to serve in the Israel Defense Forces " Soldiers are murderers " Swords to ploughshares Teach-in " The whole world is watching " Third Party Non-violent Intervention " Turn the other cheek " " Violence begets violence " War tax resisters Opposition to specific wars or their aspects War of 1812 ( UK ; US ) American Civil War Second Boer War World War I World War II Vietnam War list of protests War on Terror Iraq War Criticism Protests Afghanistan War Military action in Iran Sri Lankan Civil War 2011 intervention in Libya Anti-war protests in Russia (2014) 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine in Russia in Russian Far East Gaza War in the U.S.

Calls for a ceasefire Landmines Military taxation Nuclear disarmament International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons Nuclear weapons convention Countries Canada Costa Rica Germany Israel Japan Netherlands Spain Sudan Switzerland United Kingdom United States Peacebuilding in Jammu and Kashmir Category v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index v t e Hippies History of the hippie movement Etymology Beat Generation / Beatniks Central Park be-ins Counterculture of the 1960s Red Dog Experience San Francisco sound Drop City Sunset Strip curfew riots Love Pageant Rally Haight-Ashbury Human Be-In Mantra-Rock Dance Summer of Love Fantasy Fair Monterey Pop Festival Newport Pop Festival Sky River Rock Festival People's Park Woodstock Glastonbury Festival The Farm Piedra Roja Festival Rock y Ruedas de Avándaro Nambassa People and groups Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters Acid Tests Furthur bus Electrohippies Diggers San Francisco Oracle Haight Ashbury Free Clinic Haight-Ashbury Switchboard Yippies Wavy Gravy Hog Farm The Brotherhood of Eternal Love Rainbow Family Politics and ethics Back-to-the-land movement Free love Anti-authoritarianism Simple living Environmentalism Pacifism Communalism Counterculture Bohemianism Make love, not war Turn on, tune in, drop out Vegetarianism Veganism Culture and fashion Psychedelia Flower power Hippie trail Hippie exploitation films Happening Peace symbols Bell-bottoms Love beads Long hair Tie-dye Intentional community communal living Free festival Music festival Flower child Music Folk music Folk rock Protest song Psychedelic music Psychedelic folk Psychedelic rock Psychedelic soul Psychedelic pop Psychedelic trance Acid rock Space rock Progressive rock Raga rock World music New-age music Jam bands List of jam band music festivals List of historic rock festivals Psychedelics and other drugs Cannabis DMT LSD Psilocybin mushroom Mescaline Peyote Hippie related subcultures Deadhead Feral Flower child Freak scene Housetrucker Jesus freak Jipitecas La Onda Lebensreform Mánička New Age New Age travellers Radical Faeries Rave UK underground Woodstock Nation Zippie Related List of films List of books and other publications Subculture Cannabis culture Cyberdelic Head shop Underground press press syndicate list Legend of the Rainbow Warriors Free Speech Movement Anti-war movement Civil rights movement Protests of 1968 Chicago Seven New Left New social movements Postmaterialism Neotribalism Hungry generation Sexual revolution Second Summer of Love Neo-psychedelia Baby boomers v t e Peak oil Core issues Fossil fuel phase-out Hubbert peak theory Predicting the timing of peak oil Results/responses 1970s energy crisis 2000s energy crisis Global energy crisis (2021–present) Energy crisis Export Land Model Food vs. fuel Hirsch report Oil and gas reserves and resource quantification Permaculture Pickens Plan Price of oil Renewable energy commercialization Rimini protocol Simmons–Tierney bet Simple living Swing producer People Albert Allen Bartlett Colin J. Campbell Kenneth S. Deffeyes David Goodstein John Michael Greer Richard Heinberg M. King Hubbert James Howard Kunstler Jean Laherrère Jeremy Leggett Dale Allen Pfeiffer Richard Rainwater Michael Ruppert Matthew Simmons Books The Limits to Growth Beyond Oil The End of Oil The Long Emergency Out of Gas The Party's Over Power Down Twilight in the Desert Documentary films A Crude Awakening: The Oil Crash Collapse Crude The End of Suburbia Escape from Suburbia Fuel GasHole The Oil Factor PetroApocalypse Now?

The Power of Community: How Cuba Survived Peak Oil What a Way to Go: Life at the End of Empire Organizations Energy Watch Group International Energy Agency International Renewable Energy Agency Oil Depletion Analysis Centre The Oil Drum OPEC Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries Post Carbon Institute REN21 Transition town Other peaks Car Coal Copper Food Gas Gold Minerals Phosphorus Soil Water Wheat Wood v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees v t e Tax resistance Topics Conscientious objection to military taxation List of historical acts of tax resistance Tax resistance in the United States .

List of tax resisters Methods Barter Gift economy Local currency Rebellion Self-sufficiency Simple living Tax avoidance Tax evasion Unreported employment Organizations Addiopizzo Aide-toi, le ciel t'aidera All Britain Anti-Poll Tax Federation Anti-Poll Tax Unions Association of Real Estate Taxpayers Catalunya Diu Prou Committee for Non-Violent Action Fasci Siciliani I Don't Pay Movement Irish National Land League National Campaign for a Peace Tax Fund National War Tax Resistance Coordinating Committee Northern California War Tax Resistance Pagal Panthis Peace churches Peacemakers Planka.nu Women's Tax Resistance League Zuism Media An Act of Conscience " Civil Disobedience " Clericis laicos The Cold War and the Income Tax: A Protest " Vyborg Manifesto " Campaigns by century 14th Tuchin Revolt Harelle Peasants' Revolt 15th Cornish Rebellion of 1497 16th Croquant rebellions Rappenkrieg Revolt of the Pitauds 17th Angelets Revolt of the papier timbré Revolt of the va-nu-pieds Salt Tax Revolt in Spain Salt Riot in Moscow 18th Boston Tea Party Edenton Tea Party Fries's Rebellion Gaspee affair No taxation without representation Philadelphia Tea Party Revolt of the Comuneros (New Granada) Regulator Movement in North Carolina Whiskey Rebellion White Lotus Rebellion 19th Anti-Rent War Dog Tax War House Tax Hartal Hut Tax War of 1898 Low Rebellion Mejba Revolt Rebecca Riots Saminism Movement Tancament de Caixes Tithe War Wallachian uprising 20th Agbekoya Bambatha Rebellion Bardoli Satyagraha Beit Sahour Bondelswarts affair Champaran Satyagraha Gordon Kahl Kheda Satyagraha Irwin Schiff Johnson cult Mau movement Poll Tax Riots Poplar Rates Rebellion Tupper Saussy Turra Coo Salt March Vedaranyam March Women's poll tax repeal movement Women's War 21st Anti-austerity movement in Greece Anti-Bin Tax Campaign Edward and Elaine Brown standoff Bonnets Rouges Campaign Against Home and Water Taxes Movimento Passe Livre Movimiento Pos Me Salto Yellow vests protests Related topics Income tax threshold Potentially dangerous taxpayer Render unto Caesar Sovereign citizen / Freeman on the land / Redemption movement Tax haven Tax inversion Tax noncompliance Tax protester ( arguments / history in the United States ) Tax riot Taxation as slavery Taxation as theft v t e Veganism and vegetarianism Perspectives Veganism Animal-free agriculture Black veganism Fruitarianism History Raw veganism Straight edge Hardline Nutrition Vegan organic agriculture Vegan school meal Vegan studies Vegetarianism Economic vegetarianism Environmental vegetarianism History ( Romantic Era ) Orthopathy Lacto vegetarianism Lacto-ovo vegetarianism Ovo vegetarianism Cuisine Vegetarian Diet Pyramid Ecofeminism Nutrition By country Lists Bibliography Vegetarians Vegans Fictional characters Festivals Organizations Vegan and plant-based media Locations Cheremshanka, Altai Republic Community of the Ark Haridwar New Vrindaban Palitana Pushkar Rishikesh Tirumala The Farm (Tennessee) Ethics Secular Animal rights Animal welfare Anthropocentrism Carnism Deep ecology Environmental vegetarianism Ethics of eating meat Meat paradox Nonviolence Replaceability argument Sentientism Speciesism Tirukkuṟaḷ Religious Buddhism Christianity ( Seventh-day Adventist Church ) Hinduism Sattvic Ahimsa Islam Jainism Judaism Pythagoreanism Rastafari Sikhism Taoism Food and drink List of vegetarian and vegan companies Dairy alternatives Coconut milk Plant cream Plant milk Soy yogurt Cheese Meat alternatives List of meat substitutes Bacon Burgers Duck Hot dogs Jambon Quorn Sausage roll Seitan Tempeh Tofu Tofurkey Gelatin substitutes Vegetarian mark Beer Wine Groups and events Vegan American Vegan Society Beauty Without Cruelty China Vegan Society Food Empowerment Project Go Vegan Nederlandse Vereniging voor Veganisme Our Hen House Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine Plamil Foods Vegan Awareness Foundation Vegan flag Vegan Outreach Vegan Prisoners Support Group The Vegan Society Veganmania Vegetarian Resource Group Veganuary Veganz World Vegan Day Vegetarian Alcott House Bible Christian Church Boston Vegetarian Society Christian Vegetarian Association Dutch Vegetarian Society Eden Gemeinnützige Obstbau-Siedlung European Vegetarian Union French Vegetarian Society Hare Krishna Food for Life International Vegetarian Union Jewish Veg Meat-free days Meatless Monday Friday fast North American Vegetarian Society Order of the Golden Age ProVeg Deutschland ProVeg International ProVeg Nederland Scottish Vegetarian Society Swissveg Toronto Vegetarian Association Vegetarian Federal Union Vegetarian Society Vegetarian Society (Singapore) Veggie Pride Viva! Health World Esperantist Vegetarian Association World Vegetarian Day Films The Animals Film (1981) Diet for a New America (1991) A Cow at My Table (1998) Meet Your Meat (2002) Post Punk Kitchen (2003–2005) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) A Sacred Duty (2007) Fat, Sick and Nearly Dead (2010) Planeat (2010) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) Live and Let Live (2013) Cowspiracy (2014) PlantPure Nation (2015) What the Health (2017) Carnage (2017) Dominion (2018) Eating You Alive (2018) The Game Changers (2018) Maa Ka Doodh (2023) You Are What You Eat: A Twin Experiment (2024) Magazines and journals The Animals' Agenda Naked Food The Pleasure Boat Satya Vegan Journal The Vegetarian Magazine Vegetarian Times VegNews Books and reports On Abstinence from Eating Animals (3rd century) Acetaria: A Discourse of Sallets (1699) The Fable of the Bees (1714) A Reasonable Plea for the Animal Creation (1746) Primitive Cookery (1767) The Cry of Nature (1791) An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802) Vegetable Cookery (1812) A Vindication of Natural Diet (1813) Reasons for not Eating Animal Food (1814) Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) Nature's Own Book (1835) Fruits and Farinacea (1845) " The Vegetarian; or a Visit to Aunt Primitive " (1847) The Penny Domestic Assistant and Guide to Vegetarian Cookery (1850) The Ethics of Diet (1883) A Plea for Vegetarianism and Other Essays (1886) What is Vegetarianism?

(1886) The First Step (1891) Shelley's Vegetarianism (1891) Behind the Scenes in Slaughter-Houses (1892) Why I Am a Vegetarian (1895) Figs or Pigs?

(1896) Fifty Years of Food Reform (1898) The Logic of Vegetarianism (1899) Thirty-nine Reasons Why I Am a Vegetarian (1903) The Meat Fetish (1904) The Apsley Cookery Book The New Ethics (1907) A Fleshless Diet (1910) The Benefits of Vegetarianism (1927) Living the Good Life (1954) Ten Talents (1968) Diet for a Small Planet (1971) The Vegetarian Epicure (1972) Moosewood Collective Cookbooks (1973) The Farm Vegetarian Cookbook (1975) Laurel's Kitchen (1976) Moosewood Cookbook (1977) Fit for Life (1985) Diet for a New America (1987) The Sexual Politics of Meat (1990) Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone (1997) The China Study (2005) Skinny Bitch (2005) Livestock's Long Shadow (2006) The Bloodless Revolution (2006) Eating Animals (2009) Why We Love Dogs, Eat Pigs, and Wear Cows (2009) The Vegan Studies Project (2015) Animal (De)liberation (2016) The End of Animal Farming (2018) Vegetable Kingdom (2020) Making a Stand for Animals (2022) Meat Atlas (annual) Restaurants Active Ben & Esther's Vegan Jewish Deli Cinnaholic Crossroads Kitchen Green Elephant Vegetarian Bistro Greens Restaurant Elizabeth's Gone Raw Hiltl Restaurant Little Pine Moosewood Restaurant Plant Purezza Slutty Vegan Souley Vegan The Sound Lounge Veggie Galaxy Veggie Grill Former Cranks Food for Thought InSpiral Lounge Lentil as Anything Minerva Café New Riverside Cafe Nix Penny Cafeteria Pink Peacock The Hollow Reed The Pitman Vegetarian Hotel Related Cultured meat Juice fasting Low-carbon Plant-based action plan Plant-based diet Planetary health Sustainable diet Vegaphobia Vegetarian and vegan dog diet Vegetarian and vegan symbolism v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Simple_living&oldid=1294136504 " Categories : Simple living Lifestyle Lifestyles Personal finance Subcultures Sustainability Work–life balance Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: postscript Pages with missing ISBNs All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from September 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2023 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from September 2023 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from September 2023 Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2019 Pages in non-existent country centric categories All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 20:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Simple living 41 languages Add topic

