Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose Toggle Purpose subsection 1.1 Mission 2 History 3 Process of creating palettes 4 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 4.1 The Color Compendium 4.2 Color & Human Response 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Color Association of the United States Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Color trend forecasting and consulting organization Color Association of the United States Formerly Textile Color Card Association of the United States (1915-1955) Company type Incentive Corporation Limited Industry Entertainment Group Predecessor Textile Color Card Association of the United States Founded 1914 (as Textile Color Card Association of the United States) 1955 (as Color Association of the United States) Headquarters United States Area served Worldwide Website www.colorassociation.com The Color Association of the United States ( CAUS ), known until 1955 as the Textile Color Card Association of the United States ( TCCA ), is an independent color trend forecasting and color consulting service to the business community, known for its textile color swatch book, the Standard Color Reference of America (formerly the Standard Color Card of America).

Purpose [ edit ] As industry exploded after the Industrial Revolution certain industries especially in the textiles trade found the need to be able to better predict and set upcoming color and style trends. The Color Association of the United States (CAUS), then the Textile Color Card Association of the United States (TCCA), was formed to accomplish this goal. By implementing a standard, business could then plan upcoming product releases and marketing with better hope of success.

Mission [ edit ] Issue color forecasts in the form of cards twice a year Give directions in color trends to the market Enable different segments of the market to coordinate their products by offering the formulas for the production of each forecast color Buy products worldwide knowing they would coordinate at the point of sale Serve as an information center for all kinds of color information.

The central purpose of setting trends and maintaining color standards is accomplished to this day in part through the publication of the " Standard Color Reference of America ", and other swatch books.

History [ edit ] Prior to the creation of the TCCA in 1914, later to become The Color Association, hat makers took on the responsibility of color forecasting in the textile industry. Following the outbreak of World War I the information and supplies the milliners were using from Europe, especially France, was cut off. Textile manufacturers who had grown dependent of these color decisions decided to form their own committee, the TCCA, which immediately published a Standard Color Card.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Early on the TCCA set out to create what they termed "staple colors" that would facilitate the color coordination and consistency, especially among unrelated trades.

By 1930 the TCCA had built close ties to the United States government, especially in the military. The TCCA, under the managing direction of Margaret Hayden Rorke , played a major role in defining the colors and their names for all manner of government related items such as uniforms, ribbons, medals, and flags. For example, the modern Flag of the United States uses specific colors selected and named by the TCCA (Old Glory Red and Old Glory Blue).

Through the 1940s and 1950s the TCCA membership increased, including international companies. This expansion led to the creation of industry specific trends and color books sponsored by those industries and more direct consulting to individual companies.

To this day CAUS plays a major role in the determining of color trends for industry.

Process of creating palettes [ edit ] Many Color Cards or palettes are created for various industries each year. For each area of focus a committee panel is formed, consisting of eight to twelve people, referred in the business as the "Color Czars." Each member of the committee performs their own research on what colors they feel will, should, dominate the next few years in that industry. The committee then convenes and they debate the merits of the member selections. In the end they choose 44 colors that will make it to the palette. According to Forecaster Ken Charbonneau, the process is a lot of debate before consensus.

Publications [ edit ] The Color Compendium [ edit ] by Augustine Hope and Margaret Walch A fully illustrated encyclopedia focused entirely on color including scientific, technical, historical, and artistic concepts.

Color & Human Response [ edit ] by Faber Birren A hypothetical and scientific look at color and the human response.

References [ edit ] ^ "Standard Color Card; Has 106 Shades for Use by Textile and Allied Trades" .

The New York Times . June 7, 1915.

^ Rorke, Margaret Hayden (1931). "The Work of the Textile Color Card Association*".

Journal of the Optical Society of America .

21 (10): 651.

doi : 10.1364/JOSA.21.000651 .

History of The Color Association from the official organization site "History of the Color Association" .

Color Association of the United States . Archived from the original on 20 August 2008.

Design Section of Wikipedia entry on the Flag of the United States Color Forecasting article on HGtv.com External links [ edit ] Official website Color Works article at eWarna.com International Color Consortium site Colorbox site Pantone site Color Marketing Group The Inter-Society Color Council records Archived 2015-01-03 at the Wayback Machine at Hagley Museum and Library contain materials from the Color Association of America including corporate files, general files, special color promotions, Paris reports and swatches, publicity scrapbooks, color cards, home furnishings color cards and color selection systems, and a card catalog.

v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Color_Association_of_the_United_States&oldid=1286724569 " Categories : Color organizations Textile industry of the United States Textile industry associations Organizations established in 1915 1915 establishments in the United States Entertainment companies of the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 16:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Color Association of the United States Add languages Add topic

