Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical context 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz 13 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by Johann Valentin Andreae This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Author Anonymous: attributed to Johann Valentin Andreae Original title Chymische Hochzeit Christiani Rosencreutz anno 1459 Language German Publication date 1616 Media type Print The Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz ( German : Chymische Hochzeit Christiani Rosencreutz anno 1459 ) is a German book edited in 1616 [ 1 ] in Strasbourg . Its anonymous authorship is attributed to Johann Valentin Andreae . The Chymical Wedding is often described as the third of the original manifestos of the mysterious "Fraternity of the Rose Cross" ( Rosicrucians ), although it is markedly different from the Fama Fraternitatis and Confessio Fraternitatis in style and in subject matter.

As one of the three foundational Rosicrucian Manifestos, the book also inspired several Rosicrucian organizations such as Order of the Golden and Rosy Cross (1750s–1790s) and Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia (1865–present).

It is an allegoric romance (story) divided into Seven Days, or Seven Journeys, like Genesis , and recounts how Christian Rosenkreuz was invited to go to a wonderful castle full of miracles, in order to assist the Chymical Wedding of the king and the queen, that is, the husband and the bride .

This manifesto has been a source of inspiration for poets, alchemists (the word "chymical" is an old form of "chemical" and refers to alchemy—for which the 'Sacred Marriage' was the goal) [ 2 ] and dreamers, through the force of its initiation ritual with processions of tests, purifications, death, resurrection, and ascension and also by its symbolism found since the beginning with the invitation to Rosenkreutz to assist this Royal Wedding.

The invitation to the royal wedding includes the symbol invented and described by John Dee in his 1564 book, Monas Hieroglyphica .

There is some resemblance between this alchemical romance and passages in the Bible such as: The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son, and And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment: ( Matthew 22:2,11 KJV ) And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.

( Revelation 21:2) Historical context [ edit ] The Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz first appeared in Strasbourg in the year 1616. It was written in German and entitled Chymische Hochzeit Christiani Rosencreutz anno 1459 . No author was named in the book, other than Christian Rosenkreutz, but Johannes Valentinus Andreae (1586–1654) claimed to be the author, in his autobiography. The first English version appeared in 1690, by Ezechiel Foxcroft , followed by translations into many languages throughout time.

Although the book first appeared in 1616, the story takes place over 150 years earlier. The events of this story span seven days and are divided into seven chapters, each chapter relating a different day. The story begins on an evening near Easter . In the final chapter—the seventh day—Rosenkreutz is knighted; the year is 1459. It was on Easter-day 1459 that the Constitutions of the Freemasons of Strasburg was first signed in Regensburg, with a second signed shortly afterwards in Strasburg.

[ citation needed ] The Gutenberg Bible began printing in Mainz, Germany in 1455, and the first Bible in German , the Mentel Bible, was printed in Strasburg in 1466.

See also [ edit ] Esoteric Christianity – Mystical approach to Christianity Hermeticism – Philosophy based on the teachings of Hermes Trismegistus Kabbalah – Type of Jewish mysticism Parabola Allegory Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia – Rosicrucian esoteric Christian order References [ edit ] ^ Anonymous (1690) [Originally published in German in 1616].

The Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz (PDF) . Retrieved September 21, 2017 .

^ Gillabel, Dirk.

"Alchemy: Sacred Marriage" .

House of the Sun . Retrieved September 21, 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Original German edition of Chymische Hochzeit Christiani Rosencreutz anno 1459 via Google books Text of The Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Text of the Rosicrucian Manifestos at the Rosicrucian Library web site The Chemical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz (You Are Cordially Invited to a Royal Wedding!) French text of the Alchemical Wedding of Christian Rosycross Archived 2022-09-13 at the Wayback Machine , the gnostic review by Jan van Rijckenborgh , translated from the dutch original. Lectorium Rosicrucianum (1999) Les Noces Chimiques at Project Gutenberg (French translation) The Sacred Marriage , the goal of the 'Great Work' The Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chymical_Wedding_of_Christian_Rosenkreutz&oldid=1291772248 " Categories : 1616 books Rosicrucianism Fiction about alchemy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 09:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz 13 languages Add topic

