Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Teleological arguments 2 Spinning the myth 3 Deconstructing the myth 4 See also 5 Citations 6 Sources Toggle the table of contents Borussian myth 4 languages Deutsch Bahasa Indonesia Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The Borussian myth or Borussian legend [ 1 ] is the name given by early 20th-century historians of German history to the earlier idea that German unification was inevitable, and that it was Prussia 's destiny to accomplish it.  The Borussian myth is an example of a teleological argument.

Borussia is the Latin name for Prussia.

Teleological arguments [ edit ] A teleological argument holds all things to be designed for, or directed toward, a specific final result.  That specific result gives events and actions, even retrospectively, an inherent purpose.  When applied to the historical process, an historical teleological argument posits the result as the inevitable trajectory of a specific set of events.  These events lead "inevitably," as Karl Marx or Friedrich Engels proposed, to a specific set of conditions or situations; the resolution of those lead to another, and so on.  This goal-oriented, 'teleological' notion of the historical process as a whole is present in a variety of arguments about the past: the "inevitability," for example, of the revolution of the proletariat and the "Whiggish" narrative of past as an inevitable progression towards ever greater liberty and enlightenment that culminated in modern forms of liberal democracy and constitutional monarchy .

[ 2 ] Spinning the myth [ edit ] The narrative of the heroic past fell to such nationalist German historians as Heinrich von Treitschke (1834–1896), Theodor Mommsen (1817–1903), and Heinrich von Sybel (1817–1895), to name three. Treitschke in particular viewed Prussia as the logical agent of unification.

[ 3 ] These historical arguments can also be called the grand, or great, narratives but they are inherently ethnocentric , at least when applied to the historical process.

[ 4 ] Treitschke's History of Germany in the Nineteenth Century , published in 1879, has perhaps a misleading title: it privileges the history of Prussia over the history of other German states, and it tells the story of the German-speaking peoples through the guise of Prussia's destiny to unite all German states under its leadership. The creation of this myth established Prussia as Germany's savior; it was the destiny of all Germans to be united, this myth maintains, and it was Prussia's destiny to accomplish this.

[ 5 ] According to this story, Prussia played the dominant role in bringing the German states together as a nation-state; only Prussia could protect German liberties from being crushed by French or Russian influence. This interpretation emphasizes Prussia's role in saving Germans from the resurgence of Napoleon 's power in 1814, at Waterloo , creating some semblance of economic unity through the Zollverein (German customs union), and uniting Germans under one proud flag after the defeat of France in the Franco Prussian War in 1871.

[ 6 ] Deconstructing the myth [ edit ] After World War II , various historians of Germany sought to re-examine the German past, in part to understand the immediate German past and the Holocaust , and in part to understand Germany's supposed democratic deficit : Theoretically, Germans were inexperienced with democracy and self-government because their experience in unification came under the leadership of the least democratic of the German states (Prussia). This inevitably led to, first, World War I , and second the failure of the Weimar Republic , third, to the rise of National Socialism , and fourth, to World War II .

The Borussian myth was linked to the Sonderweg theory of Germany's peculiar road to modernity.

[ 7 ] The set of circumstances that predated the Unification, for example, the so-called failure of the 1848 German revolutions and the elimination of Austria as a possible leader in the unification process strengthen the myth's appeal.  In this way, teleological arguments tend to work backward from an event, to describe and rationalize all trends leading to it; [ 8 ] they are genealogical —trace from the present to the past—rather than historical, which explores the past to the present.

In the 1970s, and later, as social and cultural historians examined nineteenth-century German history in greater depth, they realized that not only was there a vibrant and lively German culture without Prussia, but they also deconstructed significant elements of the Sonderweg theory as well.  They discovered, for example, that the 1848 Revolutions in Germany actually had some significant successes.

[ 9 ] Indeed, the history of 19th-century Germany was not a long process of grinding under the heel of Prussian militarism, but instead a process of economic expansion, testing of democratic institutions, the writing and testing of constitutions, and the creation of social insurance systems to maintain long term economic security.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] German Empire Otto von Bismarck History of Prussia Citations [ edit ] ^ Hughes, Michael (1992).

Early Modern Germany, 1477-1806 , MacMillan Press and University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, p. xi.

ISBN 0-8122-1427-7 .

^ Herbert Butterfield , The Whiggish Interpretation of History, (1931).

^ David Blackbourn and Geoff Eley, The Peculiarities of German History: Bourgeois Society and Politics in Nineteenth-Century Germany.

Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press, 1984.

ISBN 978-0-19-873057-6 p. 241.

^ Butterfield, 1931.

^ Karin Friedrich, The Other Prussia: Royal Prussia, Poland and Liberty, 1569–1772 , New York, 2000, p. 5.

^ Many modern historians describe this myth, without subscribing to it: for example, Rudy Koshar, Germany's Transient Pasts: Preservation and the National Memory in the Twentieth Century.

Chapel Hill, 1998; Hans Kohn (ed.), German History: Some New German Views.

Boston, 1954; Thomas Nipperdey, Germany from Napoleon to Bismarck, 1800-1866.

^ David Blackbourn and Geoff Eley, Peculiarities of German History, p. 241.

^ Butterworth, 1931.

^ Jonathan Sperber, Rhineland Radicals: The Democratic Movement and the Revolution of 1848–1849.

Princeton, N.J., 1993.

^ David Blackbourn, The Long Nineteenth Century: A History of Germany, 1780–1918.

New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.

ISBN 0-19-507672-9 .

Sources [ edit ] Blackbourn, David and Geoff Eley .

The Peculiarities of German History: Bourgeois Society and Politics in Nineteenth-Century Germany . Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press, 1984.

ISBN 978-0-19-873057-6 Friedrich, Karin, The Other Prussia: Oyal Prussia, Poland and Liberty, 1569–1772 New York, 2000.

ISBN 978-0-521-02775-5 Kohn, Hans (ed.) German History: Some New German Views.

Boston, 1954.  ASIN B001037HN4 Koshar, Rudy, Germany's Transient Pasts: Preservation and the National Memory in the Twentieth Century.

Chapel Hill, 1998.

ISBN 978-0-8078-4701-5 Nipperdey, Thomas.

Germany from Napoleon to Bismarck, 1800–1866.

Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1996.

ISBN 978-0-691-02636-7 v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Historical negationism Denialism Disinformation Knowledge falsification Pseudohistory school textbook controversies Rationalization Victim blaming Genocide denial / denial of mass killings and atrocities Armenian genocide Atrocities against Indigenous peoples Bosnian genocide Cambodian genocide Genocide of Serbs during WWII Croatian Wikipedia Holodomor Katyn massacre Khojaly massacre Nanjing Massacre U.S. cover-up of Japanese war crimes Rohingya genocide Rwandan genocide Denial of the 7 October attacks Holocaust Austria victim theory Clean Wehrmacht Rommel / Speer myth Italians, the good people Trivialization Double genocide theory Vichy syndrome Sonderaktion 1005 Other whitewashing of governments or time periods Cuba de ayer Czechoslovak myth Denial of state terrorism in Argentina Driftwood theory Ferdinand Marcos apologism Lost Cause of the Confederacy Dunning School Negationism of the military dictatorship of Brazil [ pt ] / Chile Merry England Neo-Stalinism Operation Legacy (UK) Other manifestations Allah as a lunar deity Ancient astronauts Ancient Egyptian race controversy Antiquization Book burnings list Censorship of Great Zimbabwe Christ myth theory Dacianism Damnatio memoriae Destruction of cultural heritage Islamic State Saudi Arabia Gaza Strip Lebanon Sudan Myth of English aid [ es ] Izbrisani Khazar hypothesis LGBT erasure Like sheep to the slaughter Myth of the golden exile Phantom time hypothesis / New chronology Western Pseudohistory Theory Shakespeare authorship question Territorial losses of Thailand Azerbaijan Destruction of Armenian heritage Cemetery in Julfa Nakhchivan [ ru ] Nizami Ganjavi Western Azerbaijan Germany Borussian myth Myth of Langemarck [ de ] Stab-in-the-back myth Israel / Palestine Denial of the 7 October attacks Nakba denial Temple denial There was no such thing as Palestinians Russia Allegations of genocide in Donbas All-Russian nation On the Historical Unity of Russians and Ukrainians Soviet Union Censorship of images Denial of Crimean Tatars Turkey Denial of Kurds History Thesis Sun Language Theory United States 1776 Commission Irish slaves myth Vietnam stab-in-the-back myth Organizations Adelaide Institute ASİMKK Centre for the Study of the Causes of the War CODOH Dalit Voice FactCheckArmenia.com Gesellschaft zur Rechtlichen und Humanitären Unterstützung HIAG Iğdır Genocide Memorial and Museum Institute for Armenian Research Institute for Historical Review Nippon Kaigi Turkish Historical Society United Daughters of the Confederacy Zeitgeschichtliche Forschungsstelle Ingolstadt Publications A Town Betrayed A Verdade Sufocada The Birth of a Nation Coverage of the Hillsborough disaster by The Sun Did Six Million Really Die?

Falsifiers of History Flatline Folk og Land A History of the Palestinian People (2017) Hitler Diaries The Hoax of the Twentieth Century I Am More Than a Wolf Whistle Jasenovac – istina Journal of Historical Review Leuchter report The Other Side: The Secret Relationship Between Nazism and Zionism The Ottoman Lieutenant Report about Case Srebrenica Conferences International Conference to Review the Global Vision of the Holocaust Publishing houses Arndt Verlag J.J. Fedorowicz Publishing Munin Verlag Nation Europa Verlag Legal status Statute law Austria Belgium France Germany Case law R v Zundel (1992) Lehideux and Isorni v France (1998) Irving v Penguin Books Ltd (2000) Perinçek v. Switzerland (2013) International law Additional Protocol to the Convention on Cybercrime Right to truth Related Historical fiction Historical revisionism Historical misconceptions Accusation in a mirror Ash heap of history Censorship Cherry picking Conspiracy theories False attribution Furtive fallacy Genocide justification Propaganda Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Borussian_myth&oldid=1176426798 " Categories : Historiography of Germany Causality Teleology 20th century in Prussia This page was last edited on 21 September 2023, at 17:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Borussian myth 4 languages Add topic

