Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission 2 French space assets 3 Commanders 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents French Space Command 4 languages Français עברית Norsk bokmål 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Space command of the French Air and Space Force French Space Command Commandement de l'Espace Active 2019 Country France Branch French Air and Space Force Type Space force Role Space warfare Garrison/HQ Toulouse Space Center Commanders Commander Général Philippe Adam Military unit The French Space Command ( French : Commandement de l'Espace , CdE) is a formation of the French Air and Space Force , which deals with space issues. It supersedes the Joint Space Command, which was created in 2010.

Mission [ edit ] A formation of the Ministry of the Armed Forces, the JSC is placed under the authority of the Chief of the Defence Staff (France) . Within the Defense staff, it is under the supervision of the Deputy Chief of Operations.

The JSC: [ 1 ] contributes to the national space policy, in coordination with the Directorate General of International Relations and Strategy (DGRIS); contributes to the operations in coordination with military operators: the Command of Air Defense and Air Operations (CDAOA), the Joint Directorate of Infrastructure Networks and Defense Information Systems (DIRISI) and the Directorate of Military Intelligence (DRM) ; is responsible for coordinating defining guidelines for the use of French space capabilities available to the Ministry of the Armed Forces; shapes the future by federating the expression of operational needs and participates in the development and the implementation of space capability acquisition strategies with the Directorate-General for Armament (DGA) using the French Space Agency: the National Center for Space Studies (CNES) ; deals with all European, international and multilateral military cooperation for matters regarding space; orients the space situational awareness efforts, while this spatial situation is produced by the CDAOA.

French space assets [ edit ] France possesses all major kinds of military assets : Earth observation: 3 satellites Composante Spatiale Optique 2 satellites Helios 2 2 dual civil/military satellites Pleiades Signal intelligence satellite; 4 satellites ELISA 3 satellites CERES Satellite communication: 2 satellites Syracuse III 2 satellites Syracuse IV 1 satellite Athena-Fidus 1 satellite Sicral 2 Space situation awareness: GRAVES SATAM In relation with its German and Italian partners, France can access SAR imagery, respectively SAR-Lupe and COSMO-SkyMed .

Commanders [ edit ] The JSC was created in 2010.

[ 2 ] From that date, the JSC commanders are: General de division Yves Arnaud (2010–2014) Général de brigade aérienne Jean-Daniel Testé (2014–2017) Général de brigade aérienne Jean-Pascal Breton (2017–2018) Général de brigade aérienne Michel Friedling (2018–2022) Général de brigade aérienne Philippe Adam (2022–present) See also [ edit ] List of active military aircraft of the French Armed Forces References [ edit ] ^ "Hearing of the French Joint Commander for Space" . SatelliteObservation.net. February 5, 2018 . Retrieved April 13, 2018 .

^ "French Joint Space Command On Schedule to Open in July" . Space News. April 25, 2010 . Retrieved January 7, 2023 .

Quelle strategie spatiale pour la France?

, interview 16 March 2021 This article about a specific French military unit is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e v t e French Armed Forces Armée de terre (Army) Marine nationale (Navy) Armée de l'air et de l'espace (Air and Space Force) National Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie) Leadership Minister of the Armed Forces Chief of the Defence Staff Chief of Army Staff Chief of Navy Staff Chief of Air Force Staff Ranks Army ranks Navy ranks Air Force ranks Formations & Commands Foreign Legion Space Command Paratroopers Marines Joint forces Franco-German Brigade Combined Joint Expeditionary Force Nuclear forces Force de Dissuasion Strategic Air Forces Command Strategic Oceanic Force Equipment Army Navy Air and Space Force Military bases Overseas France and weapons of mass destruction v t e List of space forces and space commands Space forces China Russia United States Air and Space force Colombia France Iran Netherlands Russia Spain Air forces with space units and formations Australia Brazil Canada Germany Iran Israel Japan New Zealand North Korea Pakistan South Korea Thailand Turkey United Kingdom Vietnam Space commands Australia Brazil France India Italy Japan NATO NORAD Peru Russia South Korea United Kingdom United States Ranks and insignia of space forces Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=French_Space_Command&oldid=1299867298 " Categories : French military unit and formation stubs Commands of the French Air and Space Force Joint military units and formations Space units and formations 2019 establishments in France Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text All stub articles This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 22:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents French Space Command 4 languages Add topic

