Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Populations and languages 4 Special political status in Maine 5 Notable Passamaquoddy 6 Maps 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Notes 8.2 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Passamaquoddy 19 languages Atikamekw Беларуская Български Català Deutsch Español Euskara Français Gaeilge Hrvatski Italiano Latina മലയാളം 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic group For other uses, see Passamaquoddy (disambiguation) .

Ethnic group Passamaquoddy Peskotomuhkati Passamaquoddy men in a canoe (2016) Total population 3,575 enrolled tribal members Sipayik : 2,005 Motahkomikuk : 1,364 Qonasqamkuk : 206 Regions with significant populations United States (Maine) 3,369 (0.3%) Canada (New Brunswick) 206 (0.03%) Languages Maliseet-Passamaquoddy , English Religion Wabanaki mythology , Catholicism Related ethnic groups Abenaki , Maliseet , Mi'kmaq , Penobscot Person Peskotomuhkat People Peskotomuhkatiyik Language Peskotomuhkatuwey Country Peskotomuhkatihkuk Wabanaki The Passamaquoddy ( Passamaquoddy : Peskotomuhkati , Plural: Peskotomuhkatiyik ) are a Native American / First Nations people who live in northeastern North America. Their traditional homeland, Peskotomuhkatikuk , straddles the Canadian province of New Brunswick and the U.S. state of Maine in a region called Dawnland. They are one of the constituent nations of the Wabanaki Confederacy .

The Passamaquoddy Tribe in Maine is a federally recognized tribe . The Passamaquoddy people in Canada have an organization known as the Peskotomuhkati Nation , but it does not have official First Nations status.

Etymology [ edit ] The name "Passamaquoddy" is an anglicization of the Passamaquoddy word peskotomuhkati , the prenoun form (prenouns being a linguistic feature of Algonquian languages ) of Peskotomuhkat ( pestəmohkat ), their endonym , or the name that they use for themselves.

Peskotomuhkat literally means "pollock-spearer" or "those of the place where pollock are plentiful", [ 1 ] reflecting the importance of this fish in their culture.

[ 2 ] Their method of fishing was spear-fishing, rather than angling or using nets.

Passamaquoddy Bay is shared by both New Brunswick and Maine; its name was derived by the English settlers from the Passamaquoddy people.

History [ edit ] A Passamaquoddy story scraped onto birch bark The Passamaquoddy have an oral history supported with visual imagery, such as birchbark etching and petrographs prior to European contact. Among the Algonquian -speaking tribes of the loose Wabanaki Confederacy , they occupy coastal regions along the Bay of Fundy , Passamaquoddy Bay , and Gulf of Maine , and along the St. Croix River and its tributaries. Traditionally, they had seasonal patterns of settlement. In the winter, they dispersed and hunted inland. In the summer, they gathered more closely together on the coast and islands, and primarily harvested seafood, including marine mammals, mollusks, crustaceans, and fish.

[ 3 ] A mannequin representing a 16th-century Passamaquoddy man Settlers of European descent repeatedly forced the Passamaquoddy off their original lands from the 1800s. After the United States achieved independence from Great Britain, the tribe was eventually officially limited to the current Indian Township Reservation , at 45°15′57″N 67°36′43″W ﻿ / ﻿ 45.26583°N 67.61194°W ﻿ / 45.26583; -67.61194 , in eastern Washington County, Maine . It has a land area of 37.45 square miles (97.0 km 2 ) and a 2000 census resident population of 676 persons. They also control the small Passamaquoddy Pleasant Point Reservation in eastern Washington County, which has a land area of 0.5 square miles (1.3 km 2 ) and a population of 749, per the 2010 census.

[ 4 ] Passamaquoddy have also lived on off-reservation trust lands in five Maine counties. These lands total almost four times the size of the reservations proper. They are located in northern and western Somerset County , northern Franklin County , northeastern Hancock County , western Washington County, and several locations in eastern and western Penobscot County . The total land area of these areas is 373.888 km 2 (144.359 sq mi). As of the 2000 census, no residents were on these trust lands.

[ citation needed ] Location of Passamaquoddy off-reservation trust lands The Passamaquoddy also live in Charlotte County, New Brunswick , Canada, where they have a chief and organized government. They maintain active land claims in Canada but do not have legal status there as a First Nation . Some Passamaquoddy continue to seek the return of territory now within present-day St. Andrews, New Brunswick , which they claim as Qonasqamkuk , a Passamaquoddy ancestral capital and burial ground.

[ citation needed ] Populations and languages [ edit ] The total Passamaquoddy population is around 3,576 people. About 500 people, most if not all over the age of 50, speak the Maliseet-Passamaquoddy language , shared (other than minor differences in dialect) with the neighboring and related Wolastoqiyik people. It belongs to the Algonquian branch of the Algic language family. The University of Maine published a comprehensive Passamaquoddy Dictionary in 2008. Another resource for the language is the online Passamaquoddy-Maliseet Language Portal, which includes many videos, subtitled in English and Passamaquoddy, of native speakers conversing in the language. Most of the people speak English as their first language.

While the Passamaquoddy population in Canada is much smaller than that in Maine, there is an organization called the Peskotomuhkati Nation , with a formal structure and a chief, Hugh Akagi. Most of its people speak French and English. It is not recognized by the Canadian government as constituting a First Nation . In 2004, Chief Akagi was authorized to represent the Passamaquoddy at events marking the 400th anniversary of French settlement of St Croix Island (the first French effort at permanent settlement in the New World). This indicates that the government had acknowledged the tribe to some extent, and progress is being made in formal recognition.

[ 5 ] Special political status in Maine [ edit ] The START energy planning workshop held at the Passamaquoddy Tribes of Indian Township and Pleasant Point in Maine Tanner Hall and Simon Dumont at the winter X Games in 2008 The Passamaquoddy, along with the neighboring Penobscot , are given special political status in Maine . Both groups are allowed to send a nonvoting representative to the Maine House of Representatives . Although these representatives cannot vote, they may sponsor any legislation regarding American Indian affairs, and may co-sponsor any other legislation.

Notable Passamaquoddy [ edit ] David Moses Bridges (Passamaquoddy, 1962–2017), Sipayik, birchbark artist and canoe maker [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Simon Dumont , freestyle skier [ 10 ] Tomah Joseph (1837–1914), governor, guide, and artist [ 11 ] Francis Joseph Neptune , former Sakom [ 12 ] Molly Neptune Parker , master basketmaker [ 13 ] Geo Soctomah Neptune , master basketmaker [ 14 ] Rena Newell , tribal member of the Maine House of Representatives [ 15 ] Donald Soctomah , former tribal state representative, tribal historic preservation officer [ 16 ] Madonna Soctomah , tribal council member, former state representative [ 17 ] Maps [ edit ] Maps showing the approximate locations of areas occupied by members of the Wabanaki Confederacy (from north to south): Miꞌkmaq Maliseet , Passamaquoddy Eastern Abenaki ( Penobscot , Kennebec, Arosaguntacook , Pigwacket/Pequawket) Western Abenaki (Arsigantegok, Missisquoi, Cowasuck, Sokoki, Pennacook See also [ edit ] Joint Tribal Council of the Passamaquoddy Tribe v. Morton (1st Cir. 1975) Passanaquoddy Tribe reacquires stolen land on Pine Island , Bangor Daily News 18 May 2021 References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Erickson, Vincent O. 1978. "Maliseet-Passamaquoddy". In Northeast , ed. Bruce G. Trigger. Vol. 15 of Handbook of North American Indians , ed. William C. Sturtevant. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, pg. 135. Cited in Campbell, Lyle (1997).

American Indian Languages: The Historical Linguistics of Native America . Oxford: Oxford University Press, pg. 401.

^ "Maliseet" - Passamaquoddy Dictionary ^ "Acadia National Park - Wabanaki Ethnography (U.S. National Park Service)" . Archived from the original on 2008-08-29 . Retrieved 2008-08-31 .

^ "Profile of General Population and Housing Characteristics: 2010 Demographic Profile Data (DP-1): Passamaquoddy Pleasant Point Reservation, Washington County, Maine" .

United States Census Bureau . Retrieved July 20, 2012 .

^ Rudin, Ronald.

Remembering and Forgetting in Acadie: A Historian's Journey through Public Memory (Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 2009).

^ "DAVID MOSES BRIDGES – PASSAMAQUODDY BIRCHBARK ARTIST AND CANOE BUILDER" . Retrieved Apr 27, 2020 .

^ "David Moses Bridges Scholarship – Maine Community Foundation" . Retrieved Apr 27, 2020 .

^ "David Moses Bridges" .

First Peoples Fund . Retrieved Apr 27, 2020 .

^ "David Moses Bridges, Bar Harbor Resident Who Embraced Native American Traditions, And Nature, Fully" .

www.wbur.org . 31 January 2018 . Retrieved Apr 27, 2020 .

^ "Native heritage source of strength for world-class athlete" .

Indian Country Today Media Network . 13 February 2009 . Retrieved 8 April 2014 .

^ "Tomah Joseph—Passamaquoddy Elder Who Mentored a President" .

U.S. National Park Service .

^ "Guide to the Passamaquoddy Indian Papers,1775-1912, (bulk 1830-1875)" .

Cornell University .

^ Green, Penelope (15 July 2020).

"Molly Neptune Parker, Basket Maker and Tribal Elder, Dies at 81" .

The New York Times .

^ "Geo Neptune, One of the featured artists in Sharing Honors and Burdens: Renwick Invitational 2023" .

Smithsonian American Art Museum .

^ Daugherty, Owen (May 16, 2019).

"Maine becomes first state to ban use of Native American mascots at public schools" .

The Hill . Retrieved August 26, 2019 .

^ "Passamaquoddy Dwayne Tomah and Donald Soctomah in Pine Island" .

Library of Congress .

^ French, Edward; Tides, Quoddy (11 November 2023).

"Language-keepers film stirs emotions among Passamaquoddy tribal citizens" .

The Maine Monitor .

Sources [ edit ] Indian Township Reservation and Passamaquoddy Trust Land, Maine United States Census Bureau Further reading [ edit ] Sockabasin, Allen J.  2007.

An Upriver Passamaquoddy . Thomaston, Maine: Tilbury House External links [ edit ] Passamaquoddy Tribal Government Web Site (Pleasant Point) Passamaquoddy Tribal Government Web Site (Indian Township) Archived 2014-03-27 at the Wayback Machine Passamaquoddy-Maliseet Language Portal (includes dictionary and videos) The Boston Globe Magazine , October 27, 1985 issue, article by Peter Anderson Contribution to Passamaquoddy Folk-Lore , by J. Walter Fewkes , reprinted from the Journal of American Folk-Lore, October–December, 1890, from Project Gutenberg Passamaquoddy Origins Acadian Commemorative Website Archived 2015-09-22 at the Wayback Machine "An Unlikely Handshake Alters the Course of Maine's History," Portland Press Herald , July 5, 2014.

Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Passamaquoddy&oldid=1305432166 " Categories : Passamaquoddy Algonquian peoples Indigenous peoples of the Northeastern Woodlands Native American history of Maine Wabanaki Confederacy Native American tribes in Maine Federally recognized tribes in the United States First Nations in Atlantic Canada Algonquian ethnonyms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Malecite-Passamaquoddy-language text "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 01:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Passamaquoddy 19 languages Add topic

