Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Edinburgh, the ministry and teaching (1809–1818) 1.3 Mineralogy, law and first publications (1818–1821) 1.4 "Conversion": Leith Walk and Hoddam Hill (1821–1826) 1.5 Marriage, Comely Bank and Craigenputtock (1826–1834) 1.6 Chelsea (1834–1845) 1.7 Journeys to Ireland and Germany (1846–1865) 1.8 Final years (1866–1881) 2 Works 3 Character 4 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 4.1 Influence 4.1.1 Literature 4.1.2 Social and political movements 4.1.3 Art 5 Controversies Toggle Controversies subsection 5.1 Froude controversy 5.2 Racism and antisemitism 5.3 Prussianist and Nazi appropriation 6 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 6.1 By Carlyle 6.1.1 Major works 6.1.2 Marginalia 6.1.3 Scholarly editions 6.2 Memoirs, etc.

6.3 Biographies 6.4 Secondary sources 7 Explanatory notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle External links subsection 9.1 Electronic editions 9.2 Archival material Toggle the table of contents Thomas Carlyle 68 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kernowek Latina Magyar Македонски मराठी مصرى မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scottish essayist, historian and philosopher (1795–1881) For the Scottish lawyer, see Thomas Carlyle (lawyer) .

Thomas Carlyle Portrait c.

1865 Born ( 1795-12-04 ) 4 December 1795 Ecclefechan , Dumfriesshire, Scotland Died 5 February 1881 (1881-02-05) (aged 85) London, England Spouse Jane Welsh Carlyle ​ ​ ( m.

1826; died 1866) ​ Education Alma mater University of Edinburgh Philosophical work Notable ideas See list Carlyleanism Natural Supernaturalism Meaning of life Speech is silver, silence is golden Great Man theory Condition-of-England question Captain of industry The dismal science Carlylese Sage writing Carlyle circle Signature This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United Kingdom Ideologies Burkean Cameronism Muscular liberalism Civic Compassionate Euroscepticism Green Liberal Classical Thatcherism Neo One-nation Powellism Progressive Toryism High Red Social Ultra Principles Anglo-Saxonism British unionism Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Familialism Imperialism Loyalism Moral absolutism Victorian Nationalism British English Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Ordered liberty Protectionism Royalism Social hierarchy Social market economy Sovereignty State church Tradition History Cavalier Stuart Restoration Tories Jacobitism 1794 Treason Trials Old Whigs Corn Laws Oxford Movement Young England Neo-Jacobite Revival New Right Wets and dries Brexit Intellectuals Bagehot Belloc Biggar Blond Burke Butterfield Carlyle Chesterton Clark Coleridge Conquest Dalrymple Dawson Eliot Elton Ferguson Filmer Galton Gibbon Gray Haldane Hayek Hulme Hume Johnson (Paul) Johnson (Samuel) Kipling Kedourie Laslett Lawrence Ludovici More Newman Oakeshott (Michael) Parvini Ruskin Scott Scruton Southey Stephen Trueman Unwin Waugh Williamson Wordsworth Politicians Anderson Badenoch Baldwin Balfour Braverman Burke Butler Cameron Canning Cazalet Chamberlain Churchill Clarke Disraeli Goldsmith Gove Hannan Hayes Hogg Howard Jenrick Johnson (Boris) Joseph Leigh Liverpool Lowe Macmillan Major May Peel Pitt Powell Rees-Mogg Salisbury Thatcher Whittle Willetts Commentators Amis Benjamin Bowden Burton Clarkson Cohen Forsyth (Frederick) Goodwin Hanbury-Tracy Hitchens Johnson (Paul) Kisin Liddle Lunn Moore Morgan Murray Nelson Oakeshott (Isabel) O'Sullivan Pearce Perry Roberts Smith Starkey Sullivan Turner Watson Welch West Worsthorne Young Literature Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) " Tamworth Manifesto " (1834) On Heroes (1841) Coningsby (1844) Sybil (1845) Latter-Day Pamphlets (1850) Culture and Anarchy (1867–68) Orthodoxy (1908) The Servile State (1912) " Tradition and the Individual Talent " (1919) The Whig Interpretation of History (1931) The Abolition of Man (1943) The Left Was Never Right (1945) " Rivers of Blood " (1968) The Abolition of Britain (1999) Our Culture, What's Left of It (2005) The Rage Against God (2010) The Great Degeneration (2013) How to Be a Conservative (2014) Conservatism (2017) The Strange Death of Europe (2017) Parties Active Alliance EPP: European People's Party UK Christian Party Christian Peoples Alliance Conservative and Unionist Party Common Sense Group Conservative Future (Defunct) Young Conservatives Democratic Unionist Party Heritage Party Reform UK Social Democratic Party (UK, 1990–present) Traditional Unionist Voice UK Independence Party Ulster Unionist Party Workers Party of Britain Defunct For Britain Movement Tories Veterans and People's Party Activists Booth-Smith Bowden Forsyth (James) Goldsmith Hitchens Keen-Minshull Littlewood Marshall Montgomerie Murray Payne Shawcross Stroud Sullivan Worsthorne Organisations 55 Tufton Street Centre for Policy Studies IEA LGB Alliance Migration Watch UK Policy Exchange Bright Blue Blue Collar Conservativism Conservative Democratic Alliance (Defunct) Conservative Philosophy Group Cornerstone Group CSC European Research Group The Freedom Association Henry Jackson Society London Swinton Circle Monday Club (Defunct) NATCON One Nation Conservatives Orange Order Oxford University Conservative Association Right Book Club (Defunct) Revolutionary Conservative Caucus (Defunct) Social Affairs Unit (Defunct) Tory Reform Group Traditional Britain Group Turning Point UK Western Goals Institute (Defunct) Media Anti-Jacobin Review (Defunct) Catholic Herald ConservativeHome The Critic Daily Express Sunday Express Daily Mail The Daily Sceptic The Daily Telegraph Evening Standard GB News Guido Fawkes The Mail on Sunday The Salisbury Review The Spectator The Sun The Sun on Sunday The Sunday Telegraph The Sunday Times Talk The Times UnHerd Related Anglo-Catholicism Antidisestablishmentarianism Blue Labour Cambridge Analytica " Constructive conservatism " List of British conservatives Merry England O'Sullivan's first law Philosophy of Thomas Carlyle Politics of the United Kingdom Liberalism Libertarianism Socialism Public schools in the UK Remigration Conservatism portal United Kingdom portal v t e Thomas Carlyle (4 December 1795 – 5 February 1881) was a Scottish essayist, historian and philosopher. Known as the " sage of Chelsea ", his writings strongly influenced the intellectual and artistic culture of the Victorian era .

Carlyle was born in Ecclefechan , a village in Dumfriesshire , Scotland. He attended the University of Edinburgh , where he excelled in mathematics and invented the Carlyle circle . After finishing the arts course he prepared to become a minister in the Burgher Church while working as a schoolmaster. He quit these and several other endeavours before settling on literature, writing for the Edinburgh Encyclopædia and working as a translator. He initially gained prominence in English-language literary circles for his extensive writing on German Romantic literature and philosophy. These themes were explored in his first major work, a semi-autobiographical philosophical novel entitled Sartor Resartus (1833–34).

Carlyle eventually relocated to London, where he published The French Revolution: A History (1837). Its popular success made him a celebrity, prompting the collection and reissue of his earlier essays under the title of Miscellanies . His subsequent works were highly regarded throughout Europe and North America, including On Heroes (1841), Past and Present (1843), Cromwell's Letters (1845), Latter-Day Pamphlets (1850), and Frederick the Great (1858–65). He founded the London Library , helped to establish the National Portrait Galleries in London and in Edinburgh , [ 1 ] became Lord Rector of the University of Edinburgh in 1865 and received the Pour le Mérite in 1874, amongst other honours.

Carlyle occupied a central position in Victorian culture, being considered the "undoubted head of English letters " [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and a "secular prophet". Posthumously, a series of publications by his friend James Anthony Froude damaged Carlyle's reputation, provoking controversy about his personal life and his marriage to Jane Welsh Carlyle in particular. His reputation further declined in the aftermaths of the First World War and the Second World War , when his philosophy was seen as a precursor of both Prussianism and fascism . Growing scholarship in the field of Carlyle studies since the 1950s has improved his standing, and although little-read today, he is yet recognised as "one of the enduring monuments of [English] literature".

[ 4 ] Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Thomas Carlyle's Birthplace Silhouettes of Carlyle's father and mother with captions in Carlyle's hand Thomas Carlyle was born on 4 December 1795 to James and Margaret Aitken Carlyle in the village of Ecclefechan in Dumfriesshire in southwest Scotland. His parents were members of the Burgher secession Presbyterian church.

[ 5 ] James Carlyle was a stonemason, later a farmer, who built the Arched House wherein his son was born. His maxim was that "man was created to work, not to speculate, or feel, or dream." [ 6 ] Nicholas Carlisle , an English antiquary, traced his ancestry back to Margaret Bruce, sister of Robert the Bruce .

[ 7 ] As a result of his disordered upbringing, James Carlyle became deeply religious in his youth, reading many books of sermons and doctrinal arguments throughout his life. In 1791 he married his first wife, distant cousin Janet, who gave birth to John Carlyle and then died. He married Margaret Aitken in 1795, a poor farmer's daughter then working as a servant. They had nine children, of whom Thomas was the eldest. Margaret was pious and devout and hoped that Thomas would become a minister. She was close to her eldest son, being a "smoking companion, counsellor and confidante" in Carlyle's early days. She suffered a manic episode when Carlyle was a teenager, in which she became "elated, disinhibited, over-talkative and violent." [ 8 ] She suffered another breakdown in 1817, which required her to be removed from her home and restrained.

[ 9 ] Carlyle always spoke highly of his parents, and his character was deeply influenced by both of them.

[ 10 ] Carlyle's early education came from his mother, who taught him reading (despite being barely literate), and his father, who taught him arithmetic.

[ 11 ] He first attended "Tom Donaldson's School" in Ecclefechan followed by Hoddam School ( c.

1802–1806 ), which "then stood at the Kirk ", located at the "Cross-roads" midway between Ecclefechan and Hoddam Castle .

[ 12 ] By age 7 Carlyle showed enough proficiency in English that he was advised to "go into Latin", which he did with enthusiasm; however, the schoolmaster at Hoddam did not know Latin, so he was handed over to a minister that did, with whom he made a "rapid & sure way".

[ 13 ] He then went to Annan Academy ( c.

1806–1809 ), where he studied rudimentary Greek, read Latin and French fluently, and learned arithmetic "thoroughly well".

[ 14 ] Carlyle was severely bullied by his fellow students at Annan, until he "revolted against them, and gave stroke for stroke"; he remembered the first two years there as among the most miserable of his life.

[ 15 ] Edinburgh, the ministry and teaching (1809–1818) [ edit ] Plaque at 22A Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh [ 16 ] In November 1809 at nearly fourteen years of age, Carlyle walked one hundred miles from his home in order to attend the University of Edinburgh ( c.

1809–1814 ), where he studied mathematics with John Leslie , science with John Playfair and moral philosophy with Thomas Brown .

[ 17 ] He gravitated to mathematics and geometry and displayed great talent in those subjects, being credited with the invention of the Carlyle circle . In the University library he read many important works of eighteenth-century and contemporary history, philosophy and belles-lettres .

[ 18 ] He began expressing religious scepticism around this time, asking his mother to her horror, "Did God Almighty come down and make wheelbarrows in a shop?" [ 19 ] In 1813 he completed his arts curriculum and enrolled in a theology course at Divinity Hall, Edinburgh , the following academic year. This was to be the preliminary of a ministerial career.

[ 20 ] Carlyle began teaching at Annan Academy in June 1814.

[ 21 ] In December 1814 and December 1815, he gave his first trial sermons, both of which are lost.

[ 22 ] By the summer of 1815 he had taken an interest in astronomy [ 23 ] and would study the astronomical theories of Pierre-Simon Laplace for several years.

[ 24 ] In November 1816 he began teaching at Kirkcaldy , having left Annan. There, he made friends with Edward Irving , whose ex-pupil Margaret Gordon became Carlyle's "first love". In May 1817, [ 25 ] Carlyle abstained from enrolment in the theology course, news which his parents received with " magnanimity ".

[ 26 ] In the autumn of that year, he read De l'Allemagne (1813) by Germaine de Staël , which prompted him to seek a German teacher, with whom he learned the pronunciation.

[ 27 ] In Irving's library he read the works of David Hume and Edward Gibbon 's The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (1776–1789); he would later recall that I read Gibbon, and then first clearly saw that Christianity was not true. Then came the most trying time of my life. I should either have gone mad or made an end of myself had I not fallen in with some very superior minds.

[ 28 ] Mineralogy, law and first publications (1818–1821) [ edit ] Jane Baillie Welsh by Kenneth Macleay , 1826, shortly before marriage In the summer of 1818, following an expedition with Irving through the moors of Peebles and Moffat , Carlyle made his first attempt at publishing, forwarding an article describing what he saw to the editor of an Edinburgh magazine, which was not published and is now lost.

[ 29 ] In October, Carlyle resigned from his position at Kirkcaldy, and left for Edinburgh in November.

[ 30 ] Shortly before his departure, he began to suffer from dyspepsia , which remained with him throughout his life.

[ 31 ] He enrolled in a mineralogy class from November 1818 to April 1819, attending lectures by Robert Jameson , [ 32 ] and in January 1819 began to study German, desiring to read the mineralogical works of Abraham Gottlob Werner .

[ 33 ] In February and March, he translated a piece by Jöns Jacob Berzelius , [ 34 ] and by September he was "reading Goethe ".

[ 35 ] In November he enrolled in "the class of Scots law ", studying under the advocate David Hume .

[ 36 ] In December 1819 and January 1820 Carlyle made his second attempt at publishing, writing a review-article on Marc-Auguste Pictet 's review of Jean-Alfred Gautier 's Essai historique sur le problème des trois corps (1817), which went unpublished and is lost.

[ 37 ] The law classes ended in March 1820 and he did not pursue the subject any further.

[ 38 ] In the same month he wrote several articles for David Brewster 's Edinburgh Encyclopædia (1808–1830), which appeared in October. These were his first published writings.

[ 39 ] In May and June, Carlyle wrote a review-article on the work of Christopher Hansteen , translated a book by Friedrich Mohs , and read Goethe's Faust .

[ 40 ] By the autumn Carlyle had also learned Italian and was reading Vittorio Alfieri , Dante Alighieri and Jean Charles Léonard de Sismondi , [ 41 ] although German literature was still his foremost interest, having "revealed" to him a "new Heaven and new Earth".

[ 42 ] In March 1821 he finished two more articles for Brewster's encyclopaedia, and in April he completed a review of Joanna Baillie 's Metrical Legends (1821).

[ 43 ] In May Carlyle was introduced to Jane Baillie Welsh by Irving in Haddington.

[ 44 ] The two began a correspondence, and Carlyle sent books to her, encouraging her intellectual pursuits; she called him "my German Master".

[ 45 ] "Conversion": Leith Walk and Hoddam Hill (1821–1826) [ edit ] During this time, Carlyle struggled with what he described as "the dismallest Lernean Hydra of problems, spiritual, temporal, eternal".

[ 46 ] Spiritual doubt, lack of success in his endeavours, and dyspepsia were all damaging his physical and mental health, for which he found relief only in "sea-bathing". In early July 1821, [ 47 ] "during those 3 weeks of total sleeplessness, in which almost" his "one solace was that of a daily bathe on the sands between [ Leith ] and Portobello ", an "incident" occurred in Leith Walk as he "went down " into the water.

[ 48 ] This was the beginning of Carlyle's "Conversion", the process by which he "authentically took the Devil by the nose" [ 49 ] and flung " him behind me".

[ 50 ] It gave him courage in his battle against the "Hydra"; to his brother John, he wrote, "What is there to fear, indeed?" [ 51 ] Repentance Tower near the farm in Hoddam Hill, which Carlyle called "a fit memorial for reflecting sinners." [ 52 ] Carlyle wrote several articles in July, August and September, and in November began a translation of Adrien Marie Legendre 's Elements of Geometry . In January 1822, Carlyle wrote "Goethe's Faust" for the New Edinburgh Review , and shortly afterwards began a tutorship for the distinguished Buller family, tutoring Charles Buller and his brother Arthur William Buller until July; he would work for the family until July 1824. Carlyle completed the Legendre translation in July 1822, having prefixed his own essay "On Proportion ", which Augustus De Morgan later called "as good a substitute for the fifth Book of Euclid as could have been given in that space".

[ 53 ] Carlyle's translation of Goethe's Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship (1824) and Travels (1825) and his biography of Friedrich Schiller (1825) brought him a decent income, which had before then eluded him, and he garnered a modest reputation. He began corresponding with Goethe and made his first trip to London in 1824, meeting with prominent writers such as Thomas Campbell , Charles Lamb and Samuel Taylor Coleridge , and gaining friendships with Anna Montagu, Bryan Waller Proctor , and Henry Crabb Robinson . He also travelled to Paris in October–November with Edward Strachey and Kitty Kirkpatrick , where he attended Georges Cuvier 's introductory lecture on comparative anatomy , gathered information on the study of medicine , introduced himself to Legendre, was introduced by Legendre to Charles Dupin , observed Laplace and several other notables while declining offers of introduction by Dupin, and heard François Magendie read a paper on the " fifth pair of nerves ".

[ 54 ] In May 1825, Carlyle moved into a cottage farmhouse in Hoddam Hill near Ecclefechan, which his father had leased for him. Carlyle lived with his brother Alexander, who, "with a cheap little man-servant", worked on the farm, his mother with her one maid-servant, and his two youngest sisters, Jean and Jenny.

[ 55 ] He had constant contact with the rest of his family, most of whom lived close by at Mainhill, a farm owned by his father.

[ 56 ] Jane made a successful visit in September 1825. Whilst there, Carlyle wrote German Romance (1827), a translation of German novellas by Johann Karl August Musäus , Friedrich de la Motte Fouqué , Ludwig Tieck , E. T. A. Hoffmann and Jean Paul . In Hoddam Hill Carlyle found respite from the "intolerable fret, noise and confusion" that he had experienced in Edinburgh, and observed what he described as "the finest and vastest prospect all round it I ever saw from any house", with "all Cumberland as in amphitheatre unmatchable".

[ 55 ] Here, he completed his "Conversion" which began with the Leith Walk incident. He achieved "a grand and ever -joyful victory", in the "final chaining down, and trampling home, 'for good,' home into their caves forever, of all" his " Spiritual Dragons ".

[ 57 ] By May 1826, problems with the landlord and the agreement forced the family's relocation to Scotsbrig , a farm near Ecclefechan. Later in life, he remembered the year at Hoddam Hill as "perhaps the most triumphantly important of my life." [ 58 ] Marriage, Comely Bank and Craigenputtock (1826–1834) [ edit ] 21 Comely Bank In October 1826 Carlyle and Jane Welsh were married at the Welsh family farm in Templand . Shortly after their marriage, the Carlyles moved into a modest home on Comely Bank in Edinburgh, which had been leased for them by Jane's mother. They lived there from October 1826 to May 1828. In that time, Carlyle published German Romance , began Wotton Reinfred , an autobiographical novel which he left unfinished, and published his first article for the Edinburgh Review , "Jean Paul Friedrich Richter" (1827). "Richter" was the first of many essays extolling the virtues of German authors, who were then little-known to English readers; "State of German Literature" was published in October.

[ 59 ] In Edinburgh, Carlyle made contact with several distinguished literary figures, including the Edinburgh Review editor Francis Jeffrey , John Wilson of Blackwood's Magazine , the essayist Thomas De Quincey and the philosopher William Hamilton .

[ 44 ] In 1827 Carlyle attempted to land the Chair of Moral Philosophy at the University of St Andrews without success, despite support from an array of prominent intellectuals, including Goethe.

[ 60 ] He also made an unsuccessful attempt for a professorship at the University of London .

[ 44 ] Craigenputtock In May 1828 the Carlyles moved to Craigenputtock , the main house of Jane's modest agricultural estate in Dumfriesshire, which they occupied until May 1834.

[ 61 ] He wrote a number of essays there which earned him money and augmented his reputation, including "Life and Writings of Werner ", "Goethe's Helena", "Goethe", "Robert Burns|Burns", "The Life of Heyne " (each 1828), "German Playwrights", "Voltaire", "Novalis" (each 1829), "Jean Paul Friedrich Richter Again" (1830), "Cruthers and Jonson; or The Outskirts of Life: A True Story", "Luther's Psalm", and "Schiller" (each 1831). He began but did not complete a history of German literature, from which he drew material for essays "The Nibelungen Lied", "Early German Literature" and parts of "Historic Survey of German Poetry" (each 1831). He published early thoughts on the philosophy of history in "Thoughts on History" (1830) and wrote his first pieces of social criticism, "Signs of the Times" (1829) and "Characteristics" (1831).

[ 62 ] "Signs" garnered the interest of Gustave d'Eichthal , a member of the Saint-Simonians , who sent Carlyle Saint-Simonian literature, including Henri de Saint-Simon 's Nouveau Christianisme (1825), which Carlyle translated and wrote an introduction for.

[ 63 ] Portrait of Carlyle by Daniel Maclise for the Fraser's "Gallery of Literary Characters", June 1833 Most notably, he wrote Sartor Resartus . Finishing the manuscript in late July 1831, Carlyle began his search for a publisher, leaving for London in early August.

[ 64 ] He and his wife lived there for the winter at 4 (now 33) Ampton Street, Kings Cross , in a house built by Thomas Cubitt .

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] The death of Carlyle's father in January 1832 and his inability to attend the funeral moved him to write the first of what would become the Reminiscences , published posthumously in 1881.

[ 68 ] Carlyle had not found a publisher by the time he returned to Craigenputtock in March but he had initiated important friendships with Leigh Hunt and John Stuart Mill . That year, Carlyle wrote the essays "Goethe's Portrait", "Death of Goethe", "Goethe's Works", "Biography", "Boswell's Life of Johnson", and "Corn-Law Rhymes". Three months after their return from a January to May 1833 stay in Edinburgh, the Carlyles were visited at Craigenputtock by Ralph Waldo Emerson. Emerson (and other like-minded Americans) had been deeply affected by Carlyle's essays and determined to meet him during the northern terminus of a literary pilgrimage; it was to be the start of a lifelong friendship and a famous correspondence . 1833 saw the publication of the essays "Diderot" and "Count Cagliostro"; in the latter, Carlyle introduced the idea of " Captains of Industry ".

[ 69 ] Chelsea (1834–1845) [ edit ] In June 1834 the Carlyles moved into 5 Cheyne Row , Chelsea , which became their home for the remainder of their respective lives. Residence in London wrought a large expansion of Carlyle's social circle. He became acquainted with scores of leading writers, novelists, artists, radicals, men of science, Church of England clergymen, and political figures. Two of his most important friendships were with Lord and Lady Ashburton ; though Carlyle's warm affection for the latter would eventually strain his marriage, the Ashburtons helped to broaden his social horizons, giving him access to circles of intelligence, political influence, and power.

[ 70 ] Carlyle's House Carlyle eventually decided to publish Sartor serially in Fraser's Magazine , with the instalments appearing between November 1833 and August 1834. Despite early recognition from Emerson, Mill and others, it was generally received poorly, if noticed at all. In 1834, Carlyle applied unsuccessfully for the astronomy professorship at the Edinburgh observatory .

[ 71 ] That autumn, he arranged for the publication of a history of the French Revolution and set about researching and writing it shortly thereafter. Having completed the first volume after five months of writing, he lent the manuscript to Mill, who had been supplying him with materials for his research. One evening in March 1835, Mill arrived at Carlyle's door appearing "unresponsive, pale, the very picture of despair". He had come to tell Carlyle that the manuscript was destroyed. It had been "left out", and Mill's housemaid took it for wastepaper, leaving only "some four tattered leaves". Carlyle was sympathetic: "I can be angry with no one; for they that were concerned in it have a far deeper sorrow than mine: it is purely the hand of Providence ". The next day, Mill offered Carlyle £200 (equivalent to £25,000 in 2023), [ 72 ] of which he would only accept £100. He began the volume anew shortly afterwards. Despite an initial struggle, he was not deterred, feeling like "a runner that tho' tripped down, will not lie there, but rise and run again." [ 73 ] [ 74 ] By September, the volume was rewritten. That year, he wrote a eulogy for his friend, "Death of Edward Irving".

[ 75 ] In April 1836, with the intercession of Emerson, Sartor Resartus was first published in book form in Boston, soon selling out its initial run of five hundred copies.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] Carlyle's three-volume history of the French Revolution was completed in January 1837 and sent to the press.

[ 78 ] Contemporaneously, the essay "Memoirs of Mirabeau " was published, [ 79 ] as was " The Diamond Necklace " in January and February, [ 80 ] and "Parliamentary History of the French Revolution" in April.

[ 81 ] In need of further financial security, Carlyle began a series of lectures on German literature in May, delivered extemporaneously in Willis' Rooms .

The Spectator reported that the first lecture was given "to a very crowded and yet a select audience of both sexes." Carlyle recalled being "wasted and fretted to a thread, my tongue ... dry as charcoal: the people were there, I was obliged to stumble in, and start.

Ach Gott!

" [ 82 ] Despite his inexperience as a lecturer and deficiency "in the mere mechanism of oratory", reviews were positive and the series proved profitable for him.

[ 83 ] Crayon portrait of Thomas Carlyle by Samuel Laurence , 1838 During Carlyle's lecture series, The French Revolution: A History was officially published. It marked his career breakthrough. At the end of the year, Carlyle reported to Karl August Varnhagen von Ense that his earlier efforts to popularise German literature were beginning to produce results, and expressed his satisfaction: " Deutschland will reclaim her great Colony; we shall become more Deutsch , that is to say more English , at same time." [ 84 ] The French Revolution fostered the republication of Sartor Resartus in London in 1838 as well as a collection of his earlier writings in the form of the Critical and Miscellaneous Essays , facilitated in Boston with the aid of Emerson. Carlyle presented his second lecture series in April and June 1838 on the history of literature at the Marylebone Institution in Portman Square .

The Examiner reported that at the end of the second lecture, "Mr. Carlyle was heartily greeted with applause." [ 85 ] Carlyle felt that they "went on better and better, and grew at last, or threatened to grow, quite a flaming affair." [ 86 ] He published two essays in 1838, "Sir Walter Scott", being a review of John Gibson Lockhart 's biography, and "Varnhagen von Ense's Memoirs". In April 1839, Carlyle published "Petition on the Copyright Bill ".

[ 87 ] A third series of lectures was given in May on the revolutions of modern Europe, which the Examiner reviewed positively, noting after the third lecture that "Mr. Carlyle's audiences appear to increase in number every time." [ 88 ] Carlyle wrote to his mother that the lectures were met "with very kind acceptance from people more distinguished than ever; yet still with a feeling that I was far from the right lecturing point yet." [ 89 ] In July, he published "On the Sinking of the Vengeur " [ 90 ] and in December he published Chartism , a pamphlet in which he addressed the movement of the same name and raised the Condition-of-England question .

[ 91 ] Report in The Examiner of "the speech that gave birth to The London Library ", [ 92 ] given by Thomas Carlyle on 24 June 1840 In May 1840 Carlyle gave his fourth and final set of lectures, which were published in 1841 as On Heroes, Hero-Worship, & the Heroic in History .

Carlyle wrote to his brother John afterwards, "The Lecturing business went of [ sic ] with sufficient éclat; the Course was generally judged, and I rather join therein myself, to be the bad best I have yet given." [ 93 ] In the 1840 edition of the Essays , Carlyle published "Fractions", a collection of poems written from 1823 to 1833.

[ 94 ] Later that year, he declined a proposal for a professorship of history at Edinburgh.

[ 95 ] Carlyle was the principal founder of the London Library in 1841.

[ 96 ] He had become frustrated by the facilities available at the British Museum Library , where he was often unable to find a seat (obliging him to perch on ladders), where he complained that the enforced close confinement with his fellow readers gave him a "museum headache", where the books were unavailable for loan, and where he found the library's collections of pamphlets and other material relating to the French Revolution and English Civil Wars inadequately catalogued. In particular, he developed an antipathy to the Keeper of Printed Books, Anthony Panizzi (despite the fact that Panizzi had allowed him many privileges not granted to other readers), and criticised him in a footnote to an article published in the Westminster Review as the "respectable Sub-Librarian".

[ 97 ] Carlyle's eventual solution, with the support of a number of influential friends, was to call for the establishment of a private subscription library from which books could be borrowed.

[ 98 ] Carlyle had chosen Oliver Cromwell as the subject for a book in 1840 and struggled to find what form it would take. In the interim he wrote Past and Present (1843) and the articles " Baillie the Covenanter " (1841), "Dr. Francia" (1843), and "An Election to the Long Parliament " (1844). Carlyle declined an offer for professorship from St. Andrews in 1844. The first edition of Oliver Cromwell's Letters and Speeches : with Elucidations was published in 1845; it was a popular success and did much to revise Cromwell's standing in Britain.

[ 70 ] Journeys to Ireland and Germany (1846–1865) [ edit ] Thomas Carlyle by Robert Scott Tait, 25 May 1855 Carlyle visited Ireland in 1846 with Charles Gavan Duffy as a companion and guide, and wrote a series of brief articles on the Irish question in 1848. These were "Ireland and the British Chief Governor", "Irish Regiments (of the New Æra)", and "The Repeal of the Union", each of which offered solutions to Ireland's problems and argued to preserve England's connection with Ireland.

[ 99 ] Carlyle wrote an article titled "Ireland and Sir Robert Peel " (signed "C.") published in April 1849 in The Spectator in response to two speeches given by Peel wherein he made many of the same proposals which Carlyle had earlier suggested; he called the speeches "like a prophecy of better things, inexpressibly cheering." [ 100 ] In May, he published "Indian Meal", in which he advanced maize as a remedy to the Great Famine as well as the worries of "disconsolate Malthusians ".

[ 101 ] He visited Ireland again with Duffy later that year while recording his impressions in his letters and a series of memoranda, published as Reminiscences of My Irish Journey in 1849 after his death; Duffy would publish his own memoir of their travels, Conversations with Carlyle .

[ 102 ] Carlyle's travels in Ireland deeply affected his views on society, as did the Revolutions of 1848 . While embracing the latter as necessary in order to cleanse society of various forms of anarchy and misgovernment, he denounced their democratic undercurrent and insisted on the need for authoritarian leaders. These events inspired his next two works, " Occasional Discourse on the Negro Question " (1849), in which he coined the term " Dismal Science " to describe political economy, and Latter-Day Pamphlets (1850). The illiberal content of these works sullied Carlyle's reputation for some progressives, while endearing him to those that shared his views. In 1851, Carlyle wrote The Life of John Sterling as a corrective to Julius Hare 's unsatisfactory 1848 biography. In late September and early October, he made his second trip to Paris, where he met Adolphe Thiers and Prosper Mérimée ; his account, "Excursion (Futile Enough) to Paris; Autumn 1851", was published posthumously.

[ 103 ] In 1852, Carlyle began research on Frederick the Great , whom he had expressed interest in writing a biography of as early as 1830.

[ 104 ] He travelled to Germany that year, examining source documents and prior histories. Carlyle struggled through research and writing, telling von Ense it was "the poorest, most troublesome and arduous piece of work he has ever undertaken".

[ 105 ] In 1856, the first two volumes of History of Friedrich II. of Prussia, Called Frederick the Great were sent to the press and published in 1858. During this time, he wrote "The Opera" (1852), [ 106 ] "Project of a National Exhibition of Scottish Portraits" (1854) at the request of David Laing , and "The Prinzenraub" (1855). In October 1855, he finished The Guises , a history of the House of Guise and its relation to Scottish history, which was first published in 1981.

[ 107 ] Carlyle made a second expedition to Germany in 1858 to survey the topography of battlefields, which he documented in Journey to Germany, Autumn 1858 , published posthumously. In May 1863, Carlyle wrote the short dialogue "Ilias (Americana) in Nuce" (American Iliad in a Nutshell) on the topic of the American Civil War . Upon publication in August, the "Ilias" drew scornful letters from David Atwood Wasson and Horace Howard Furness .

[ 108 ] In the summer of 1864, Carlyle lived at 117 Marina (built by James Burton ) [ 109 ] in St Leonards-on-Sea , in order to be nearer to his ailing wife who was in possession of caretakers there.

[ 110 ] Carlyle planned to write four volumes but had written six by the time Frederick was finished in 1865. Before its end, Carlyle had developed a tremor in his writing hand.

[ 111 ] Upon its completion, it was received as a masterpiece. He earned a sobriquet , the " Sage of Chelsea", [ 112 ] and in the eyes of those that had rebuked his politics, it restored Carlyle to his position as a great man of letters.

[ 113 ] Carlyle was elected Lord Rector of Edinburgh University in November 1865, succeeding William Ewart Gladstone and defeating Benjamin Disraeli by a vote of 657 to 310.

[ 114 ] Final years (1866–1881) [ edit ] Carlyle and his niece Mary Aitken, 1874 Carlyle travelled to Scotland to deliver his "Inaugural Address at Edinburgh" as Rector in April 1866. During his trip he was accompanied by John Tyndall , Thomas Henry Huxley and Thomas Erskine . One of those that welcomed Carlyle on his arrival was Sir David Brewster, Principal of the university and the commissioner of Carlyle's first professional writings for the Edinburgh Encyclopædia . Carlyle was joined onstage by his fellow travellers, Brewster, Moncure D. Conway , George Harvey , Lord Neaves and others. Carlyle spoke extemporaneously on several subjects, concluding his address with a quote from Goethe: "Work, and despair not: Wir heissen euch hoffen, 'We bid you be of hope!'" Tyndall reported to Jane in a three-word telegram that it was "A perfect triumph." [ 115 ] The warm reception he received in his homeland of Scotland marked the climax of Carlyle's life as a writer. While still in Scotland, Carlyle received abrupt news of Jane's sudden death in London. Upon her death, Carlyle began to edit his wife's letters and write reminiscences of her. He experienced feelings of guilt as he read her complaints about her illnesses, his friendship with Lady Harriet Ashburton, and his devotion to his labour, particularly on Frederick the Great . Although deep in grief, Carlyle remained active in public life.

[ 116 ] Engraving depicting the Inaugural Address Amidst controversy over Governor John Eyre 's violent repression of the Morant Bay rebellion , Carlyle assumed leadership of the Eyre Defence and Aid Fund in 1865 and 1866. The Defence had convened in response to the anti-Eyre Jamaica Committee , led by Mill and backed by Charles Darwin , Herbert Spencer and others. Carlyle and the Defence were supported by John Ruskin , Alfred, Lord Tennyson , Charles Dickens and Charles Kingsley .

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] From December 1866 to March 1867, [ 119 ] Carlyle resided at the home of Louisa Baring, Lady Ashburton in Menton , where he wrote reminiscences of Irving, Jeffrey, Robert Southey , and William Wordsworth . In August, he published "Shooting Niagara : And After?", an essay in response and opposition to the Second Reform Bill .

[ 120 ] In 1868 he wrote reminiscences of John Wilson and William Hamilton , and his niece Mary Aitken Carlyle moved into 5 Cheyne Row, becoming his caretaker and assisting in the editing of Jane's letters. In March 1869 he met Queen Victoria , who wrote in her journal of "Mr. Carlyle, the historian, a strange-looking eccentric old Scotchman, who holds forth, in a drawling melancholy voice, with a broad Scotch accent, upon Scotland and upon the utter degeneration of everything." [ 121 ] In 1870 he was elected President of the London Library, and in November he wrote a letter to The Times in support of Germany in the Franco-Prussian War . His conversation was recorded by a number of friends and visitors in later years, most notably William Allingham , who became known as Carlyle's James Boswell .

[ 122 ] Commemoration Medal for Thomas Carlyle, front In the spring of 1874 Carlyle accepted the Pour le Mérite für Wissenschaften und Künste from Otto von Bismarck and declined Disraeli's offers of a state pension and the Knight Grand Cross in the Order of the Bath in the autumn. On the occasion of his eightieth birthday in 1875, he was presented with a commemorative medal crafted by Sir Joseph Edgar Boehm and an address of admiration signed by 119 of the leading writers, scientists, and public figures of the day.

[ a ] "Early Kings of Norway", a recounting of historical material from the Icelandic sagas transcribed by Mary acting as his amanuensis , [ 123 ] and an essay on "The Portraits of John Knox " (both 1875) were his last major writings to be published in his lifetime. In November 1876, he wrote a letter in the Times "On the Eastern Question ", entreating England not to enter the Russo-Turkish War on the side of the Turks. Another letter to the Times in May 1877 "On the Crisis ", urging against the rumoured wish of Disraeli's to send a fleet to the Baltic Sea and warning not to provoke Russia and Europe at large into a war against England, marked his last public utterance.

[ 124 ] The American Academy of Arts and Sciences elected him a Foreign Honorary Member in 1878.

[ 125 ] On 2 February 1881 Carlyle fell into a coma. For a moment he awakened, and Mary heard him speak his final words: "So this is Death—well ..." [ 126 ] He thereafter lost his speech and died on the morning of 5 February.

[ 127 ] An offer of interment at Westminster Abbey , which he had anticipated, was declined by his executors in accordance with his will.

[ 128 ] He was laid to rest with his mother and father in Hoddam Kirkyard in Ecclefechan, according to old Scottish custom.

[ 129 ] His private funeral, held on 10 February, was attended by family and a few friends, including Froude, Conway, Tyndall and William Lecky , as local residents looked on.

[ 116 ] Works [ edit ] Main articles: Philosophy of Thomas Carlyle and Thomas Carlyle's prose style Carlyle's "Seal", sketched in 1823. Its Latin motto translates: "May I be wasted so that I be of use." [ 130 ] Carlyle's corpus spans the genres of "criticism, biography, history, politics, poetry, and religion." [ 131 ] His innovative writing style, known as Carlylese , greatly influenced Victorian literature and anticipated techniques of postmodern literature .

[ 132 ] In his philosophy , while not adhering to any formal religion, Carlyle asserted the importance of belief during an age of increasing doubt. Much of his work is concerned with the modern human spiritual condition; he was the first writer to use the expression " meaning of life ".

[ 133 ] In Sartor Resartus and in his early Miscellanies , he developed his own philosophy of religion based upon what he called " Natural Supernaturalism ", [ 134 ] the idea that all things are "Clothes" which at once reveal and conceal the divine, that "a mystic bond of brotherhood makes all men one", [ 135 ] and that duty, work and silence are essential.

Carlyle postulated the Great Man theory , a philosophy of history which contends that history is shaped by exceptional individuals. This approach to history was first promulgated in his lectures On Heroes and given specific focus in longer studies like Cromwell and Frederick the Great . He viewed history as a "Prophetic Manuscript" that progresses on a cyclical basis, analogous to the phoenix and the seasons. His historiographical method emphasises the relationship between the event at hand and all those which precede and follow it, which he makes apparent through use of the present (rather than past) tense in his French Revolution and in other histories.

Raising the " Condition-of-England Question " [ 136 ] to address the impact of the Industrial Revolution , Carlyle's social and political philosophy is characterised by medievalism , [ 137 ] advocating a " Chivalry of Labour" [ 138 ] led by " Captains of Industry ".

[ 139 ] In works of social criticism such as Past and Present and Latter-Day Pamphlets , he attacked utilitarianism as mere atheism and egoism , [ 140 ] criticised the political economy of laissez-faire as the " Dismal Science ", [ 141 ] and rebuked "big black Democracy ", [ 142 ] while championing " Hero archy (Government of Heroes)".

[ 143 ] Character [ edit ] Medallion of Carlyle by Thomas Woolner , 1851.

James Caw said that it recalled Lady Eastlake 's description of him: "The head of a thinker, the eye of a lover, and the mouth of a peasant." [ 144 ] James Anthony Froude recalled his first impression of Carlyle: He was then fifty-four years old; tall (about five feet eleven), thin, but at that time upright, with no signs of the later stoop. His body was angular, his face beardless, such as it is represented in Woolner's medallion, [ b ] which is by far the best likeness of him in the days of his strength. His head was extremely long, with the chin thrust forward; his neck was thin; the mouth firmly closed, the under lip slightly projecting; the hair grizzled and thick and bushy. His eyes, which grew lighter with age, were then of a deep violet, with fire burning at the bottom of them, which flashed out at the least excitement. The face was altogether most striking, most impressive in every way.

[ 145 ] He was often recognised by his wideawake hat .

[ 146 ] Carlyle was a renowned conversationalist.

Ralph Waldo Emerson described him as "an immense talker, as extraordinary in his conversation as in his writing,—I think even more so." Charles Darwin considered him "the most worth listening to, of any man I know." [ 147 ] William Lecky noted his "singularly musical voice" which "quite took away anything grotesque in the very strong Scotch accent" and "gave it a softening or charm".

[ 148 ] Henry Fielding Dickens recollected that he was "gifted with a high sense of humour, and when he laughed he did so heartily, throwing his head back and letting himself go." [ 149 ] Thomas Wentworth Higginson remembered his "broad, honest, human laugh", one that "cleared the air like thunder, and left the atmosphere sweet." [ 150 ] Lady Eastlake called it "the best laugh I ever heard".

[ 151 ] Charles Eliot Norton wrote that Carlyle's "essential nature was solitary in its strength, its sincerity, its tenderness, its nobility. He was nearer Dante than any other man." [ 152 ] Frederic Harrison similarly observed that "Carlyle walked about London like Dante in the streets of Verona , gnawing his own heart and dreaming dreams of Inferno . To both the passers-by might have said, See! there goes the man who has seen hell".

[ 153 ] Higginson rather felt that Jean Paul 's humorous character Siebenkäs "came nearer to the actual Carlyle than most of the grave portraitures yet executed", for, like Siebenkäs, Carlyle was "a satirical improvisatore".

[ 154 ] Emerson saw Carlyle as "not mainly a scholar", but "a practical Scotchman, such as you would find in any saddler's or iron-dealer's shop, and then only accidentally and by a surprising addition, the admirable scholar and writer he is." [ 155 ] Paul Elmer More found Carlyle "a figure unique, isolated, domineering—after Dr. Johnson the greatest personality in English letters, possibly even more imposing than that acknowledged dictator." [ 156 ] Legacy [ edit ] Influence [ edit ] See also: Philosophy of Thomas Carlyle § Influence , and Thomas Carlyle's prose style § Reception Statue of Thomas Carlyle in Chelsea Bust of Thomas Carlyle by Mario Raggi c. 1892, displayed at Chelsea Library George Eliot summarised Carlyle's impact in 1855: It is an idle question to ask whether his books will be read a century hence: if they were all burnt as the grandest of Suttees on his funeral pile, it would be only like cutting down an oak after its acorns have sown a forest. For there is hardly a superior or active mind of this generation that has not been modified by Carlyle's writings; there has hardly been an English book written for the last ten or twelve years that would not have been different if Carlyle had not lived.

[ 157 ] Carlyle's two most important followers were Emerson and Ruskin . In the 19th century, Emerson was often thought of as "the American Carlyle", [ 158 ] and he described himself in 1870 as "Lieutenant" to Carlyle's "General in Chief".

[ 159 ] Ruskin publicly acknowledged that Carlyle was the author to whom he "owed more than to any other living writer", [ 160 ] and would frequently refer to him as his "master", writing after Carlyle's death that he was "throwing myself now into the mere fulfilment of Carlyle's work".

[ 161 ] The British philosopher J. H. Muirhead wrote that in his rejection of philosophical scepticism and embrace of German idealism , Carlyle "exercised an influence in England and America that no other did upon the course of philosophical thought of his time".

[ 162 ] Literature [ edit ] See also: List of allusions to Carlyle in literature "The most explosive impact in English literature during the nineteenth century is unquestionably Thomas Carlyle's", writes Lionel Stevenson . "From about 1840 onward, no author of prose or poetry was immune from his influence." [ 163 ] By 1960 he had become "the single most frequent topic of doctoral dissertations in the field of Victorian literature".

[ 164 ] While preparing for a study of his own, the German scholar Gerhart von Schulze-Gävernitz found himself overwhelmed by the amount of material already written about Carlyle—in 1894.

[ 4 ] Authors on whom Carlyle's influence was particularly strong include Matthew Arnold , [ 165 ] Elizabeth Barrett Browning , [ 166 ] Robert Browning , [ 167 ] Arthur Hugh Clough , [ 168 ] Dickens, Disraeli, George Eliot, [ 169 ] Elizabeth Gaskell , [ 170 ] Frank Harris , [ 171 ] Kingsley, George Henry Lewes , [ 172 ] David Masson , George Meredith , [ 173 ] Mill, Margaret Oliphant , Luigi Pirandello , [ 174 ] Marcel Proust , [ 175 ] [ 176 ] Ruskin, George Bernard Shaw [ 177 ] and Walt Whitman .

[ 178 ] Germaine Brée has shown the considerable impact that Carlyle had on the thought of André Gide .

[ 179 ] Carlylean influence is also seen in the writings of Ryūnosuke Akutagawa , Leopoldo Alas , [ 180 ] Marcu Beza , Jorge Luis Borges , the Brontës , [ 181 ] Arthur Conan Doyle , Antonio Fogazzaro , [ 174 ] E. M. Forster , Ángel Ganivet , Lafcadio Hearn , William Ernest Henley , Marietta Holley , Rudyard Kipling , [ 182 ] Selma Lagerlöf , Herman Melville , [ 183 ] Alfredo Panzini , [ 174 ] Edgar Quinet , Samuel Smiles , Tokutomi Sohō , [ 184 ] Lord Tennyson, William Makepeace Thackeray , Anthony Trollope , Miguel de Unamuno , Alexandru Vlahuță and Vasile Voiculescu .

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] Carlyle's German essays and translations as well as his own writings were pivotal to the development of the English Bildungsroman .

[ 187 ] His concept of symbols influenced French literary Symbolism .

[ 188 ] The Victorian specialist Alice Chandler writes that the influence of his medievalism is "found throughout the literature of the Victorian age".

[ 189 ] Carlyle's influence was also felt in the negative sense.

Algernon Charles Swinburne , whose comments on Carlyle throughout his writings range from high praise to scathing critique, once wrote to John Morley that Carlyle was "the illustrious enemy whom we all lament", reflecting a view of Carlyle as a totalising figure to be rebelled against.

[ 190 ] Despite the broad Modernist reaction against the Victorians, the influence of Carlyle has been traced in the writings of T. S. Eliot , [ 191 ] James Joyce , Wyndham Lewis [ 192 ] and D. H. Lawrence .

[ 193 ] The Oxford English Dictionary credits Carlyle with the first quotation in 547 separate entries, the 45th-highest of all English-language authors.

[ 194 ] Social and political movements [ edit ] "Never had political progressivism a foe it could more heartily respect" (Walt Whitman).

[ 195 ] Woodcut by Robert Bryden , 1901 Politically, Carlyle's influence spans across ideologies, from conservatism and nationalism to communism. He is acknowledged as an essential influence on Young England conservatism, [ 196 ] Christian socialism , [ 197 ] and the fin de siècle labour movement.

[ 198 ] His work is referenced in the writings of a diverse range of political writers, including Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels , [ 199 ] Mahatma Gandhi , [ 200 ] and Richard Wagner .

[ 201 ] The prominent Young Ireland nationalist John Mitchel [ 202 ] and the Antebellum South secessionist George Fitzhugh [ 203 ] were both deeply influenced by Carlyle.

Jamshedji Tata , the prominent Indian industrialist and philanthropist who founded the Tata Group , India's largest conglomerate company, was influenced by Carlyle.

[ 204 ] Many social reformers were inspired by him, including Octavia Hill , [ 205 ] Emmeline Pankhurst , [ 206 ] Jane Addams , [ 207 ] W. E. B. Du Bois [ 208 ] [ 209 ] and Martin Luther King Jr.

[ 210 ] More recently figures associated with neoreaction and the alt-right have claimed Carlyle as an influence, notably Curtis Yarvin , [ 211 ] Jonathan Bowden [ 212 ] and Kerry Bolton .

[ 213 ] Scholars have been divided on whether Carlyle himself was conservative: Herbert Tingsten and Richard Reeves argue that he was, while Simon Heffer claims that he was not.

[ 214 ] [ 215 ] Art [ edit ] Carlyle's medievalist critique of industrial practice and political economy was an early utterance of what would become the spirit of both the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood and the Arts and Crafts movement , and several leading members recognised his importance.

[ 216 ] John William Mackail , a friend and the official biographer of William Morris, wrote that in the years of Morris and Edward Burne-Jones attendance at the University of Oxford, Past and Present stood as "inspired and absolute truth." [ 217 ] Morris read a letter from Carlyle at the first public meeting of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings .

[ 218 ] Fiona MacCarthy , a recent biographer, affirmed that Morris was "deeply and lastingly" indebted to Carlyle.

[ 219 ] William Holman Hunt considered Carlyle to be a mentor of his. He used Carlyle as one of the models for the head of Christ in The Light of the World and showed great concern for Carlyle's portrayal in Ford Madox Brown 's painting Work (1865).

[ 220 ] Carlyle helped Thomas Woolner to find work early in his career and throughout, and he would become "a kind of surrogate son" to the Carlyles, referring to Carlyle as "the dear old philosopher".

[ 221 ] Phoebe Anna Traquair depicted Carlyle, one of her favourite writers, in murals painted for the Royal Hospital for Sick Children and St Mary's Cathedral in Edinburgh.

[ 222 ] According to Marylu Hill, the Roycrofters were "very influenced by Carlyle's words about work and the necessity of work", with his name appearing frequently in their writings, which are held at Villanova University .

[ 223 ] Thackeray wrote that Carlyle had done more than any other to give " art for art's sake ... its independence." [ 224 ] Roberts explains that Carlyle "did much to set the stage for the Aesthetic Movement " through both his German and original writings, noting that he even popularised (if not introduced) the term " Æesthetics " into the English language, leading her to declare him as "the apostle of aesthetics in England, 1825–27." [ 225 ] Carlyle's rhetorical style and his views on art also provided a foundation for aestheticism, particularly that of Walter Pater , Wilde and W. B. Yeats .

[ 226 ] Controversies [ edit ] Froude controversy [ edit ] Further information: Reminiscences (Carlyle) § The Froude-Carlyle controversy , and James Anthony Froude § Life of Carlyle controversy (1881–1903) "Froude besmirching Carlyle", illustration from Punch 's Almanac , 31 December 1881 Carlyle had entrusted his papers to the care of James Anthony Froude after his death but was unclear about the permissions granted to him. Froude edited and published the Reminiscences in 1881, which sparked controversy due to Froude's failure to excise comments that might offend living persons, as was common practice at the time. The book damaged Carlyle's reputation, as did the following Letters and Memorials of Jane Welsh Carlyle and the four-volume biography of life as written by Froude. The image that Froude presented of Carlyle and his marriage was highly negative, prompting new editions of the Reminiscences and the letters by Charles Eliot Norton and Alexander Carlyle (husband of Carlyle's niece), who argued that, among other things, Froude had mishandled the materials entrusted to him in a deliberate and dishonest manner. This argument overshadowed Carlyle's work for decades.

Owen Dudley Edwards remarked that by the turn of the century, "Carlyle was known more than read".

[ 227 ] As Campbell describes: The effect of Froude’s work in the years following Carlyle’s death was extraordinary. Almost overnight, it seemed, Carlyle plunged from his position as Sage of Chelsea and Grand Old Victorian to the object of puzzled dislike, or even of revulsion.

[ 228 ] Racism and antisemitism [ edit ] Fielding writes that Carlyle "was often ready to play up to being a caricature of prejudice".

[ 229 ] Targets for his ire included the French, the Irish, Slavs, [ 230 ] Turks, Americans, Catholics, and, most explicitly, blacks and Jews. According to Duffy, when he charged Carlyle with having "taught [John] Mitchel to oppose the liberation of the negroes and the emancipation of the Jews", Carlyle replied: Mitchel ... would be found to be right in the end; the black man could not be emancipated from the laws of nature, which had pronounced a very decided decree on the question, and neither could the Jew.

[ 231 ] In his biography of Carlyle, Fred Kaplan suggests that Carlyle "resembled most of his contemporaries" in his beliefs about Jews, identifying them with capitalist materialism and outmoded religious orthodoxy.

[ 232 ] [ 233 ] Throughout the late 1840s, Carlyle privately pondered the need for England to make an "Exodus from Houndsditch", and to discard "Hebrew Old-Clothes" in religion. In June 1861, Charles Dickens reported to William Macready that "Carlyle has greatly intensified his aversion to Jews, and is greatly enraged by beholding the gradual rise of a Mansion that Rothschild is building next the Duke of Wellington's." Dickens recounted Carlyle's vision of Queen Victoria summoning Rothschild before her and threatening to pull the teeth out of his "Mosaic head" unless he repaid his "millions of ill gotten Money".

[ 234 ] Carlyle had once considered writing a book called Exodus from Houndsditch , [ c ] "a pealing off of fetid Jewhood in every sense from myself and my poor bewildered brethren".

[ 235 ] Froude described Carlyle's aversion to the Jews as " Teutonic ". He felt they had contributed nothing to the "wealth" of mankind, contrasting "the Jews with their morbid imaginations and foolish sheepskin Targums " with "The Norse with their steel swords guided by fresh valiant hearts and clear veracious understanding".

[ 236 ] [ 237 ] Carlyle refused an invitation by Baron Rothschild in 1848 to support a Bill in Parliament to allow voting rights for Jews in the United Kingdom , asking Richard Monckton Milnes in a correspondence how a Jew could "try to be Senator, or even Citizen, of any Country, except his own wretched Palestine", and expressed his hope that they would "arrive" in Palestine "as soon as possible".

[ 238 ] Carlyle argued that slavery was preferable to laissez-faire capitalism .

[ 203 ] Henry Crabb Robinson heard Carlyle at dinner in 1837 speak approvingly of slavery. "It is a natural aristocracy, that of colour , and quite right that the stronger and better race should have dominion!" [ 239 ] The 1853 pamphlet " Occasional Discourse on the Nigger Question " expressed concern for the excesses of the practice, considering "How to abolish the abuses of slavery, and save the precious thing in it." [ 240 ] Carlyle's defences of slavery contributed to his enduring popularity among pro-slavery figures of the antebellum South .

[ 203 ] But liberals in Britain and the American North disputed such arguments, and among the objectors was the abolitionist Mill, in the anonymous essay "The Negro Question".

[ 241 ] In the modern era, the London Library has removed its bust of Carlyle from public display, and states that "Carlyle's racist views are completely unacceptable and the London Library does not share them." [ 242 ] Prussianist and Nazi appropriation [ edit ] From Goethe's recognition of Carlyle as "a moral force of great importance" in 1827 to the celebration of his centennial as though he were a national hero in 1895, Carlyle had long enjoyed a high reputation in Germany.

[ 243 ] Passages from Frederick were even part of the curriculum in German schools. Carlyle's support of Bismarck and the Silesian Wars led to suspicion during the First World War that he would have supported the German Empire and its leaders (such as Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg and Gottlieb von Jagow ).

Allied nations largely regarded Carlyle as a Prussianist , the "spiritual brother of Clausewitz and Treitschke." Prussian statesmen had identified Carlyle's "gospel of force" with their doctrine of Weltmacht oder Untergang (World Power or Downfall) in order to "make their own side respectable." Herbert L. Stewart defended Carlyle's memory by arguing that besides a shared opposition to democracy, his belief that "Right makes Might" [ d ] is "far removed" from "the ethic of militarism ", and his " Puritan Theodicy " has nothing to do with the "Immoralism of German Kriegsherren " ( Warlords ).

[ 245 ] With the rise of Adolf Hitler , many agreed with the assessment of K. O. Schmidt in 1933, who came to see Carlyle as den ersten englischen Nationalsozialisten (the first English National Socialist ).

William Joyce (founder of the National Socialist League and the Carlyle Club, a cultural arm of the NSL named for Carlyle) [ 246 ] wrote of how "Germany has repaid him for his scholarship on her behalf by honouring his philosophy when it is scorned in Britain." [ 247 ] German academics viewed him as having been immersed in and an outgrowth of German culture, just as National Socialism was. They proposed that Heroes and Hero-Worship justified the Führerprinzip (Leadership principle). Theodor Jost wrote in 1935: "Carlyle established, in fact, the mission of the Führer historically and philosophically. He fights, himself a Führer, vigorously against the masses, he ... becomes a pathfinder for new thoughts and forms." Parallels were also drawn between Carlyle's critique of Victorian England in Latter-Day Pamphlets and Nazi opposition to the Weimar Republic .

[ 243 ] Some believed that Carlyle was German by blood. Echoing Paul Hensel 's earlier claim in 1901 that Carlyle's Volkscharakter (Folk character) had preserved "the peculiarity of the Low German tribe", Egon Friedell , an anti-Nazi and Jewish Austrian, explained in 1935 that Carlyle's affinity with Germany stemmed from his being "a Scotsman of the lowlands , where the Celtic imprint is far more marginal than it is with the High Scottish and the Low German element is even stronger than it is in England." [ 248 ] Others regarded him, if not ethnically German, as a Geist von unserem Geist (Spirit from our Spirit), as Karl Richter wrote in 1937: "Carlyle's ethos is the ethos of the Nordic soul par excellence." [ 249 ] In 1945 Joseph Goebbels frequently sought consolation from Carlyle's History of Frederick the Great . Goebbels read passages from the book to Hitler during his last days in the Führerbunker in the Battle of Berlin .

[ 250 ] While some Germans were eager to claim Carlyle for the Reich, others were more aware of incompatibilities. In 1936 Theodor Deimel argued that because of the "profound difference" between Carlyle's philosophical foundation of "a personally shaped religious idea" and the Völkisch foundation of National Socialism, the designation of Carlyle as the "first National Socialist" is "mistaken".

[ 251 ] Ernst Cassirer rejected the notion of Carlyle as proto-fascist in The Myth of the State (1946), emphasizing the moral underpinning of his thought. G. B. Tennyson has also commented that Carlyle's anti-modernist and anti-egoist stances disqualify him from association with 20th-century totalitarianism .

[ 252 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Main article: Bibliography of Thomas Carlyle By Carlyle [ edit ] Major works [ edit ] The standard edition of Carlyle's works is the Works in Thirty Volumes , also known as the Centenary Edition . The date given is when the work was "originally published." Traill, Henry Duff , ed. (1896–1899).

The Works of Thomas Carlyle in Thirty Volumes . London: Chapman and Hall .

Vol. I.

Sartor Resartus : The Life and Opinions of Herr Teufelsdröckh in Three Books (1831) Vols. II–IV.

The French Revolution: A History (1837) Vol. V.

On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the Heroic in History (1841) Vols. VI–IX.

Oliver Cromwell's Letters and Speeches : with Elucidations (1845) Vol. X.

Past and Present (1843) Vol. XI.

The Life of John Sterling (1851) Vols. XII–XIX.

History of Friedrich II. of Prussia, Called Frederick the Great (1858–1865) Vol. XX.

Latter-Day Pamphlets (1850) Vols. XXI–XXII.

German Romance: Translations from the German, with Biographical and Critical Notices (1827) Vols. XXIII–XXIV.

Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship and Travels , Translated from the German of Goethe (1824) Vol. XXV.

The Life of Friedrich Schiller, Comprehending an Examination of His Works (1825) Vols. XXVI–XXX.

Critical and Miscellaneous Essays Marginalia [ edit ] This is a list of selected books, pamphlets and broadsides uncollected in the Miscellanies through 1880 as well as posthumous first editions and unpublished manuscripts.

[ 253 ] Ireland and Sir Robert Peel (1849) Legislation for Ireland (1849) Ireland and the British Chief Governor (1849) Froude, James Anthony, ed. (1881).

Reminiscences . London: Longmans, Green, and Co.

Reminiscences of My Irish Journey in 1849 (1882). London: Sampson Low , Marston, Searle & Rivington.

Last Words of Thomas Carlyle: On Trades-Unions, Promoterism and the Signs of the Times (1882). 67 Princes Street, Edinburgh: William Paterson.

Norton, Charles Eliot, ed. (1883).

The Correspondence of Thomas Carlyle and Ralph Waldo Emerson . Boston: James R. Osgood and Company.

Norton, Charles Eliot, ed. (1886).

Early Letters of Thomas Carlyle . London and New York: Macmillan and Co.

Thomas Carlyle's Counsels to a Literary Aspirant: A Hitherto Unpublished Letter of 1842 and What Came of Them (1886). Edinburgh: James Thin , South Bridge.

Norton, Charles Eliot, ed. (1887).

Reminiscences . London and New York: Macmillan and Co.

Norton, Charles Eliot, ed. (1887).

Correspondence Between Goethe and Carlyle . London and New York: Macmillan and Co.

Norton, Charles Eliot, ed. (1888).

Letters of Thomas Carlyle . London and New York: Macmillan and Co.

Thomas Carlyle on the Repeal of the Union (1889). London: Field & Tuer, the Leadenhall Press .

Newberry, Percy, ed. (1892).

Rescued Essays of Thomas Carlyle . The Leadenhall Press.

Last Words of Thomas Carlyle (1892). London: Longmans, Green, and Co.

Karkaria, R. P., ed. (1892).

Lectures on the History of Literature . London: Curwen, Kane & Co.

Greene, J. Reay , ed. (1892).

Lectures on the History of Literature . London: Ellis and Elvey.

Carlyle, Alexander, ed. (1898).

Historical Sketches of Notable Persons and Events in the Reigns of James I and Charles I . London: Chapman and Hall Limited.

Norton, Charles Eliot, ed. (1898).

Two Note Books of Thomas Carlyle . New York: The Grolier Club .

Copeland, Charles Townsend, ed. (1899).

Letters of Thomas Carlyle to His Youngest Sister . Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Company.

Jones, Samuel Arthur, ed. (1903).

Collecteana . Canton, Pennsylvania: The Kirgate Press.

Carlyle, Alexander, ed. (1904).

New Letters of Thomas Carlyle . London: The Bodley Head.

Carlyle, Alexander, ed. (1909).

The Love Letters of Thomas Carlyle and Jane Welsh . 2 vols. London: The Bodley Head.

Carlyle, Thomas (1922).

"Notes of a Three-Days' Tour to the Netherlands" .

Cornhill Magazine . Vol. 53. pp.

626– 640.

Carlyle, Alexander, ed. (1923).

Letters of Thomas Carlyle to John Stuart Mill, John Sterling and Robert Browning . London: T. Fisher Unwin L TD .

Brooks, Richard Albert Edward, ed. (1940).

Journey to Germany, Autumn 1858 . New Haven: Yale University Press.

Graham Jr., John, ed. (1950).

Letters of Thomas Carlyle to William Graham . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Shine, Hill, ed. (1951).

Carlyle's Unfinished History of German Literature . Lexington: University of Kentucky Press.

Bliss, Trudy, ed. (1953).

Letters to His Wife . London: Victor Gollancz Ltd .

King, Marjorie P. (1954).

" "Illudo Chartis": An Initial Study in Carlyle's Mode of Composition" .

The Modern Language Review .

49 (2): 164– 175.

doi : 10.2307/3718901 .

ISSN 0026-7937 .

JSTOR 3718901 .

Baumgarten, Murray (1968).

"Carlyle and "Spiritual Optics" " .

Victorian Studies .

11 (4): 503– 522.

ISSN 0042-5222 .

JSTOR 3825228 .

Marrs, Edwin W. Jr., ed. (1968).

The Letters of Thomas Carlyle to His Brother Alexander: with Related Family Letters . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Clubbe, John, ed. (1974).

Two Reminiscences of Thomas Carlyle . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.

ISBN 978-0822303077 .

Fielding, K.J. (1979).

"Unpublished Manuscripts – I: Carlyle Among the Cannibals" .

Carlyle Newsletter (1): 22– 28.

ISSN 0269-8226 .

JSTOR 44945570 .

Henderson, Heather, ed. (1979).

Wooden-Headed Publishers and Locust-Swarms of Authors . University of Edinburgh.

Campbell, Ian, ed. (1980).

Thomas and Jane: Selected Letters from the Edinburgh University Library Collection . Edinburgh.

Fielding, K.J. (1980).

"Unpublished Manuscripts – II: Carlyle's Scenario for 'Cromwell' " .

Carlyle Newsletter (2): 6– 13.

ISSN 0269-8226 .

JSTOR 44945576 .

Kaplan, Fred (1980).

" 'Phallus-Worship' (1848): Unpublished Manuscripts – III: A Response to the Revolution of 1848" .

Carlyle Newsletter (2): 19– 23.

ISSN 0269-8226 .

JSTOR 44945578 .

Carlyle, Thomas (1981).

"The Guises" .

Victorian Studies .

25 (1): 13– 80.

ISSN 0042-5222 .

JSTOR 3827058 .

Trela, D. J. (1984).

"Carlyle and the Beautiful People: An Unpublished Manuscript" .

Carlyle Newsletter (5): 36– 41.

ISSN 0269-8226 .

JSTOR 44937838 .

Tarr, Rodger L.; McClelland, Fleming, eds. (1986).

The Collected Poems of Thomas and Jane Welsh Carlyle . Greenwood, Florida: The Penkevill Publishing Company.

Fielding, K. J. (1991).

"Carlyle Writes Local History: 'Dumfries-Shire Three Hundred Years Ago' " .

Carlyle Annual (12): 3– 7.

ISSN 1050-3099 .

JSTOR 44945533 .

Fielding, K. J.; Neuberg, J. (1992).

"New Notes for 'The Letters': I. Carlyle's Sketch of Joseph Neuberg II. 'Leave it Alone; Time Will Mend It' " .

Carlyle Annual (13): 3– 15.

ISSN 1050-3099 .

JSTOR 44945549 .

de L. Ryals, Clyde (1995).

"Thomas Carlyle on the Mormons: An Unpublished Essay" .

Carlyle Studies Annual (15): 49– 54.

ISSN 1074-2670 .

JSTOR 44946088 .

Campbell, Ian (1 January 1996).

"Peter Lithgow: New Fiction by Thomas Carlyle" .

Studies in Scottish Literature .

29 (1).

ISSN 0039-3770 .

Hubbard, Tom (2005), "Carlyle, France and Germany in 1870", in Hubbard, Tom (2022), Invitation to the Voyage: Scotland, Europe and Literature , Rymour, pp. 44–46, ISBN 978-1739596002 Scholarly editions [ edit ] Altick, Richard D.

, ed. (2000).

Past and Present (Reprint ed.). New York: New York University Press.

Cate, George Allen, ed. (1982).

The Correspondence of Thomas Carlyle and John Ruskin . Stanford, California: Stanford University Press .

Fielding, Kenneth J.; Campbell, Ian, eds. (2009).

Reminiscences (Reprint ed.). Glasgow: Kennedy & Boyd.

Goldberg, M. K.; Seigel, J. P., eds. (1983).

Carlyle's Latter-Day Pamphlets . Canadian Federation for the Humanities.

McSweenery, Kerry; Sabor, Peter, eds. (2008).

Sartor Resartus . Oxford World's Classics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Sanders, Charles Richard; Fielding, Kenneth J.; Ryals, Clyde de L.; Campbell, Ian; Christianson, Aileen; Clubbe, John; McIntosh, Sheila; Smith, Hilary; Sorensen, David, eds. (1970–2022).

The Collected Letters of Thomas and Jane Welsh Carlyle .

Durham, North Carolina : Duke University Press .

Kinser, Brent E. (ed.).

"The Carlyle Letters Online: A Victorian Cultural Reference" .

Slater, Joseph, ed. (1964).

The Correspondence of Emerson and Carlyle . New York and London: Columbia University Press.

Sorensen, David R.; Kinser, Brent E., eds. (2023).

Past and Present . Oxford World's Classics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0198841081 .

Sorensen, David R.; Kinser, Brent E.; Engel, Mark, eds. (2019).

The French Revolution . Oxford World's Classics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

The Norman and Charlotte Strouse Edition of the Writings of Thomas Carlyle . 8 vols. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. 1993–2024.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) Memoirs, etc.

[ edit ] Allingham, William (1907).

William Allingham's Diary 1847–1889 (Paperback ed.). London: Centaur Press (published 2000).

Baker, William (1 January 1976).

"Herbert Spencer's unpublished reminiscences of Thomas Carlyle: The 'Perfect owl of minerva for knowledge' on a 'Poet without music' " .

Neophilologus .

60 (1): 145– 152.

doi : 10.1007/BF01513592 .

ISSN 1572-8668 .

S2CID 161087774 .

Blunt, Reginald (1895).

The Carlyles' Chelsea Home, being some account of No. 5, Cheyne Row . York Street, Covent Garden , London: George Bell and Sons .

Boyle, Mary (1902).

"Carlyle" . In Boyle, Sir Courtenay (ed.).

Her Book . London: John Murray. pp.

267– 268.

Conway, Moncure D. (1881).

Thomas Carlyle . London: Chatto & Windus .

Duffy, Sir Charles Gavan (1892).

Conversations with Carlyle . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

Espinasse, Francis (1893).

Literary Recollections and Sketches . London: Hodder and Stoughton.

Fox, Caroline (1883). Pym, Horace N. (ed.).

Memories of Old Friends: Being Extracts from the Journals and Letters of Caroline Fox of Penjerrick, Cornwall, from 1835 to 1871 . London: Smith, Elder & Co.

Higginson, Thomas Wentworth (1909).

"Carlyle's Laugh" .

Carlyle's Laugh, and Other Surprises . Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company. pp.

1– 12.

Knighton, William (1881).

"Conversations with Carlyle" .

Contemporary Review (39): 904– 920.

Larkin, Henry (1881).

"Carlyle, and Mrs. Carlyle: A Ten-Years' Reminiscence" .

The British Quarterly Review (74): 84– 64.

Masson, David (1885).

Carlyle Personally and in His Writings .

Norton, Charles Eliot (1886).

"Recollections of Carlyle" .

The New Princeton Review .

2 (4): 1–19.

Tyndall, John (1890).

"Personal Recollections of Thomas Carlyle" .

New Fragments . New York: Appleton (published 1892). pp.

347– 391.

Symington, Andrew J. (1886).

Some Personal Reminiscences of Carlyle .

The Westminster Gazette .

The Homes and Haunts of Thomas Carlyle , 1895.

Biographies [ edit ] Boyle, Andrew , ed. (1913–1914).

"Carlyle, Thomas" .

The Everyman Encyclopædia . Everyman's library Reference. Vol. Three. London: J. M. Dent & Sons, L TD . pp.

325– 327.

Campbell, Ian (1974).

Thomas Carlyle (2nd Revised ed.). Glasgow, Scotland: Kennedy & Boyd (published 24 June 2011).

Campbell, Ian (1987).

"Thomas Carlyle" .

Dictionary of Literary Biography . Gale. Archived from the original on 24 October 2019 . Retrieved 30 December 2022 .

Fischer, Thomas A. (1882).

Thomas Carlyle (in German).

Froude, James Anthony (1882–1884).

Thomas Carlyle . 4 vols. London: Longmans, Green, and Co.

Garnett, Richard (1887).

Life of Thomas Carlyle .

Heffer, Simon (1996).

Moral Desperado: A Life of Thomas Carlyle . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

Kaplan, Fred (1983).

Thomas Carlyle: A Biography . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Morrow, John (2006).

Thomas Carlyle . New York: Hambledon Continuum.

ISBN 978-1852855444 .

Neff, Emery (1932).

Carlyle . New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.

Nichol, John (1904).

Thomas Carlyle .

Perry, Bliss (1915).

Thomas Carlyle: How to Know Him . Indianapolis: The Bobbs-Merrill Company.

Shepherd, Richard Herne (1881).

Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Thomas Carlyle .

Shine, Hill (1953).

Carlyle's Early Reading, to 1834 . Occasional Contributions. Vol. 57. Lexington: University of Kentucky Libraries.

Sloan, J. M. (1904). Hollern, Mary (ed.).

The Carlyle Country (2nd ed.). Sheffield, England: The Grimsay Press (published 20 May 2010).

Stephen, Leslie (1887).

"Carlyle, Thomas (1795–1881)" .

Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 09. pp.

111– 127.

Symons, Julian (1952).

Thomas Carlyle: The Life and Ideas of a Prophet . New York: Oxford University Press.

Wilson, David Alec (1923–1934).

Carlyle . 6 vols. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., L TD .

Wylie, William Howie (1881).

Thomas Carlyle, the Man and His Books . London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Secondary sources [ edit ] Barfoot, C. C., ed. (1999).

Victorian Keats and Romantic Carlyle: The Fusions and Confusions of Literary Periods . Amsterdam & Atlanta, GA: Rodopi.

ISBN 9042005785 .

Birrell, Augustine (1885).

"Carlyle" .

Obiter Dicta . New York: Chas. Scribner's Sons.

Bishirjian, Richard J. (1976).

"Carlyle's Political Religion" .

The Journal of Politics .

38 (1): 95– 113.

doi : 10.2307/2128963 .

JSTOR 2128963 .

S2CID 153527096 .

Campell, Ian (1987).

"Thomas Carlyle (1795–1881)" . In Thesing, William B. (ed.).

Victorian Prose Writers Before 1867 . Dictionary of Literary Biography. Vol. 55. Detroit: Gale. pp.

46– 64.

ISBN 978-0810317338 .

Chandler, Alice (1970).

A Dream of Order: The Medieval Ideal in Nineteenth-Century English Literature . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

ISBN 978-0803207042 .

Clubbe, John, ed. (1976).

Carlyle and His Contemporaries: Essays in Honor of Charles Richard Sanders . Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press .

ISBN 978-0822303404 .

Cole, J. A. (1964).

Lord Haw-Haw: The Full Story of William Joyce . London: Faber and Faber.

ISBN 978-0571148608 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Cumming, Mark, ed. (2004).

The Carlyle Encyclopedia . Madison and Teaneck, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press .

ISBN 978-0838637920 .

Drescher, Horst W., ed. (1983).

Thomas Carlyle 1981: Papers Given at the International Thomas Carlyle Centenary Symposium . Scottish Studies. Frankfurt am Main: Lang .

ISBN 978-3820473278 .

Dyer, Isaac Watson (1928).

A Bibliography of Thomas Carlyle's Writings and Ana . New York: Burt Franklin (published 1968).

Fielding, K. J.; Tarr, Rodger L., eds. (1976).

Carlyle Past and Present: A Collection of New Essays . Vision Press.

ISBN 978-0854783731 .

Harrold, Charles Frederick (1934).

Carlyle and German Thought: 1819–1834 . New Haven: Yale University Press.

Jackson, Holbrook (1948).

Dreamers of Dreams: The Rise and Fall of 19th Century Idealism . New York: Farrar, Straus and Company.

Jessop, Ralph (1997).

Carlyle and Scottish Thought . Macmillan Press.

Joyce, William (1940).

Twilight Over England . Berlin: Internationaler Verlag.

Kerry, Paul E.; Hill, Marylu, eds. (2010).

Thomas Carlyle Resartus: Reappraising Carlyle's Contribution to the Philosophy of History, Political Theory, and Cultural Criticism . Madison and Teaneck, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.

ISBN 978-0838642238 .

Kerry, Paul E.; Pionke, Albert D.; Dent, Megan, eds. (2018).

Thomas Carlyle and the Idea of Influence . Madison and Teaneck, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.

ISBN 978-1683930662 .

LaValley, Albert J. (1968).

Carlyle and the Idea of the Modern: Studies in Carlyle's Prophetic Literature and Its Relation to Blake, Nietzsche, Marx, and Others . New Haven and London: Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0300006766 .

Lea, F. A. (2017) [1943].

Carlyle: Prophet of To-day . Routledge Library Editions: Social and Political Thought in the Nineteenth Century. Vol. 2. Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781315563640 .

ISBN 978-1315563640 .

McCollum, Jonathon C. (20 July 2007).

Thomas Carlyle, Fascism, and Frederick: From Victorian Prophet to Fascist Ideologue (MA thesis). Brigham Young University.

hdl : 1877/etd2044 .

Mendilow, Jonathan (1983).

" The Neglected (I): Carlyle's Political Philosophy: Towards a Theory of Catch-All Extremism" .

Government and Opposition .

18 (1): 68– 87.

doi : 10.1111/j.1477-7053.1983.tb00341.x .

JSTOR 44483466 .

S2CID 145617742 .

Mendilow, Jonathan (1984). "Carlyle, Marx & the ILP: Alternative Routes to Socialism".

Polity .

17 (2). The University of Chicago Press: 225– 247.

doi : 10.2307/3234506 .

JSTOR 3234506 .

S2CID 147550498 .

Moldbug, Mencius (5 April 2016).

Moldbug on Carlyle .

Unqualified Reservations .

ASIN B01DVJCCBQ .

Moore, Carlisle (1957).

"Thomas Carlyle" . In Houtchens, Carolyn Washburn; Houtchens, Lawrence Huston (eds.).

The English Romantic Poets & Essayists: A Review of Research and Criticism (Revised ed.). New York: New York University Press (published 1966).

Norman, Edward (1987).

The Victorian Christian Socialists . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Pierson, Stanley (1979).

British Socialists: The Journey from Fantasy to Politics . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674082823 .

Plotz, John (2000).

"Crowd Power: Chartism, Carlyle, and the Victorian Public Sphere" .

Representations .

70 (70): 87– 114.

doi : 10.2307/2902894 .

JSTOR 2902894 .

Rosenberg, John D. (1985).

Carlyle and the Burden of History . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Rosenberg, Philip (1974).

The Seventh Hero: Thomas Carlyle and the Theory of Radical Activism . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Sanders, Charles Richard (1977).

Carlyle's Friendships and Other Studies . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.

ISBN 978-0822303893 .

Seigel, Jules Paul, ed. (1971).

Thomas Carlyle: The Critical Heritage . The Critical Heritage Series. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

ISBN 978-0710070906 .

Shepherd, Richard Herne (1881).

The Bibliography of Carlyle . London: Elliot Stock .

Shine, Hill (1971).

Carlyle and the Saint-Simonians; the concept of historical periodicity . New York: Octagon Books.

ISBN 978-0374973605 .

Sorensen, David R. (1 March 2009).

" 'Natural Supernaturalism': Carlyle's Redemption of the Past in The French Revolution" .

Revue LISA/LISA e-journal. Littératures, Histoire des Idées, Images, Sociétés du Monde Anglophone – Literature, History of Ideas, Images and Societies of the English-speaking World .

VII (3): 442– 451.

doi : 10.4000/lisa.132 .

ISSN 1762-6153 .

Sorensen, David R. (2012).

" 'The Great Pioneer of National Socialist Philosophy?': Carlyle and Twentieth-Century Totalitarianism" .

Studies in the Literary Imagination .

45 (1): 43– 66.

doi : 10.1353/sli.2012.0000 .

ISSN 2165-2678 .

S2CID 153751576 .

Sorensen, David; Kinser, Brent E. (11 January 2018).

"Thomas Carlyle" .

Oxford Bibliographies .

doi : 10.1093/OBO/9780199799558-0037 .

Tarr, Rodger L. (1976).

Thomas Carlyle: A Bibliography of English Language Criticism, 1824–1974 . Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia .

ISBN 978-0813906959 .

Tarr, Rodger L. (1989).

Thomas Carlyle: A Descriptive Bibliography . Pittsburgh Series in Bibliography. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.

ISBN 978-0822936077 .

Tennyson, G. B. (1965).

Sartor Called Resartus: The Genesis, Structure, and Style of Thomas Carlyle's First Major Work . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

LCCN 65017162 .

Tennyson, G. B. (1973). "Thomas Carlyle". In DeLaura, David J. (ed.).

Victorian Prose: A Guide to Research . New York: The Modern Language Association of America. pp.

33– 104.

ISBN 978-0873522502 .

Trela, D. J.; Tarr, Rodger L., eds. (1997).

The Critical Response to Thomas Carlyle's Major Works . Critical Responses in Arts and Letters. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press.

ISBN 978-0313291074 .

Vanden Bossche, Chris R. (1991).

Carlyle and the Search for Authority . Columbus: Ohio State University Press.

Vida, Elizabeth M. (1993).

Romantic Affinities: German Authors and Carlyle; A Study in the History of Ideas . Heritage. University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 978-1487573270 .

JSTOR 10.3138/j.ctvfrxchd .

Vijn, J. P. (2017).

Carlyle, Jung, and Modern Man: Jungian Concepts as Key to Carlyle's Mind (PDF) . H. Brinkman-Vijn. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 December 2022.

Wellek, René (1965).

Confrontations: studies in the intellectual and literary relations between Germany, England, and the United States during the nineteenth century . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Young, Louise Merwin (1971).

Thomas Carlyle and the Art of History . New York: Octagon Books.

ISBN 978-0374988418 .

Explanatory notes [ edit ] ^ For the letter, written by John Morley and David Masson , and list of signatories, see New Letters of Thomas Carlyle , edited by Alexander Carlyle, vol. II, pp. 323–324.

^ Pictured.

^ Houndsditch is a mercantile district in the East End of London that was associated with Jewish merchants of used clothing.

^ In his journal, Carlyle wrote that "right is the eternal symbol of might", and described himself thus: "never [was there] a son of Adam more contemptuous of might except where it rests on the above origin." [ 244 ] References [ edit ] ^ "The Great Hall in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery" .

National Galleries of Scotland . Retrieved 7 August 2022 .

The procession starts with the author and historian Thomas Carlyle, who played a significant role in the establishment of the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, and the National Portrait Gallery in London.

^ Emerson, Ralph Waldo (1881).

"The Literary Work of Thomas Carlyle" .

Scribner's Monthly . No. 22. p. 92.

hdl : 2027/uc1.32106009632289 .

Mr. Carlyle ... has yet for many years been accepted by competent critics of all shades of opinion as the undoubted head of English letters.

^ Stephen 1887 , p. 124, "Carlyle during these years had become the acknowledged head of English literature." ^ a b Tennyson 1973 , p. 35.

^ "Among these humble, stern, earnest religionists of the Burgher phase of Dissent Thomas Carlyle was born." – Sloan, John MacGavin (1904).

The Carlyle Country, with a Study of Carlyle's Life.

London: Chapman & Hall, p. 40.

^ Reminiscences , p. 5.

^ Marrs 1968 , p. 1.

^ Ingram, I. M. Margaret Carlyle: Her Illness of 1817 and its Consequences . Carlyle Society Papers: Edinburgh, 2004.

^ Cumming 2004 , pp. 76–77.

^ Reminiscences , p. 27.

^ Cumming 2004 , pp. 66–67.

^ LL , 2:369, n. 2.

^ TR , pp. 29–30.

^ TR , p. 31.

^ TR , p. 32.

^ "Thomas Carlyle" .

The University of Edinburgh . 13 May 2015 . Retrieved 19 July 2022 .

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 78.

^ Neff 1932 , p. 28.

^ Allingham , p. 253.

^ Wilson , 1:87.

^ Letters , 1:14, 16.

^ Reminiscences , p. 189.

^ Letters , 1:103.

^ Letters , 1:127–128.

^ Letters , 1:97.

^ TR , p. 35.

^ TR , p. 13.

^ Allingham , p. 232.

^ Reminiscences , p. 319.

^ Letters , 1:143.

^ TR , p. 50.

^ Letters , 1:149.

^ Letters , 5:28.

^ Dyer 1928 , p. 30.

^ Letters , 1:196.

^ Letters , 1:208.

^ Reminiscences , pp. 318–319.

^ Letters , 1:236.

^ Shepherd Bibliography , p. 1.

^ Letters , 1:251, 253, 254.

^ Letters , 1:272–273.

^ Letters , 1:286.

^ Letters , 1:352.

^ a b c Cumming 2004 , p. 79.

^ Letters , 1:368.

^ TR , pp. 50–51.

^ Vijn 2017 , p. 28.

^ TR , p. 49.

^ Froude , 1:101.

^ TR , p. 51.

^ Letters , 1:371–372.

^ CLO , TC to Janie Baillie Welsh; 23 March 1825.

^ Fielding & Tarr 1976 , p. 62.

^ Letters , p. 3:187–188.

^ a b CLO , JBW to Thomas Carlyle; 2 September 1825.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 303.

^ CLO , JBW to Mrs. George Welsh; 1 October 1826.

^ Cumming 2004 , pp. 223–224.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 442.

^ Nichol, John (1892).

Thomas Carlyle.

London: Macmillan & Co., p. 49.

^ "Thomas Carlyle and Dumfries & Galloway" .

D&G online . Retrieved 9 July 2020 .

^ D. Daiches (ed.), Companion to Literature 1 (London, 1965), p. 89.

^ Cumming 2004 , pp. 406–407.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 414.

^ Reminiscences , p. 83.

^ "Numbers 21–39 and Attached Railings, Non Civil Parish – 1246998 | Historic England" .

historicengland.org.uk . Retrieved 6 August 2022 .

^ "Thomas Carlyle | Essayist & Historian | Blue Plaques" .

English Heritage . Retrieved 6 August 2022 .

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 67.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 61.

^ a b Cumming 2004 , p. 81.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 418.

^ United Kingdom Gross Domestic Product deflator figures follow the MeasuringWorth "consistent series" supplied in Thomas, Ryland; Williamson, Samuel H. (2024).

"What Was the U.K. GDP Then?" .

MeasuringWorth . Retrieved 15 July 2024 .

^ CLO , TC to John A. Carlyle; 23 March 1835.

^ CLO , TC to James Fraser; 7 March 1835.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 245.

^ Tarr 1989 , p. 39.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 474.

^ Tarr 1989 , p. 55.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 331.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 121.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 366.

^ Letters , 9:215.

^ Shepherd 1881 , 1:170.

^ Letters , 9:382–385.

^ Shepherd 1881 , 1:179.

^ Letters , 10:93.

^ Works , 29:205.

^ Shepherd 1881 , 1:206.

^ Letters , 11:102.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 478.

^ Cumming 2004 , pp. 89–90.

^ "175 years ago: Carlyle's speech that gave birth to The London Library" .

www.londonlibrary.co.uk . 24 June 2015 . Retrieved 24 July 2022 .

^ Letters , 12:152.

^ Tennyson, G. B. (1963).

"Carlyle's Poetry to 1840: A Checklist and Discussion, a New Attribution, and Six Unpublished Poems" .

Victorian Poetry .

1 (3): 161– 181.

ISSN 0042-5206 .

JSTOR 40001193 .

^ Stephen, Leslie (1887).

"Carlyle, Thomas (1795-1881)" .

Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 09. pp.

111– 127.

^ Grindea, Miron , ed. (1978).

The London Library . Ipswich: Boydell Press/Adam Books. pp.

9–13 .

ISBN 0851150985 .

^ Wells (1991), pp. 26–31.

^ Wells, John (1991).

Rude Words: a discursive history of the London Library . London: Macmillan. pp.

12– 56.

ISBN 978-0333475195 .

^ Seigel, Jules. "Carlyle and Peel: The Prophet’s Search for a Heroic Politician and an Unpublished Fragment".

Victorian Studies , vol. 26, no. 2, 1983, pp. 181–195, JSTOR 3827005 . Accessed 13 April 2022.

^ Carlyle, Thomas. " Ireland and Sir Robert Peel ".

Spectator 22 (14 April 1849): 343–334.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 237.

^ Duffy 1892 .

^ Last Words of Thomas Carlyle , 1892.

^ Letters , 5:102.

^ Shepherd 1881 , 2:168.

^ Carlyle, Thomas (January 1852).

"The Opera" .

Harper's New Monthly Magazine . Vol. IV, no. XX – via Clyx.com.

^ Carlyle 1981 .

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 235.

^ "117–118 Marina, Non Civil Parish – 1353240 | Historic England" .

historicengland.org.uk . Retrieved 6 August 2022 .

^ Reminiscences , pp. 172–180.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 177.

^ Wilson , 6:3.

^ Brewster, William Tenney (1920).

"Carlyle, Thomas" .

Encyclopedia Americana . Vol. V.

^ Symons, Julian (2001). "The Imperfect Triumph".

Thomas Carlyle: The Life & Ideas of a Prophet . House of Stratus. p. 1.

ISBN 978-1842329368 .

^ Cumming 2004 , pp. 236–237.

^ a b Cumming 2004 , p. 83.

^ Hall, Catherine (2002).

Civilising Subjects: Metropole and Colony in the English Imagination, 1830–1867 . University of Chicago Press, p. 25.

^ D. Daiches ed., Companion to Literature 1 (London, 1965), p. 90.

^ Nichol 1904 , Chapter VII. Decadence [1866–1881].

^ Trella, D. J. (1992). "Carlyle's 'Shooting Niagara': The Writing and Revising of an Article and Pamphlet", Victorian Periodicals Review 25 (1), pp. 30–34.

^ Weintraub, Stanley (1987).

Victoria: An Intimate Biography . New York: Dutton. p. 352.

ISBN 978-0525244691 .

^ Allingham , p. 202.

^ Ousby, I. (ed.), The Cambridge Guide to Literature in English (Cambridge, 1995), p. 154.

^ Marrs 1968 , p. 790.

^ "Book of Members, 1780–2010: Chapter C" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved 23 September 2016 .

^ Wilson , 6:470–471.

^ Froude , 4:501.

^ Froude, James (1903).

My Relations with Carlyle . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. p. 70.

^ Wilson , 6:471.

^ Blunt 1895 , p. 92.

^ Birrell 1885 .

^ Campbell, Ian (10 April 2012).

"Retroview: Our Hero?" .

The American Interest . Retrieved 5 February 2022 .

^ O'Brien, Wendell.

"Meaning of Life, The: Early Continental and Analytic Perspectives" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 28 December 2022 .

^ Works , 1:202–212.

^ Works , 27:388.

^ Works , 29:118.

^ Taylor, Beverly (14 August 2015).

"Medievalism" . In Felluga, Dino Franco (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Victorian Literature . Oxford, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. pp.

1– 7.

doi : 10.1002/9781118405376.wbevl205 .

ISBN 978-1-118-40537-6 . Retrieved 15 April 2023 .

^ Works , 10:277.

^ Works , 28:271.

^ Letters , 11:219.

^ Works , 29:354.

^ Works , 20:9.

^ Works , 5:12.

^ Dyer 1928 , p. 546.

^ Froude , 3:391.

^ Sutherland, Liz (2005).

" 'As others dress to live, he lives to dress.' " (PDF) .

Carlyle Society Occasional Papers (18). Edinburgh University Press: 30.

^ Darwin, Charles (1839). Burkhardt, Frederick; Smith, Sydney (eds.).

The Correspondence of Charles Darwin . Vol. 2 (published 1985). p. 155.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 275.

^ "Thomas Carlyle" .

Spartacus Educational . Retrieved 9 August 2022 .

^ Higginson 1909 , pp. 5–6.

^ Smith, Charles Eastlake, ed. (1895).

Journals and Correspondence of Lady Eastlake . Vol. 1. London: John Murray. p. 118.

^ Norton, Sara; Howe, M. A. DeWolfe , eds. (1913). "To John Ruskin, Shady Hill, April 3, 1883".

Letters of Charles Eliot Norton . Vol. II. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company. p. 147.

^ Harrison, Frederic.

The Choice of Books, and Other Literary Pieces . London: Macmillan, 1912. pp. 180–181.

^ Higginson 1909 , p. 12.

^ Emerson, Ralph Waldo (1881). " XVIII. Carlyle ".

The Complete Works of Ralph Waldo Emerson . Vol. X. Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Company (published 1904).

^ Moore, Paul Elmer (1904).

"The Spirit of Carlyle" .

Shelburne Essays: First Series . New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons . p. 102.

^ George Eliot, "Thomas Carlyle", George Eliot Archive , accessed March 12, 2022, https://georgeeliotarchive.org/items/show/96 .

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 145.

^ Jackson 1948 , p. 14.

^ Cook, E. T.; Wedderburn, Alexander, eds. (1904).

"Appendix to Part II" .

Lectures on Architecture and Painting (Edinburgh, 1853) with Other Papers (1844–1854) . The Works of John Ruskin. Vol. XII. London: George Allen. p. 507.

^ Cook, E. T.; Wedderburn, Alexander, eds. (1909).

"Carlyle's Work" .

The Letters of John Ruskin (1870–1899) . The Works of John Ruskin. Vol. XXXVII. London: George Allen. p. 345.

^ Muirhead, John H. (1931).

The Platonic Tradition in Anglo-Saxon Philosophy . London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd. p. 127.

^ Clubbe 1976 , p. 257.

^ Fielding & Tarr 1976 , p. 50.

^ Cumming 2004 , pp. 18–19.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 40.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 42.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 93.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 142.

^ Cumming 2004 , pp. 186–188.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 209.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 284.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 318, "Meredith, George".

^ a b c McCollum 2007 , p. 46.

^ Sorensen, David R. (2008).

" 'A Flowing Light-Fountain': Thomas Carlyle, John Ruskin, and the Architecture of Heroism in The Stones of Venice" .

Carlyle Studies Annual (24): 77– 84.

ISSN 1074-2670 .

JSTOR 26592962 .

^ O’Beirne, Catherine (2014).

" 'A "cup of tea" as our friends across the Channel say': Marcel Proust Reads Carlyle intime" .

Carlyle Studies Annual (30): 73– 90.

ISSN 1074-2670 .

JSTOR 26594458 .

^ Devries, Ella Mae Scales (1976).

Thomas Carlyle and Bernard Shaw as Critics of Religion and Society (Doctoral dissertation). University of Nebraska–Lincoln.

OCLC 2686224 .

ProQuest 302812510 .

^ Altman, Matthew C.

"Carlyle, Thomas (1795–1881)" .

The Walt Whitman Archive . Retrieved 1 July 2022 .

General editors Matt Cohen, Ed Folsom & Kenneth M. Price.

^ Tennyson 1973 , p. 65.

^ McCollum 2007 , p. 66.

^ "Carlyle and Brontë on the Religiosity of the Victorian Age" .

victorianweb.org . Retrieved 27 June 2022 .

^ Chesterton, G. K. (1913).

"The Victorian Age in Literature" .

Victorian Web .

^ Cumming 2004 , pp. 316–317.

^ Marcus, Marvin (1985).

"Mori Ōgai and Biography as a Literary Genre in Japan" .

Biography .

8 (3): 213.

ISSN 0162-4962 .

JSTOR 23539089 .

^ Lemny, Stefan (1987).

"Carlyle's Impact on Romanian Culture" .

Carlyle Newsletter (8): 1– 6.

ISSN 0269-8226 .

JSTOR 44945694 .

^ Tennyson 1973 , pp. 61–72.

^ Kerry, Pionke & Dent 2018 , pp. 246, 319.

^ Fielding & Tarr 1976 , p. 47.

^ Chandler 1970 , pp. 150–151.

^ Cumming 2004 , pp. 457–459.

^ Kerry, Pionke & Dent 2018 , pp. 4–6.

^ Kerry, Pionke & Dent 2018 , pp. 319–332, " Finnegans Wake as 'Sartor's Risorted' or Sartor Retold: Recovering the Hidden Carlyle in Joyce".

^ Kinser, Brent E. (2001).

" 'A mixture of yea and nay': D. H. Lawrence, His 'Last Poems', and the Presence of Thomas Carlyle" .

Carlyle Studies Annual (20): 82– 104.

ISSN 1074-2670 .

JSTOR 44945804 .

^ Ingram, Malcolm (2013).

"Carlylese" (PDF) .

Carlyle Society Occasional Papers (26). Edinburgh University Press: 9– 10, 19.

^ Whitman, Walt (1882). "Carlyle from American Points of View".

Specimen Days .

^ Kegel, Charles H. (1961).

"Lord John Manners and the Young England Movement: Romanticism in Politics" .

The Western Political Quarterly .

14 (3): 691– 697.

doi : 10.2307/444286 .

ISSN 0043-4078 .

JSTOR 444286 .

^ Norman 1987 , pp. 10–11.

^ Mendilow 1984 .

^ Cumming 2004 , pp. 149–150, 310.

^ Ali, Syed Ashraf (16 August 2010).

"Gandhi and Islam" .

IslamiCity . Retrieved 13 July 2022 .

^ Wagner, Richard (1993).

The Art-Work of the Future and Other Works . Translated by Ellis, William Ashton . Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press. p. 29.

^ Duffy 1892 , pp. 4, 24.

^ a b c Roel Reyes, Stefan (12 January 2022).

" 'There must be a new world if there is to be any world at all!': Thomas Carlyle's illiberal influence on George Fitzhugh" .

Journal of Political Ideologies .

29 : 79– 97.

doi : 10.1080/13569317.2022.2026906 .

hdl : 1871.1/898b201d-6799-4e2b-bcab-bc96e8521654 .

ISSN 1356-9317 .

S2CID 245952334 .

Carlyle presented slavery as a system superior to the free wage labour promoted by laissez-faire capitalists. He argued that black slaves benefited from the security of shelter and food provided by a master – which free labourers black or white did not – while slave masters benefitted from their labour.

^ Lala, R. M. (2006).

For the Love of India: The Life and Times of Jamsetji Tata . Penguin Books India. p. 23.

ISBN 978-0-14-306206-6 .

^ The Legacy of Thomas Carlyle : A conversation between Simon Heffer, Ian Hislop and AN Wilson (YouTube video). London and South East National Trust. 23 March 2017.  Event occurs at 7:33.

^ E. Pankhurst 1914, p. 3.

^ Hamington, Maurice (2022), "Jane Addams" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2022 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 9 August 2022 ^ Dickerson, V. D. (2010).

Dark Victorians . Champaign: University of Illinois Press. p. 92.

^ Juguo, Zhang (15 January 2019).

W.E.B. Du Bois: The Quest for the Abolition of the Color Line . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-72268-7 .

^ Raab, Nathan.

"10 People Who Inspired Martin Luther King (And He Hoped Would Inspire Us)" .

Forbes . Retrieved 4 August 2023 .

^ Moldbug 2016 , Chapter 1: From Mises to Carlyle: My Sick Journey to the Dark Side of the Force.

^ Bowden, Jonathan (2017).

"Thomas Carlyle: The Sage of Chelsea" . In Johnson, Greg (ed.).

Extremists: Studies in Metapolitics . San Francisco: Counter-Currents.

ISBN 978-1940933481 . Archived from the original on 7 May 2021.

^ Bolton, Kerry (9 October 2020).

"Hendrik de Man, The Right, & Ethical Socialism" .

Counter-Currents .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2022.

^ Frykman, Erik (1984).

"Carlyle's Reception and Influence in Sweden" .

Studies in Scottish Literature .

19 (1): 33 . Retrieved 14 November 2023 .

^ Swaim, Barton (February 2010).

"Carlyle the wise" .

The New Criterion . Retrieved 14 November 2023 .

^ Sussman, Herbert L. (1979).

Fact into Figure: Typology in Carlyle, Ruskin, and the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood . Columbus: Ohio State University Press.

ISBN 978-0814203019 .

^ Mackail, J. W. (2011).

The Life of William Morris . New York: Dover Publications. p. 38.

ISBN 978-0486287935 .

^ Mackail, p. 346.

^ MacCarthy, Fiona (1994).

William Morris: A Life for our Time . London: Faber and Faber. p. 71.

^ Cumming 2004 , pp. 232–233, "Hunt, William Holman".

^ Cumming 2004 , pp. 498–499, "Woolner, Thomas".

^ Blakesley, Rosalind P. (2009).

The Arts and Crafts Movement . Phaidon Press.

ISBN 978-0714849676 .

^ Thomas Carlyle Rediscovered (YouTube video). villanovauniversity. 15 November 2010.  Event occurs at 40:10.

^ Sanders 1977 , p. 234.

^ ap Roberts, Ruth (1991).

"Carlyle and the Aesthetic Movement" .

Carlyle Annual (12): 57– 64.

JSTOR 44945538 .

^ Agnew, Lois (1998).

"Heroic Intensity: Thomas Carlyle's Rhetorical Foundation for Victorian Aestheticism" .

Carlyle Studies Annual (18): 167– 173.

JSTOR 44945773 .

^ Kerry, Pionke & Dent 2018 , p. 306.

^ Campbell 1987 , p. 58.

^ CLO , Introduction to Volume 27.

^ Allingham , p. 241.

^ Duffy 1892 , p. 117.

^ Kaplan 1983 , p. 526.

^ Kaplan, Fred (1993).

Thomas Carlyle: A Biography .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0520082007 .

Carlyle's active anti-Semitism was based primarily upon his identification of Jews with materialism and with an anachronistic religious structure. He was repelled by those 'old clothes' merchants ... by 'East End' orthodoxy, and by 'West End' Jewish wealth, merchants clothed in new money who seemed to epitomise the intense material corruption of Western society.

^ Cumming 2004 , p. 252.

^ Slater 1964 , p. 428.

^ Froude , 4:449.

^ Froude , 2:13.

^ Letters , 22:187.

^ Robinson, Henry Crabb (1938).

Henry Crabb Robinson on Books and their Writers . 3 vols. Ed.

Edith J. Morley . London: Dent. 2:541.

^ Goldberg, Michael K.; Jules P. Seigel, eds. (1983).

Carlyle's Latter-Day Pamphlets . Ottawa: Canadian Federation for the Humanities. p. 451.

^ Goldberg, David Theo (2000).

"Liberalism's Limits: Carlyle and Mill on 'The Negro Question' " .

Nineteenth-Century Contexts .

22 (2): 203– 216.

doi : 10.1080/08905490008583508 .

ISSN 0890-5495 .

^ "The London Library and Thomas Carlyle" . London Library . Retrieved 13 February 2025 .

^ a b Cumming 2004 , pp. 393–394.

^ Froude , 4:422.

^ Stewart, Herbert L. (1918).

"The Alleged Prussianism of Thomas Carlyle" .

International Journal of Ethics .

28 (2): 159– 178.

doi : 10.1086/intejethi.28.2.2377535 .

ISSN 1526-422X .

JSTOR 2377535 .

S2CID 159741457 .

^ Cole 1964 , p. 80.

^ Joyce 1940 , p. 165.

^ Kerry & Hill 2010 , p. 196.

^ Kerry & Hill 2010 , p. 193.

^ Kerry & Hill 2010 , p. 200.

^ Kerry & Hill 2010 , p. 197.

^ Tennyson 1973 , pp. 79–80.

^ Tarr 1989 .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Thomas Carlyle Wikiquote has quotations related to Thomas Carlyle .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Thomas Carlyle .

Carlyle Studies Annual on JSTOR The Norman and Charlotte Strouse Edition of the Writings of Thomas Carlyle The Collected Letters of Thomas and Jane Welsh Carlyle The Carlyle Society of Edinburgh The Ecclefechan Carlyle Society Thomas & Jane Carlyle's Craigenputtock the official site Portraits of Thomas Carlyle at the National Portrait Gallery, London Electronic editions [ edit ] Works by Thomas Carlyle in eBook form at Standard Ebooks Works by Thomas Carlyle at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Thomas Carlyle at the Internet Archive Works by Thomas Carlyle at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Poems by Thomas Carlyle at PoetryFoundation.org The Carlyle Letters Online The Green Snake and the Beautiful Lily , Thomas Carlyle's translation (1832) from the German of Goethe's Märchen or Das Märchen Archival material [ edit ] "Archival material relating to Thomas Carlyle" .

UK National Archives .

A guide to the Thomas Carlyle Collection at the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library Thomas and Jane Welsh Carlyle Photographs at the Mortimer Rare Book Collection , Smith College Special Collections Academic offices Preceded by William Ewart Gladstone Rector of the University of Edinburgh 1865–1868 Succeeded by James Moncreiff v t e Thomas Carlyle Allusions Philosophy Prose style People William Allingham Jane Welsh Carlyle Ralph Waldo Emerson Francis Espinasse John Forster James Anthony Froude Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Leigh Hunt Edward Irving Kitty Kirkpatrick John Stuart Mill John Ruskin John Sterling Places Arched House Scotsbrig 21 Comely Bank Craigenputtock 5 Cheyne Row London Library Statue Works Sartor Resartus (1831) The French Revolution: A History (1837) On Heroes, Hero-Worship, & the Heroic in History (1841) Past and Present (1843) Oliver Cromwell's Letters and Speeches (1845) Latter-Day Pamphlets (1850) The Life of John Sterling (1851) History of Friedrich II. of Prussia, Called Frederick the Great (1858–1865) Critical and Miscellaneous Essays " Occasional Discourse on the Negro Question " (1849) Reminiscences (1881) Correspondence with Emerson Ideas Captain of Industry Carlyle circle Condition-of-England Question Dismal Science Great Man theory Natural Supernaturalism Sage writing Related Arrangement in Grey and Black, No. 2: Portrait of Thomas Carlyle by James McNeill Whistler Dryasdust Laborare est Orare Phoenix Smelfungus Thomas Carlyle (Millais) " Thomas Carlyle and His Works " by Henry David Thoreau Vates Yggdrasil Articles related to Thomas Carlyle v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Critique of political economy 18th–19th-century Friedrich Engels Karl Marx Thomas Carlyle John Ruskin Paul Lafargue Erik Johan Stagnelius 20th–21st-century Jean Baudrillard Guy Debord Mahatma Gandhi André Gorz Moishe Postone Étienne Balibar Neue Marx-Lektüre Helmut Reichelt Hans-Georg Backhaus Robert Kurz Michael Heinrich Mark Fisher Roman Rosdolsky Claus Peter Ortlieb Georges Bataille Katrine Marçal Concepts Abstract labour and concrete labour Capitalist mode of production Commodity Chrematistics Dismal Science Illth Law of value Socially necessary labour time Valorisation Value-form Written works Unto This Last Sarvodaya The Right to Be Lazy Das Kapital Grundrisse Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Mirror of Production A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Critique of Economic Reason Discourse on Inequality The Accursed Share Who Cooked Adam Smith's Dinner?

Related Assume a can opener Classical economics Chrematistics Criticism of capitalism Critique of work Economic anthropology Economics Mainstream economics Occam's razor v t e Romanticism Countries Denmark England (literature) France (literature) Germany Japan Norway Poland Russia (literature) Scotland Spain (literature) Sweden (literature) Movements Ancients Bohemianism Coppet group Counter-Enlightenment Dark Düsseldorf School German historical school Gothic revival Hudson River School Indianism Jena Lake Poets Nationalist Nazarene movement Neo Pre Sturm und Drang Post Purismo Transcendentalism Ukrainian school Ultra Wallenrodism Themes Blue flower British Marine Gesamtkunstwerk Gothic fiction Hero Byronic Romantic Historical fiction Mal du siècle Medievalism Noble savage Nostalgia Ossian Pantheism Rhine Romantic genius Wanderlust Weltschmerz White Mountain art Writers Brazil Abreu Alencar Manuel Antônio de Almeida Alves Assis Azevedo Barreto Dias Guimarães Macedo Magalhães Reis Taunay Varela France Baudelaire Bertrand Chateaubriand Dumas Gautier Hugo Lamartine Mérimée Musset Nerval Nodier Staël Vigny Germany A. v. Arnim B. v. Arnim Beer Brentano Eichendorff Fouqué Goethe Brothers Grimm Günderrode Gutzkow Hauff Heine Hoffmann Hölderlin Jean Paul Kleist Mörike Novalis Schwab Tieck Uhland Great Britain Barbauld Blake Anne Brontë C. Brontë E. Brontë Burns Byron Carlyle Clare Coleridge de Quincey Maria Edgeworth Keats Maturin Polidori Radcliffe Mary Robinson Scott Seward M. Shelley P. B. Shelley Southey Wordsworth Poland Fredro Krasiński Józef Ignacy Kraszewski Malczewski Mickiewicz Norwid Potocki Wincenty Pol Słowacki Portugal Castelo Branco Castilho João de Deus Dinis Garrett Herculano Soares dos Passos Romania Mihail Kogălniceanu Constantin Negruzzi Vasile Alecsandri Dimitrie Bolintineanu Mihai Eminescu George Coșbuc Octavian Goga Alexandru Macedonski Barbu Ștefănescu Delavrancea Russia Baratynsky Batyushkov Gogol Karamzin Küchelbecker Lermontov Pushkin Tyutchev Vyazemsky Zhukovsky Serbia Jakšić Kostić Njegoš Radičević Stojadinović-Srpkinja Zmaj Spain Bécquer Rosalía de Castro Espronceda Gutiérrez Saavedra Zorrilla U.S.

Bryant Cooper Emerson Hawthorne Josiah Gilbert Holland Irving Longfellow Lowell Poe Other Abovian Alfieri Andersen Baratashvili Botev Chavchavadze Foscolo Frashëri Geijer Grundtvig Heliade Isaacs Lenau Leopardi Mácha Manzoni Maturin Oehlenschläger Orbeliani Prešeren Raffi Runeberg Shevchenko Topelius Vörösmarty Wergeland Musicians Austria Bruckner Czerny Hummel Mahler Schubert Thalberg Wolf Czechia Dvořák Moscheles Reicha Smetana Voříšek France Adam Alkan Auber Berlioz Fauré Halévy Méhul Onslow Saint-Saëns Germany Beethoven Brahms Bruch Kalkbrenner Loewe Marschner Fanny Mendelssohn Felix Mendelssohn Meyerbeer Moszkowski C. Schumann R. Schumann Spohr Strauss Wagner Weber Great Britain Elgar Holst Vaughan Williams Hungary Erkel Goldmark Heller Hubay Joachim Liszt Italy Bellini Busoni Cherubini Donizetti Paganini Respighi Rossini Spontini Verdi Poland Bortkiewicz Chopin Lipiński Moniuszko Paderewski Stolpe Tausig Wieniawski Russia Arensky Balakirev Borodin Cui Glinka Lyapunov Medtner Mussorgsky Rachmaninoff Rimsky-Korsakov Rubinstein Scriabin Tchaikovsky Serbia Hristić Konjović Mokranjac Stanković U.S.

Chadwick Beach Foote Foster Joplin MacDowell Sousa Other Bennett Berwald Field Franck Grieg Sibelius Sor Philosophers Belinsky Berchet Burke Carlyle Chaadayev Coleridge Constant Emerson Fichte Goethe Hazlitt Hegel Khomyakov Lamennais Larra Maistre Mazzini Michelet Müller Novalis Quinet Rousseau Schelling Schiller A. Schlegel F. Schlegel Schleiermacher Senancour Snellman Staël Thoreau Tieck Wackenroder Visual artists Aivazovsky Bierstadt Blake Bonington Bryullov Chassériau Church Constable Cole Corot Dahl David d'Angers Delacroix Edelfelt Friedrich Fuseli Gallen-Kallela Géricault Girodet Głowacki Goya Gude Hayez Janmot Jones Kiprensky Koch Lampi Leutze Martin Michałowski Palmer Porto-Alegre Préault Révoil Richard Rude Runge Saleh Scheffer Stattler Stroy Tidemand Tropinin Turner Veit Ward Wiertz Scholars Abraham Abrams Barzun Beiser Berlin Blanning Bloom Blume Dahlhaus Ferber Frye Janion Lacoue-Labarthe Lovejoy de Man Nancy Porthan Ricks Rosen Wellek Related topics Coleridge's theory of life German idealism List of romantics List of Romantic poets Middle Ages in history Opium and Romanticism Romantic ballet Romantic epistemology Romantic medicine Romantic poetry Romantic psychology Romanticism and economics Romanticism and the French Revolution Romanticism in science Bacon Evolution theory Wanderer above the Sea of Fog ← Age of Enlightenment Modernism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet Artists ULAN MusicBrainz Musée d'Orsay Photographers' Identities FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐98598574d‐sq57b
Cached time: 20250818074838
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.001 seconds
Real time usage: 3.409 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 28941/1000000
Revision size: 129677/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 835861/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 170342/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 636853/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.856/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23608989/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2736.660      1 -total
 20.35%  557.040     95 Template:Cite_book
 17.66%  483.371    176 Template:Sfn
 16.09%  440.445      2 Template:Reflist
 10.05%  275.148      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
  7.04%  192.613     35 Template:Cite_journal
  6.65%  182.113     21 Template:Cite_web
  5.70%  156.005      1 Template:Conservatism_UK
  5.60%  153.132      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  4.61%  126.140    276 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:128422:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818074838 and revision id 1303779157. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_Carlyle&oldid=1303779157 " Categories : Thomas Carlyle 1795 births 1881 deaths 19th-century Scottish biographers 19th-century British essayists 19th-century Scottish historians 19th-century Scottish translators 19th-century Scottish novelists 19th-century Scottish philosophers Alumni of the University of Edinburgh Antisemitism in the United Kingdom British anti-communists Conservatism in the United Kingdom Critics of Freemasonry Critics of political economy Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Historians of the French Revolution British lecturers British white supremacists People associated with the National Portrait Gallery People educated at Annan Academy People from Dumfries and Galloway People of the Victorian era Scottish proslavery activists Racism in the United Kingdom Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class) Rectors of the University of Edinburgh Right-wing politics in the United Kingdom Romantic critics of political economy Scottish biographers Scottish essayists 19th-century Scottish mathematicians Scottish literary critics Scottish monarchists Scottish satirists Scottish white nationalists Sexism in the United Kingdom Translators of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Writers of the Romantic era Scottish encyclopedists Hidden categories: Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Good articles Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from August 2023 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Articles containing German-language text CS1 maint: others CS1: long volume value CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles incorporating Cite DNB template an ndash in the wstitle parameter CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 errors: ISBN date Commons link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 01:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thomas Carlyle 68 languages Add topic

