Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Modern Locri 3 Main sights Toggle Main sights subsection 3.1 Ionic temple of Marasà 3.2 The theatre 3.3 Ludovisi Throne 4 Notable people 5 Notes 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Locri 56 languages العربية تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bikol Central Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaelg 한국어 Հայերեն Interlingua Italiano עברית Қазақша Kurdî Ladin Latina Lombard Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Picard Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray Wolof 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°12′57.65″N 16°13′43.62″E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.2160139°N 16.2287833°E ﻿ / 38.2160139; 16.2287833 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the city in Calabria. For the ancient region of Greece, see Locris . For the modern municipality in Greece, see Lokroi (municipality) . For other uses, see Lokroi .

Comune in Calabria, Italy Locri Comune Coat of arms Location of Locri Locri Location of Locri in Italy Show map of Italy Locri Locri (Calabria) Show map of Calabria Coordinates: 38°12′57.65″N 16°13′43.62″E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.2160139°N 16.2287833°E ﻿ / 38.2160139; 16.2287833 Country Italy Region Calabria Metropolitan city Reggio Calabria (RC) Frazioni Moschetta, San Fili, Baldari Government • Mayor Giuseppe Fontana Area [ 1 ] • Total 25 km 2 (10 sq mi) Population (2018-01-01) [ 2 ] • Total 12,367 • Density 490/km 2 (1,300/sq mi) Time zone UTC+1 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+2 ( CEST ) Postal code 89044 Dialing code 0964 Patron saint St. Catherine Saint day November 24 Website Official website Locri is a town and comune (municipality) in the province of Reggio Calabria , Calabria , southern Italy. Its name derives from that of the ancient Greek region of Locris . Today it is an important administrative and cultural center on the Ionian Coast and within its province.

History [ edit ] Main article: Epizephyrian Locris Epizephyrian Locris or Locri Epizephyrii ( Ancient Greek : Λοκροί Ἐπιζεφύριοι , romanized : Lokroí Epizephúrioi ; from the plural of Λοκρός ( Lokros , "a Locrian"), ἐπί ( epí , "on"), Ζέφυρος ( Zéphuros , " West Wind "), thus "the Western Locrians") [ 3 ] was founded about 680 BC on the Italian shore of the Ionian Sea , near modern Capo Zefirio, by the Locrians , apparently by Opuntii (East Locrians) from the city of Opus , but including Ozolae (West Locrians) and Lacedaemonians . Its Latin name, Locri , is the plural of the Latin Locrus , which was used both to mean an inhabitant of Locris and the eponymous ancestor of the Locrians .

Strabo suggests that the Ozolian Locrians were the principal founders, while Ephorus held that the Locri was a colony of Opuntian Locris .

[ 4 ] Pinax from Locris: Persephone and Hades sitting on the throne Due to fierce winds at an original settlement, the settlers moved to the present site. After a century, a defensive wall was built. Outside the city there are several necropoleis , some of which are very large.

Its renowned lawgiver Zaleucus decreed that anyone who proposed a change in the laws should do so with a noose about their neck, with which they should be hanged if the amendment did not pass.

Plato called it "The flower of Italy", due to the local peoples' characteristics.

Locris was the site of two great sanctuaries, that of Persephone and of Aphrodite .

[ 5 ] Perhaps uniquely, Persephone was worshiped as protector of marriage and childbirth, a role usually assumed by Hera , and Diodorus Siculus knew the temple there as the most illustrious in Italy.

[ 6 ] In the early centuries Locris was allied with Sparta , and later with Syracuse . It founded two colonies of its own, Hipponion and Medma .

During the 5th century BC , votive pinakes in terracotta were often dedicated as offerings to the goddess, made in series and painted with bright colors, animated by scenes connected to the myth of Persephone. Many of these pinakes are now on display in the National Museum of Magna Græcia in Reggio Calabria. Locrian pinakes represent one of the most significant categories of objects from Magna Graecia, both as documents of religious practice and as works of art.

[ 7 ] In the iconography of votive plaques at Locri, her abduction and marriage to Hades served as an emblem of the marital state, children at Locri were dedicated to Persephone, and maidens about to be wed brought their peplos to be blessed.

During the Pyrrhic Wars (280-275 BC) fought between Pyrrhus of Epirus and Rome , Locris accepted a Roman garrison and fought against the Epirote king. However, the city changed sides numerous times during the war. Bronze tablets from the treasury of its Olympeum, a temple to Zeus , record payments to a 'king', generally thought to be Pyrrhus. Despite this, Pyrrhus plundered the temple of Persephone at Locris before his return to Epirus, an event which would live on in the memory of the Greeks of Italy. At the end of the war, perhaps to allay fears about its loyalty, Locris minted coins depicting a seated Rome being crowned by 'Pistis', a goddess personifying good faith and loyalty, and returned to the Roman fold.

The city was abandoned in the 5th century AD . The town was finally destroyed by the Saracens in 915. The survivors fled inland about 10 kilometres (6 mi) to the town Gerace on the slopes of the Aspromonte .

Modern Locri [ edit ] See also: Locri Cathedral After 1850 Gerace developed along the coast, forming a new centre Gerace Marina, to house new public buildings and a railway station. In 1934 it changed its name in Locri, which is now the administrative centre of the Locride area. The city boasts a National Museum and an Archaeological Park.

[ 8 ] Apart from the archeological sites, the town is also an important sea-side resort along the Costa dei Gelsomini , or Jasmine Coast, one of the wildest coastlines of Italy.

[ 9 ] Locri, with over 12,000 inhabitants, is an important administrative and cultural centre on the Ionian Coast, in the Italian Province of Reggio Calabria. The town is easily reached by plane; in fact, it is only 90 minutes away from the International Airport of Lamezia Terme and from the Airport of Reggio Calabria. Locri is well connected to all regional and national towns and cities by train, shuttle, taxi, and bus. The A2 autoroute makes Locri easy to reach by car, too.

Sicily is accessible by ferry boat from Villa San Giovanni or Reggio Calabria, both of which are a car or a train journey away from Locri. There are several hotels, residences, hostels, and bed&breakfast establishments where tourists and visitors can find comfortable accommodation for their stay. The Tourist Information Centre can offer assistance and information on matters of accommodation.
In Locri, you can find many administrative bodies and public services, such as a criminal and civil court, a revenue agency, a police station, travel agencies, three post offices (two of which have ATM facilities), banks, the State Archive, the City Hall (built in 1880), trade unions, the bishop's office, several Catholic churches, and an Indian and an Evangelical church.  The city is also home to the most important hospital of the area, an emergency medical service, many private doctors, and three pharmacies. There are in the locality several state schools – including Elementary Schools, High Schools, Lyceums, and Vocational  Schools  – as well as private schools and two private English language schools .
The city boasts a National Museum and an Archaeological Park, two cinemas, two cultural centres, a theatre, and a library. In Locri you will find many shops, restaurants, pizzerias, fast food outlets, pubs, bars, cafeterias, patisseries, farm restaurants, fruit and vegetable market halls, florists, supermarkets, and shopping malls. You also have facilities for a wide range of sports, including soccer, basketball, volleyball, tennis, swimming, snorkeling, fishing and diving, and, because there is nearby hilly and mountainous terrain, trekking and hiking are further options. Finally, being a seaside city, Locri can offer enjoyable walks on the sea-front boulevard or on the beach and in the summer months it plays host to an assortment of beach-side lidos.

Main sights [ edit ] Ionic temple of Marasà [ edit ] In the first half of the fifth century BC, the Locrians demolished their archaic temple and rebuilt a new temple in the Ionic style . The temple was designed by Syracusan architects around 470 BC, based on the idea of Hiero I of Syracuse .

The new temple occupies the same place as the previous one but it has a different orientation. The temple was destroyed in the 11th century. The dimensions of the temple were 45.5 by 19.8 metres (149 by 65 ft). The cella is free of supports on the central axes. The pronaos had two columns. The temple has seventeen Ionic columns on the long side, and six on the front. The height of the temple was 12 metres (39 ft).

According to Italian scholar Margherita Guarducci , the famous Ludovisi Throne comes from the temple of Aphrodite of Epizephyrian Locris, where it was used as the parapet of the bothros . This theory is strengthened by the measures of the sculpture which fit perfectly together with the three great stones of the covering of the bothros ; stones still existing and open to visits inside the archaeological area of the Temple of contrada Marasà.

[ 10 ] The theatre [ edit ] The theatre was built in the fourth century BC not far from the ancient city, 
in the Contrada Pirettina, taking advantage of a hillside slope. The original structure had space for more than 4,500 people; now only the central part of the theatre is visible.

Part of the Cavea was cut into the rocks. Each plane was divided in 7 wedges between 6 scales. A horizontal separation divided the upper theater from the lower theatre.

Ludovisi Throne [ edit ] Left-hand panel of the throne: a woman playing the aulos In 1982, the exquisite and famous Ludovisi Throne , found reused in the ancient Roman gardens of Sallust in 1887, was securely linked to the newly studied Ionic temple at Marasà, in Locri. A reconstruction of the throne was shown to fit exactly into remaining blocks in the temple's foundations, and it has been suggested that terracotta votive plaques, or pinakes, of cults at Epizephyrian Locris, are the only stylistic parallel to the Throne.

[ 11 ] The marble sculpture, in its bas-relief decoration, represents on the front side Aphrodite born from the sea foam (but some scholars sees in it the representation of Persephone coming back from the Hades) and helped by two maidservants to raise from the water, while on the left side is represented a naked flute-girl seated on a cushion and playing the double-flute, and on the right side a veiled woman using an incense-burner.

Notable people [ edit ] Acrion (Pythagorean philosopher) Nossis (ancient epigrammist and poet) Philistion of Locri (ancient physician and writer on medicine) Timaeus of Locri (Pythagorean philosopher) Zaleucus (devised the first written Greek law code) Notes [ edit ] ^ "Superficie di Comuni Province e Regioni italiane al 9 ottobre 2011" . Italian National Institute of Statistics . Retrieved 16 March 2019 .

^ All demographics and other statistics from the Italian statistical institute ( Istat ) ^ It was common in classical times to name a city in the plural for the name of its inhabitants and/or its eponymous deity or founder, cp. αἱ Ἀθήναι, literally "The Athenas," i.e. " Athens ." See also the List of traditional Greek place names ^ Strabo (1903).

Geography . Translated by H.C. Hamilton; William Falconer. London: George Bell & Sons.

^ See the history of the Ludovisi Throne , now thought to have come from Locris.

^ Eisenfeld, Hanne (2016).

"Life, Death, and a Lokrian Goddess" .

Kernos (29): 41– 72.

doi : 10.4000/kernos.2388 .

^ Bennett, Michael; Bennett, Michael J.; Paul, Aaron J. (2002).

Magna Graecia: Greek Art from South Italy and Sicily . Cleveland Museum of Art.

ISBN 9780940717718 .

^ http://www.locriantica.it/enghome.htm www.locriantica.it ^ Calabria's Jasmine Coast , Italia, site of ENIT - the Italian Government Tourist Board, accessed 14 September 2017 ^ "Locri Epizephyrii's Archaeological Finds: The Ludovisi Throne" .

^ Terra, 1997 External links [ edit ] Locri Youth Association - Associazione Culturale Giovani per la Locride (in Italian) Sito on ancient Locri (in Italian and English) v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Calabria · Comuni of the Metropolitan City of Reggio Calabria Africo Agnana Calabra Anoia Antonimina Ardore Bagaladi Bagnara Calabra Benestare Bianco Bivongi Bova Bova Marina Bovalino Brancaleone Bruzzano Zeffirio Calanna Camini Campo Calabro Candidoni Canolo Caraffa del Bianco Cardeto Careri Casignana Caulonia Ciminà Cinquefrondi Cittanova Condofuri Cosoleto Delianuova Feroleto della Chiesa Ferruzzano Fiumara Galatro Gerace Giffone Gioia Tauro Gioiosa Ionica Grotteria Laganadi Laureana di Borrello Locri Mammola Marina di Gioiosa Ionica Maropati Martone Melicuccà Melicucco Melito di Porto Salvo Molochio Monasterace Montebello Ionico Motta San Giovanni Oppido Mamertina Palizzi Palmi Pazzano Placanica Platì Polistena Portigliola Reggio Calabria Riace Rizziconi Roccaforte del Greco Roccella Ionica Roghudi Rosarno Samo San Ferdinando San Giorgio Morgeto San Giovanni di Gerace San Lorenzo San Luca San Pietro di Caridà San Procopio San Roberto Sant'Agata del Bianco Sant'Alessio in Aspromonte Sant'Eufemia d'Aspromonte Sant'Ilario dello Ionio Santa Cristina d'Aspromonte Santo Stefano in Aspromonte Scido Scilla Seminara Serrata Siderno Sinopoli Staiti Stignano Stilo Taurianova Terranova Sappo Minulio Varapodio Villa San Giovanni Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Geographic Pleiades Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐n9f4n
Cached time: 20250817051450
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.724 seconds
Real time usage: 0.873 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6251/1000000
Revision size: 13996/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 219709/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15802/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 30/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 62839/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.440/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16327090/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  717.290      1 -total
 62.90%  451.165      1 Template:Infobox_Italian_comune
 61.64%  442.146      1 Template:Infobox_settlement
 44.37%  318.241      1 Template:Infobox
 18.96%  136.004     16 Template:Main_other
 14.69%  105.387      1 Template:Magna_Graecia
 14.33%  102.781      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 12.99%   93.205      5 Template:Wikidata
 10.49%   75.243      5 Template:Lang
  5.75%   41.267      1 Template:About Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:48104:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051450 and revision id 1291111988. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Locri&oldid=1291111988 " Categories : Cities and towns in Calabria Municipalities of the Metropolitan City of Reggio Calabria Archaeological sites in Calabria Dorian colonies in Magna Graecia Spartan colonies History of the 'Ndrangheta Railway towns in Italy Locri Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using infobox settlement with image map1 but not image map Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 19 May 2025, at 04:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Locri 56 languages Add topic

