Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Particle physics 2 Electronics 3 Thermodynamics 4 Quantum mechanics 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Observer effect (physics) 14 languages العربية Català فارسی Galego 한국어 עברית Magyar 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fact that observing a situation changes it For other uses, see Observer effect .

Part of a series of articles about Quantum mechanics i ℏ ℏ d d t | Ψ Ψ ⟩ ⟩ = H ^ ^ | Ψ Ψ ⟩ ⟩ {\displaystyle i\hbar {\frac {d}{dt}}|\Psi \rangle ={\hat {H}}|\Psi \rangle } Schrödinger equation Introduction Glossary History Background Classical mechanics Old quantum theory Bra–ket notation Hamiltonian Interference Fundamentals Complementarity Decoherence Entanglement Energy level Measurement Nonlocality Quantum number State Superposition Symmetry Tunnelling Uncertainty Wave function Collapse Experiments Bell's inequality CHSH inequality Davisson–Germer Double-slit Elitzur–Vaidman Franck–Hertz Leggett inequality Leggett–Garg inequality Mach–Zehnder Popper Quantum eraser Delayed-choice Schrödinger's cat Stern–Gerlach Wheeler's delayed-choice Formulations Overview Heisenberg Interaction Matrix Phase-space Schrödinger Sum-over-histories (path integral) Equations Dirac Klein–Gordon Pauli Rydberg Schrödinger Interpretations Bayesian Consciousness causes collapse Consistent histories Copenhagen de Broglie–Bohm Ensemble Hidden-variable Many-worlds Objective-collapse Quantum logic Superdeterminism Relational Transactional Advanced topics Relativistic quantum mechanics Quantum field theory Quantum information science Quantum computing Quantum chaos EPR paradox Density matrix Scattering theory Quantum statistical mechanics Quantum machine learning Scientists Aharonov Bell Bethe Blackett Bloch Bohm Bohr Born Bose de Broglie Compton Dirac Davisson Debye Ehrenfest Einstein Everett Fock Fermi Feynman Glauber Gutzwiller Heisenberg Hilbert Jordan Kramers Lamb Landau Laue Moseley Millikan Onnes Pauli Planck Rabi Raman Rydberg Schrödinger Simmons Sommerfeld von Neumann Weyl Wien Wigner Zeeman Zeilinger v t e In physics , the observer effect is the disturbance of an observed system by the act of observation.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] This is often the result of utilising instruments that, by necessity, alter the state of what they measure in some manner. A common example is checking the pressure in an automobile tire, which causes some of the air to escape, thereby changing the amount of pressure one observes. Similarly, seeing non-luminous objects requires light hitting the object to cause it to reflect that light. While the effects of observation are often negligible, the object still experiences a change (leading to the Schrödinger's cat thought experiment). This effect can be found in many domains of physics, but can usually be reduced to insignificance by using different instruments or observation techniques.

A notable example of the observer effect occurs in quantum mechanics , as demonstrated by the double-slit experiment . Physicists have found that observation of quantum phenomena by a detector or an instrument can change the measured results of this experiment. Despite the "observer effect" in the double-slit experiment being caused by the presence of an electronic detector, the experiment's results have been interpreted by some to suggest that a conscious mind can directly affect reality.

[ 3 ] However, the need for the "observer" to be conscious is not supported by scientific research, and has been pointed out as a misconception rooted in a poor understanding of the quantum wave function ψ and the quantum measurement process.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Particle physics [ edit ] An electron is detected upon interaction with a photon ; this interaction will inevitably alter the velocity and momentum of that electron. It is possible for other, less direct means of measurement to affect the electron. It is also necessary to distinguish clearly between the measured value of a quantity and the value resulting from the measurement process. In particular, a measurement of momentum is non-repeatable in short intervals of time. A formula (one-dimensional for simplicity) relating involved quantities, due to Niels Bohr (1928) is given by | v x ′ − − v x | Δ Δ p x ≈ ≈ ℏ ℏ / Δ Δ t , {\displaystyle |v'_{x}-v_{x}|\Delta p_{x}\approx \hbar /\Delta t,} where Δ p x is uncertainty in measured value of momentum, Δ t is duration of measurement, v x is velocity of particle before measurement, v ′ x is velocity of particle after measurement, ħ is the reduced Planck constant .

The measured momentum of the electron is then related to v x , whereas its momentum after the measurement is related to v ′ x . This is a best-case scenario.

[ 7 ] Electronics [ edit ] In electronics , ammeters and voltmeters are usually wired in series or parallel to the circuit, and so by their very presence affect the current or the voltage they are measuring by way of presenting an additional real or complex load to the circuit, thus changing the transfer function and behavior of the circuit itself. Even a more passive device such as a current clamp , which measures the wire current without coming into physical contact with the wire, affects the current through the circuit being measured because the inductance is mutual .

Thermodynamics [ edit ] In thermodynamics , a standard mercury-in-glass thermometer must absorb or give up some thermal energy to record a temperature , and therefore changes the temperature of the body which it is measuring.

Quantum mechanics [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Observer (quantum physics) .

[ edit ] Some interpretations of quantum mechanics posit a central role for an observer of a quantum phenomenon.

[ 8 ] The quantum mechanical observer is tied to the issue of observer effect , where a measurement necessarily requires interacting with the physical object being measured, affecting its properties through the interaction. The term "observable" has gained a technical meaning, denoting a Hermitian operator that represents a measurement.

[ 9 ] : 55 See also [ edit ] Observer (special relativity) References [ edit ] ^ Dirac, P.A.M. (1967).

The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (4th ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 3.

^ Dent, Eric B.

"The Observation, Inquiry, and Measurement Challenges Surfaced by Complexity Theory" (PDF) . In Richardson, Gurt (ed.).

Managing the Complex: Philosophy, Theory and Practice . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2019 . Retrieved 23 April 2019 .

^ Squires, Euan J. (1994).

"Does wavefunction reduction require conscious observers?" .

The Mystery of the Quantum World . Taylor & Francis Group. p. 62.

ISBN 9781420050509 .

^ "Of course the introduction of the observer must not be misunderstood to imply that some kind of subjective features are to be brought into the description of nature. The observer has, rather, only the function of registering decisions, i.e., processes in space and time, and it does not matter whether the observer is an apparatus or a human being ; but the registration, i.e., the transition from the "possible" to the "actual," is absolutely necessary here and cannot be omitted from the interpretation of quantum theory." - Werner Heisenberg , Physics and Philosophy , p. 137 ^ "Was the wave function waiting to jump for thousands of millions of years until a single-celled living creature appeared? Or did it have to wait a little longer for some highly qualified measurer - with a PhD?" - John Stewart Bell , 1981, Quantum Mechanics for Cosmologists . In C.J. Isham, R. Penrose and D.W. Sciama (eds.), Quantum Gravity 2: A second Oxford Symposium . Oxford: Clarendon Press, p. 611.

^ According to standard quantum mechanics, it is a matter of complete indifference whether the experimenters stay around to watch their experiment, or instead leave the room and delegate observing to an inanimate apparatus which amplifies the microscopic events to macroscopic measurements and records them by a time-irreversible process ( Bell, John (2004).

Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics: Collected Papers on Quantum Philosophy . Cambridge University Press. p. 170.

ISBN 9780521523387 .

). The measured state is not interfering with the states excluded by the measurement. As Richard Feynman put it: "Nature does not know what you are looking at, and she behaves the way she is going to behave whether you bother to take down the data or not." ( Feynman, Richard (2015).

The Feynman Lectures on Physics . Vol. III. Basic Books. Ch 3.2.

ISBN 9780465040834 .

).

^ Landau, L.D.

; Lifshitz, E. M.

(1977).

Quantum Mechanics: Non-Relativistic Theory . Vol. 3. Translated by Sykes, J. B.; Bell, J. S.

(3rd ed.).

Pergamon Press . §7, §44.

ISBN 978-0-08-020940-1 .

^ Schlosshauer, Maximilian; Kofler, Johannes; Zeilinger, Anton (1 August 2013). "A snapshot of foundational attitudes toward quantum mechanics".

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B .

44 (3): 222– 230.

arXiv : 1301.1069 .

Bibcode : 2013SHPMP..44..222S .

doi : 10.1016/j.shpsb.2013.04.004 .

S2CID 55537196 .

^ Rieffel, Eleanor G.

; Polak, Wolfgang H. (4 March 2011).

Quantum Computing: A Gentle Introduction . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-01506-6 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Observer_effect_(physics)&oldid=1290822720 " Category : Physical phenomena Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 17 May 2025, at 08:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Observer effect (physics) 14 languages Add topic

