Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Academic career 3 Persecution and death 4 Rubin's value theory 5 Influence and legacy 6 Family 7 Selected publications Toggle Selected publications subsection 7.1 Chief work 7.2 Further publications 7.2.1 Books 7.2.2 Articles 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Isaak Illich Rubin 10 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano مصرى Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Soviet lawyer and economist Isaak and Polonia Rubin, 1910 Part of a series on the Marxian critique of political economy Concepts Capitalist mode of production Capital Commodity Concrete and abstract labour Critique of political economy Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Relations of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Wage labour Wage slavery Wertkritik Wertabspaltungskritik Value-form Topics Crisis theory Imperialism Historical materialism Technological unemployment Falling profit-rate tendency Works Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 Wage Labour and Capital A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Grundrisse Das Kapital Theories of Surplus Value Value, Price and Profit People Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Roman Rosdolsky Isaak Illich Rubin Étienne Balibar Robert Kurz Mark Fisher Claus Peter Ortlieb Moishe Postone NML Hans-Georg Backhaus Helmut Reichelt Michael Heinrich Journals Monthly Review New School Economic Review Crisis and Critique Historical Materialism Socialist register Capital & Class Related topics Critique of political economy Economics Marxist sociology Socialism portal v t e Isaak Illich Rubin ( Russian : Исаак Ильич Рубин; 12 June 1886 – 27 November 1937) was a Soviet lawyer, economist and scholar of Marx's work. His most important published work was Essays on Marx's Theory of Value (first edition, 1923).

His scholarly works and textbooks and his popular lectures, e.g., at the Institute of Red Professors , were an important influence on the early Soviet Russian interpretation of Karl Marx ; but he was not himself a Bolshevik and was frequently jailed, then banished to Soviet Central Asia, then executed in 1937 during the Great Purge . Though Rubin's reading of Marx had produced an extensive Russian literature throughout the 1920s, by the late 1930s his work and memory had been completely expunged within the Soviet Union. Rubin was also unknown in the West until the 1970s, when an English translation of his main work, made from a rare surviving copy, appeared – after numerous references to the "Rubin school" of the twenties had been made in Roman Rosdolsky 's major 1968 study of Marx's Grundrisse .

[ 1 ] Since that time much more material has emerged and he has been a major figure in scholarly disputes about Marx's theory of value since the 1970s. In 1989–91 he was rehabilitated by the Soviet Union.

[ 2 ] Early life [ edit ] He was born in Dinaburg , Vitebsk Governorate , Russian Empire , into a wealthy Lithuanian Jewish family, Rubin became a revolutionary prior to the Revolution of 1905 , when he was 19 years old. He joined the Jewish workers' Bund and later also the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party . Rubin belonged to the Menshevik-Internationalists during the Russian Revolution , and was a member of its faction, which in 1920 opposed joining the completely Bolshevik dominated Russian Communist Party (b) . In the same period, the Bund  split, mostly dissolving into the new Communist Party, while others continued and founded the short-lived Social Democratic Union, of which Rubin served as secretary. From 1921 he was repeatedly arrested by the Cheka . Because of his scholarly reputation, Rubin enjoyed preferential treatment and was allowed to continue writing his works. In addition, petitions from numerous influential Bolshevik intellectuals such as Anatoly Lunacharsky , Mikhail Pokrovsky and David Ryazanov also repeatedly called for his release. He was once again arrested in 1923 and imprisoned until December 1924, eventually being exiled to Crimea until 1926 before being recalled to work at the Marx-Engels Institute .

[ 3 ] Academic career [ edit ] He had withdrawn from politics by 1924, devoting himself to the academic study of Marx's critique of political economy . In 1926 he joined the prestigious Marx-Engels Institute as a research assistant. The Marx-Engels Institute was headed by David Riazanov , against whom Joseph Stalin nursed a grudge.

[ 4 ] Essays on Marx's Theory of Value was published in 1924.  Rubin also published books on the history of economics and contemporary economics, as well as editing an anthology of classical political economy .

[ 5 ] However, by 1928, criticism of his positions intensified. He was accused of distorting Marx's economic theory, taking an idealistic and metaphysical approach to economic categories, and separating form from content. He became the target of a campaign that culminated in an indictment published in Pravda in November 1930 accusing Rubin of being a member of a "Menshevik-kulak" conspiracy.

[ 2 ] Persecution and death [ edit ] Rubin was arrested on December 23, 1930, and accused of being a member of the All-Union Bureau of Mensheviks , a fictitious secret organisation. Rubin, a trained lawyer and an economist, outwitted his first interrogators and the first charge was dropped; he was then transferred to a cell in Suzdal , where he was placed in solitary confinement and subjected to sleep deprivation .

[ 4 ] [ unreliable source?

] On January 28, 1931, Rubin was brought to another cell, where he was shown another prisoner and told that if he did not confess, the prisoner would be shot. Rubin refused and the prisoner was executed before him. The process was repeated the next night. After the second shooting, Rubin negotiated a "confession" with his interrogators, who wanted him implicate his mentor David Riazanov as a member of a secret Menshevik conspiracy.

[ 4 ] At the 1931 Menshevik Trial , Rubin refused to confirm the existence of a Menshevik organisation. Although he agreed to make false statements regarding correspondence with secret Mensheviks said to be in possession of Riazonov, he claimed that he was their source and had given them to Riazonov's care on the basis of "great personal trust" rather than organisational discipline. As a result of his failure to fully cooperate with his prosecutors, Rubin was sentenced to five years in prison. Although he attempted to shield Riazanov from the worst charges, Rubin emerged from the experience "morally broken, destroyed, degraded to a state of complete hopelessness", according to the account in Medvedev [ 4 ] Rubin served most of his prison term in solitary confinement, during which he continued his research as best as he could. When he fell ill with a suspected cancer, he was removed to a hospital and encouraged to make further confessions in return for favourable treatment, but declined the offer. He was released on a commuted sentence in 1934 and allowed to work in Aktyubinsk , Kazakh SSR as an economic planner.

Rubin was arrested once more during the Great Purge on 19 November 1937. After this arrest he was never seen alive again.

[ 4 ] He was executed under the accusation of Trotskyist conspiracy on 25 November 1937. He was rehabilitated during the period of Perestroika .

[ 2 ] Rubin's value theory [ edit ] Main article: Exchange theory of value Rubin's main work emphasised the importance of Marx's theory of commodity fetishism in the labor theory of value . Against those who counterposed Marx's early interest in alienation with his later economic theory, Rubin argued that Marx's mature economic work represented the culmination of his lifetime project to understand how human creative power is shaped, defined, and limited by social structures, which take on a uniquely "objective" economic form under capitalism .

[ 6 ] Significantly, Rubin is at pains to argue that simple commodity production is not a historical phenomenon that developed into capitalism, as it is often understood by both Marxists and critics of Marx; rather, it is a theoretical abstraction that explains one aspect of a fully developed capitalist economy. The concept of value , as understood by Rubin, cannot exist without the other elements of a full-blown capitalist economy: money , capital , the existence of a proletariat , and so on.

Influence and legacy [ edit ] Rubin's work was never reissued in the Soviet Union after 1928, but in 1972 Essays on Marx's Theory of Value was translated into English by Fredy Perlman and Milos Samardzija. The work had important points of contact with the German "New Marx Reading" already begun by Hans-Georg Backhaus and Helmut Reichelt and thereafter became a foundation stone of the "value-form" approach to Marxist theory, exemplified also by Chris Arthur, Geert Reuten , the "Konstanz–Sydney" group (Michael Eldred, Mike Roth, Lucia Kleiber , Volkbert Roth ) and others. In this interpretation of Marx, "it is the development of the forms of exchange that is seen as the prime determinant of the capitalist economy rather than the content regulated by it".

[ 7 ] Capitalism is here understood as a method of regulating human labor by giving it the social form of an exchangeable commodity (the "value-form"), rather than a disguised or mystified system that is otherwise similar in content to other class-based societies.

According to Arthur, the rediscovery of Rubin's "masterly exegesis" was "the most important single influence on the value form approach to Capital ".

[ 7 ] Family [ edit ] His brother Aron Rubin (1888–1961), was a Soviet philosopher and literary critic. His nephew Vitaly Rubin was a Soviet orientalist and the topic of a global campaign to permit his emigration to Israel in 1974.

Selected publications [ edit ] Chief work [ edit ] Rubin, Isaak Illich: Essays on Marx's Theory of Value . Translated by Milos Samardzija and Fredy Perlman from the third edition, Moscow, Leningrad 1928. Fourth Printing. Montreal, New York 1990.

Rubin, Isaak Illich : Essays on Marx's Theory of Value. Conceived as a Variorum Edition (Historical Materialism Band 339) Brill, Leiden 2025, ISBN 978-90-04-72133-3.

Further publications [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Rubin, Isaac Ilych: A History of Economic Thought Inklinks 1979.

Translated and edited by Donald Filtzer from 2nd Revised Russian ed 1929.

Rubin, Isaac Ilych: Essays on Marx's Theory of Money (1926–8) translated in Day and Gaido, 619-727.

Articles [ edit ] "Marx’s Teaching on Production and Consumption" (1930), translated Day and Gaido, 448-535 "Fundamental Features of Marx’s Theory of Value and How it Differs from Ricardo’s Theory" (1924), translated Day and Gaido, 536-582 "Towards a History of the Text of the First Chapter of Marx’s Capital" (1929), translated Day and Gaido, 583-618 "The Dialectical Development of Categories in Marx’s Economic System" (1929) translated Day and Gaido, 728-818 "Abstract Labour and Value in Marx’s System" (1927), translated by Kathleen Gilbert .

"Ricardo's Doctrine of Capital" (1936-7), note discovered by Vasina and Rokityanskii, English 1992 References [ edit ] ^ "Zur Entstehungsgeschichte des Marxschen Kapital" .

^ a b c "Рубин Исаак" .

^ Редакция.

"Рубин Исаак" .

Электронная еврейская энциклопедия ОРТ (in Russian) . Retrieved 4 December 2022 .

^ a b c d e Medvedev, Roy (1989).

Let History Judge: The Origins and Consequences of Stalinism . New York: Columbia University Press. pp.

279–284 .

^ Rubin, Isaak Illich (1990).

Essays on Marx's Theory of Value . Montreal: Black Rose Books.

^ Perlman, Fredy.

"Commodity Fetishism" .

^ a b Arthur, Chris (2004).

The New Dialectic and Marx's Capital . Leiden: Brill. p. 11.

Further reading [ edit ] Boldyrev, Ivan and Martin Kragh. "Isaak Rubin: Historian of Economic Thought During the Stalinization of Social Sciences in Soviet Russia," Journal of the History of Economic Thought . 2015. Vol. 37, Iss. 3. P. 363–386.

Joe, Hyeon-soo: Politische Ökonomie als Gesellschaftstheorie. Studien zur Marx-Rezeption von Isaak Iljitsch Rubin und Kozo Uno [German], Diss. Philipps-Universität Marburg 1995.

Paula, João Antonio; Cerqueira, Hugo.

Isaac I. Rubin e sua história do pensamento econômico . Belo Horizonte: Cedeplar-UFMG, 2013. (in Portuguese).

Vasina, Ljudmila L.: I. I. Rubin – Marxforscher und Politökonom . [German], in: Beiträge zur Marx-Engels-Forschung. Neue Folge 1994, pp. 144–149.

Vasina, Lyudmila L.; Rokityansky, Yakov G. "Pages from the Life and Creative Work of Economist I.I. Rubin" (1992) translated in Day and Gaido, 819-36.  This essay incorporates Vasina's research into Rubin's biography.

Day, Richard B., Gaido, Daniel F., editors.

Responses to Marx’s Capital: From Rudolf Hilferding to Isaak Illich Rubin , Volume 144 of Historical Materialism Book Series. Pages 429-818 of this work translates six works of Rubin, most unknown before his rehabilitation, including the manuscript Essays on Marx's Theory of Money that was preserved from the 30s to 90s by members of his family.

External links [ edit ] Writings of I. I. Rubin at marxists.org Selected bibliography with links and materials.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Isaak_Illich_Rubin&oldid=1301832975 " Categories : 1886 births 1937 deaths Writers from Daugavpils People from Dvinsky Uyezd Latvian Jews Jews from the Russian Empire Soviet Jews Bundists Mensheviks Marxian economists Marxist theorists Historians of economic thought Jewish historians Jewish socialists Soviet economists 1931 Menshevik Trial Jews executed by the Soviet Union Great Purge victims from Latvia Hidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2020 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2021 This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 23:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Isaak Illich Rubin 10 languages Add topic

