Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Government service career 3 Personal life 4 Positions held 5 Awards 6 Teaching 7 Books 8 Death 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana 1 language తెలుగు Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana Background information Born ( 1923-08-04 ) 4 August 1923 Origin Anakapalli , Andhra Pradesh , India Died 11 July 2013 (2013-07-11) (aged 89) Genres Carnatic classical music Occupation Classical Vocalist Years active 1945 - 2013 Website Official site Musical artist Mahamahopadhyaya Dr.

Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana (4 August 1923 – 11 July 2013) was a Carnatic musician , [ 1 ] a classical vocalist, [ 2 ] musicologist, author and teacher, a great administrator and motivator. He was a performer on All India Radio and Doordarshan who participated in Sangeeta Sammelans, outdoor broadcasts and national programmes innumerable times. His radio lessons and Bhakti Ranjanis were very popular. He was awarded Padma Bhushan award by the Government of India in 2010.

Early life [ edit ] Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana was born in Anakapalli , Andhra Pradesh , the son of Annapurneswara Sarma and Yegnachayanamma. His father, Annapurneswara Sarma, was a 'Srividya' upasaka (a scholar and priest of high rank). His mother Yegnachayanamma gave him basic training in classical music and fostered his talent. His father always motivated and encouraged him.

Career [ edit ] Nookala, when young, entered the traditional theatre and handled a few boy roles but classical music attracted him from the start. He has started as violin student. Sri Kambhampati Akkaji Rao led him to Mangalampally Pattabhiramayya at Vijayawada, under whose guidance he remained for three years, after which he made his way to Vijayanagaram to learn violin under Prof.

Dwaram Venkataswamy Naidu garu. Nookala accompanied Prof. Naidu garu on his concerts all over India, and Prof. Naidu garu introduced Nookala to Dr. Sripada Pinakapani. His singing style developed after he came under the influence of Dr. Pinakapani. Nookala sharpened his analytical approach, achieving a deeper understanding of the science and art of music and learnt to infuse the raga bhava in every note and phrase of the kriti .

Nookala was attracted by several musical greats but developed his own style of singing, never departing from classicism, yet expressing the beauty of 'raga' and the meaning of the 'kriti', with special emphasis on diction.

Government service career [ edit ] During his administrative career spans over four decades: he has held various posts and positions, including: Professor, Maharajah's Government College of Music and Dance , Vizianagaram Professor, Telugu University, Hyderabad Principal, Govt. Music College of Secunderabad Principal, Govt. Music College of Hyderabad Principal, Govt. Music College of Vijayawada Principal, Sri Venkateswara College of Tirupati Personal life [ edit ] Nookala was married to Sesha, daughter of Annapurna and Ayyalasomayajula Kameswar Rao, a 'Srividya' upasaka: they have seven children.

Positions held [ edit ] Founder President of Viswakala Parishat Chairman Board of Studies - Andhra University Chairman Board of Studies - Sri Venkateswara University Expert Member - Andhra University Expert Member - Madras Music Academy Member Audition Board and Committee - All India Radio Awards [ edit ] Padma Bhushan by Government of India in 2010.

Hamsa Award or Kala Ratna (Cultural Council Government of Andhra Pradesh) Annamacharya Vidwanmani ('Sapna' - Sri Annamacharya Project of North America, Chicago) Sangeeta Kala Acharya (Music Academy, Chennai) Sangeeta Vidya Nidhi (Andhra Music Academy, Bhimily) Vani Kala Sudhakara (Bangalore Gayan Samaj, Centenary Celebrations, Bangalore) Saptagiri Sangeeta Vidwanmani (Sri Tyagaraja Festival Committee, Tirupati) Nada Nidhi (Sri Ganapathi Sachidananda Swamy) Nada Hridayagnaha (Swami Dayananda Saraswati) Nada Sudharnava (Murali Ravali, Madras) Sangeeta Sarvabuama (Sri Maruti Tyagaraja Gana Sabha, Tirupati) Sangeeta Ksheera Sagara (Sri Tyagaraja Narayanadasa Seva Samithi, Rajahmundry) Ganakala Ghandarva (Vamshi Arts Theatres, Hyderabad) Lakshya Lakshana Marthanda Sangeeta Sudhakara Emipatus Fellowship from Govt. of India President's Sangeeta Nataka Academy Award Senior Fellowship of Department of Culture Govt. of India Mahamahopadya He is the Asthana Vidwan of Sri Tirumala Tirupati Devastanam - Tirupati and Pitsburg, U.S.A.

Kanchi Kamakoti Peetham of Kanchi Sringeri Sankara Peetham of Sringeri Pushpagiri Peetham of Pushpagiri Ganapati Sachidananda Ashram - Mysore Teaching [ edit ] Nookala has travelled all over India performing. He is the favourite choice of SPICMACAY Society for Promoting Interest in Classical Music and Culture among Youth. He has total command over the South Indian style and also a commendable knowledge of the Hindustani style of music which enables comparative study.

Nookala has traveled to United States of America, Canada, the United Kingdom, Ireland, Malaysia, Singapore, and Mauritius. He has given performances and lecture demonstrations and conducted workshops in several universities including Cambridge, Oxford, Edinburgh, London and Wakefield in the U.K. and Wesleyan, Wisconsin, Colombia and Colorado in U.S.A.

His lecture demonstrations are attended by students, teachers and academics. He compares the Carnatic music system with other systems, including Hindustani as well as western classical music while being an ambassador of Carnatic music. He has a passion for teaching and enjoys it very much. The title Mahamahopadhyaya is given to a musician who has trained a hundred students. Dr. Nookala has several hundreds of students ranging from beginners to doctorate trainees, five-year-olds to 75-year-olds, prodigies to minimum gifted students.

Dr. Nookala founded Viswakala Parishat, a non-profit organization for the cause of music and related activities which holds chamber music concerts and conducts music festivals and launches young and talented artists.

Books [ edit ] Sangeeta Sudha a course of lessons including Saralis, Alankaras, Geethams, Varnams with notation published in English and Telugu.

Ragalakshana Sangraham A reference book of the lakshanas or features of 250 ragas with examples in sanchari listing the compositions and viseshana prayogas in detail.  This is available in Telugu and in English under the name " Ragas Of Indian Music " The Monograph Of Tyagaraja's Pancharatna Kritis A work on the 'Magnum Opus' of a saint composer. It covers every aspect of the five monumental compositions giving word by word meaning, extended meaning and a commentary correlating the swara sahitya relationship. He has examined and analyzed the kritis from the three angles of literature, music and spiritualism excelling in every aspect. This book is available in both English and Telugu.

Deekshithar's Navagraha and Kamalamba Navaavarna Kritis Meaning, sahitya with notation and an in depth commentary. This book is available in both English and Telugu.

Sri Tyagaraja Saraswata Sarvaswam All the kritis of Sri Tyagaraja with commentary and meaning. This book is available only in Telugu.

Sangeeta Saastra Sudhaarnavam Some aspects of the science and art of Indian Music. It deals mainly with Carnatic Music but some aspects of Hindustani and western music are also presented briefly. This book is available in both Telugu and English under the name " The Science of Indian Music " Vaggeyakara Kriti Sagaram This book contains lyrics with notations, of great composers and musicians of ancient India like Tyagaraja, Deekshitar, Syamasastry, Annamayya and also contemporary musicians like Dr.Mangalampally Balamurali Krishna and Dr.Sripada Pinakapani Garu. It is a treasure of classical Musical Compositions. This book is available in 2 volumes and is available only in Telugu.

Death [ edit ] Despite his advanced age and failing health, Nookala participated in many programmes and toured abroad. His condition worsened by 2013 and he died on 11 July 2013, [ 3 ] less than a month before his 90th birthday.

References [ edit ] ^ "The Hindu : Arts / Music : A treat for the ears" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 27 August 2010.

^ Srihari, Gudipoodi (12 July 2013).

"Nookala passes away" .

The Hindu .

^ "Carnatic Musician Nukala Chinna Satyanarayana Dead" .

External links [ edit ] Sangeeta Saastra Sudhaarnavam at Internet Archive Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Israel v t e Padma Bhushan award recipients (2010–2019) 2010 Satya Paul Agarwal Mohammad Amin Sailesh Kumar Bandopadhyay M. S. Banga Anil Bordia Bipan Chandra B. K. Chaturvedi Sant Singh Chatwal G. P. Chopra Tan Chung Madhusudan Dhaky P. R. Dubhashi Puttaraj Gawai Belle Monappa Hegde Ilaiyaraaja Jagdish Chandra Kapur Shrinivas Khale Aamir Khan Sultan Khan Ram Kumar Kumudini Lakhia Kuzhur Narayana Marar Chhannulal Mishra Eledath Thaikkattu Narayanan Mooss C. P. Krishnan Nair S. P. Oswal Akbar Padamsee Ramakanta Panda Balasaheb Vikhe Patil Arogyaswami Paulraj A. R. Rahman Moosa Raza Mallika Sarabhai Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana Abhijit Sen Satya Vrat Shastri Noshir M. Shroff Kushal Pal Singh Bikash Sinha Balagangadharanatha Swamiji Narayanan Vaghul P. K. Warrier Fareed Zakaria 2011 S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Rajashree Birla M. N. Buch C. V. Chandrasekhar Ajai Chowdhry Yogesh Chander Deveshwar Satyadev Dubey T. J. S. George Shankha Ghosh Kris Gopalakrishnan Keki Byramjee Grant Shashi Kapoor Krishen Khanna Khayyam Chanda Kochhar Dwijen Mukhopadhyay Madavoor Vasudevan Nair Ramdas Pai Dashrath Patel Rajendra Singh Pawar Suryanarayanan Ramachandran Shobhana Ranade Gunupati Venkata Krishna Reddy Kallam Anji Reddy Waheeda Rehman Shyam Saran Analjit Singh Arpita Singh Surendra Singh R. K. Srikantan Raghavan Thirumulpad 2012 Suresh H. Advani Shabana Azmi Homi K. Bhabha Shashikumar Chitre Khaled Choudhury Jatin Das Vidya Dehejia Dharmendra S. N. Goenka M. S. Gopalakrishnan T. V. Gopalakrishnan Buddhadev Das Gupta Sunil Janah Anish Kapoor S. B. Mujumdar B. Muthuraman Mira Nair Arvind Panagariya José Pereira Mata Prasad M. S. Raghunathan P. Chandrasekhara Rao Ronen Sen Devi Shetty M. V. Subbiah N. Vittal N. H. Wadia George Yeo 2013 Satya N. Atluri Maharaj Kishan Bhan Jaspal Bhatti Rahul Dravid Adi Godrej Abdul Rashid Khan Rajesh Khanna Mary Kom Nandkishore Shamrao Laud Mangesh Padgaonkar Hemendra Singh Panwar Jogesh Pati Shivajirao Girdhar Patil A. Sivathanu Pillai D. Ramanaidu Kanak Rele V. K. Saraswat Ashoke Sen Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak B. N. Suresh Sharmila Tagore Ramamurthy Thyagarajan Saroja Vaidyanathan 2014 Anisuzzaman Mrityunjay Athreya Padmanabhan Balaram Dalveer Bhandari Ruskin Bond Anita Desai Pullela Gopichand Kamal Haasan Jyeshtharaj Joshi V. N. Kaul Neelam Kler M. Mahadevappa Leander Paes Koppillil Radhakrishnan Anumolu Ramakrishna Thirumalachari Ramasami Lloyd Rudolph Susanne Hoeber Rudolph Vinod Prakash Sharma Gulam Mohammed Sheikh Parween Sultana Dhirubhai Thaker Vairamuthu J. S. Verma T. H. Vinayakram 2015 Jahnu Barua Manjul Bhargava Vijay P. Bhatkar Swapan Dasgupta David Frawley Bill Gates Melinda French Gates Swami Satyamitranand N. Gopalaswami Subhash C. Kashyap Gokulotsavji Maharaj Saichiro Misumi Ambrish Mithal Sudha Ragunathan Harish Salve Ashok Seth Rajat Sharma Satpal Singh Shivakumara Swami Khadg Singh Valdiya 2016 Ravindra Chandra Bhargava Robert D. Blackwill Hafeez Contractor Indu Jain Heisnam Kanhailal Anupam Kher Sania Mirza Pallonji Mistry Udit Narayan Saina Nehwal Yarlagadda Lakshmi Prasad Vinod Rai N. S. Ramanuja Tatacharya A. V. Rama Rao D. Nageshwara Reddy Dayananda Saraswati Barjinder Singh Hamdard Ram V. Sutar Tejomayananda 2017 Vishwa Mohan Bhatt Deviprasad Dwivedi Ratnasundarsuri Niranjanananda Saraswati Cho Ramaswamy Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Tehemton Erach Udwadia 2018 Pankaj Advani Philipose Mar Chrysostom Mahendra Singh Dhoni Alexander Kadakin Ramachandran Nagaswamy Laxman Pai Arvind Parikh Sharda Sinha 2019 John T. Chambers Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa Pravin Gordhan Dharampal Gulati Darshan Lal Jain Ashok Laxmanrao Kukade Kariya Munda Budhaditya Mukherjee Mohanlal Nambi Narayanan Kuldip Nayar Bachendri Pal V. K. Shunglu Hukmdev Narayan Yadav # Posthumous conferral 1954–1959 1960–1969 1970–1979 1980–1989 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–2029 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nookala_Chinna_Satyanarayana&oldid=1132808173 " Categories : 2013 deaths 1923 births Male Carnatic singers Carnatic singers 20th-century Indian male classical singers Recipients of the Padma Bhushan in arts Recipients of the Kala Ratna Musicians from Visakhapatnam Singers from Andhra Pradesh Recipients of the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from May 2018 Use Indian English from May 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles lacking reliable references from March 2008 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 10 January 2023, at 18:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana 1 language Add topic

