Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methodology Toggle Methodology subsection 1.1 Disease and prognostic indicators 1.2 End of life 2 Estimator 3 History 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Prognosis 46 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Ghanaian Pidgin Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wiktionary Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medical term for the likely development of a disease This article is about the medical term. For the engineering discipline, see prognostics .

Prognosis ( Greek : πρόγνωσις "fore-knowing, foreseeing"; pl.

: prognoses ) is a medical term for predicting the likelihood or expected development of a disease , including whether the signs and symptoms will improve or worsen (and how quickly) or remain stable over time; expectations of quality of life , such as the ability to carry out daily activities; the potential for complications and associated health issues; and the likelihood of survival (including life expectancy).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] A prognosis is made on the basis of the normal course of the diagnosed disease, the individual's physical and mental condition, the available treatments, and additional factors.

[ 2 ] A complete prognosis includes the expected duration, function, and description of the course of the disease, such as progressive decline, intermittent crisis, or sudden, unpredictable crisis.

[ 3 ] When applied to large statistical populations , prognostic estimates can be very accurate: for example the statement "45% of patients with severe septic shock will die within 28 days" can be made with some confidence, because previous research found that this proportion of patients died. This statistical information does not apply to the prognosis for each individual patient, because patient-specific factors can substantially change the expected course of the disease: additional information is needed to determine whether a patient belongs to the 45% who will die, or to the 55% who survive.

[ 4 ] Methodology [ edit ] Disease and prognostic indicators [ edit ] Prognostic scoring is also used for cancer outcome predictions. A Manchester score is an indicator of prognosis for small-cell lung cancer. For Non-Hodgkin lymphoma , physicians have developed the International Prognostic Index to predict patient outcome.

Other medical areas where prognostic indicators are used is in Drug-Induced Liver Injury (DILI) ( Hy's law ) and use of an exercise stress test as a prognostic indicator after myocardial infarction , also used to indicate multiple myeloma survival rate.

[ 5 ] End of life [ edit ] Studies have found that most doctors are overly optimistic when making a prognosis; they tend to overstate how long a patient might live. For patients who are critically ill, particularly those in an intensive care unit , there are numerical prognostic scoring systems that are more accurate. The most famous of these is the APACHE II scale, which is most accurate when applied in the seven days prior to a patient's predicted death.

[ 6 ] Knowing the prognosis helps determine whether it makes more sense to attempt certain treatments or to withhold them, and thus plays an important role in end-of-life decisions and advanced care planning .

[ 7 ] Estimator [ edit ] Estimators that are commonly used to describe prognoses include: Progression-free survival - the length of time during and after medication or treatment during which the disease being treated (usually cancer) does not get worse.

Survival rate – indicating the percentage of people in a study or treatment group who are alive for a given period of time after diagnosis.

Survival time – the remaining duration of life. If not otherwise specified, it generally starts from the time of diagnosis.

History [ edit ] One of the earliest written works of medicine is the Book of Prognostics of Hippocrates , written around 400 BC. This work opens with the following statement: "It appears to me a most excellent thing for the physician to cultivate Prognosis; for by foreseeing and foretelling, in the presence of the sick, the present, the past, and the future, and explaining the omissions which patients have been guilty of, he will be the more readily believed to be acquainted with the circumstances of the sick; so that men will have confidence to intrust themselves to such a physician." [ 8 ] For 19th-century physicians, particularly those following the French school of medicine, the main aim of medicine was not to cure disease, but rather to give a medical diagnosis and achieve a satisfying prognosis of the patient's chances.

[ 9 ] Only several decades later did the focus of efforts in Western medicine shift to curing disease.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Cure – Substance or procedure that ends a medical condition Medical diagnosis – Process to identify a disease or disorder Nocebo – Harmful effect from negative belief Optimism bias – Type of cognitive bias Placebo (origins of technical term) – Substance or treatment of no therapeutic value Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Prediction – Statement about a future event Reference class forecasting – Method of predicting the future Relative survival – Calculation in epidemiology Sign (medicine) – Indications of a specific illness, including psychiatric Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Signs and symptoms – Indications of a specific illness, including psychiatric Survival analysis – Branch of statistics Survival rate – Medical analysis of disease Symptom – Indications of a specific illness, including psychiatric Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets References [ edit ] ^ "What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?" .

Genetics Home Reference . NIH: U.S. National Library of Medicine . Retrieved 2018-05-20 .

^ a b "Prognosis" .

Nature Publishing Group . Retrieved 20 May 2018 .

^ Hansebout, R. R.; Cornacchi, S. D.; Haines, T.; Goldsmith, C. H. (2009).

"How to use an article about prognosis" .

Canadian Journal of Surgery. Journal Canadien de Chirurgie .

52 (4): 328– 336.

PMC 2724829 .

PMID 19680521 .

^ Gould, Stephen Jay (2013), "The Median Isn't the Message" , AMA Journal of Ethics , 15 (1): 77– 81, doi : 10.1001/virtualmentor.2013.15.1.mnar1-1301 , PMID 23356812 ^ "Multiple Myeloma Prognosis" .

Multiple Myeloma Prognosis .

^ Tian, Yao; Yao, Yang; Zhou, Jing; Diao, Xin; Chen, Hui; Cai, Kaixia; Ma, Xuan; Wang, Shengyu (2021).

"Dynamic APACHE II Score to Predict the Outcome of Intensive Care Unit Patients" .

Frontiers in Medicine .

8 : 744907.

doi : 10.3389/fmed.2021.744907 .

ISSN 2296-858X .

PMC 8826444 .

PMID 35155461 .

^ Kim, Peter; Daly, Jeanette M.; Berry-Stoelzle, Maresi A.; Schmidt, Megan E.; Michaels, LeAnn C.; Dorr, David A.; Levy, Barcey T. (March 2020).

"Prognostic Indices for Advance Care Planning in Primary Care: A Scoping Review" .

The Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine .

33 (2): 322– 338.

doi : 10.3122/jabfm.2020.02.190173 .

ISSN 1557-2625 .

PMC 7772823 .

PMID 32179616 .

^ "The Internet Classics Archive – The Book of Prognostics by Hippocrates" .

classics.mit.edu . Retrieved 19 March 2018 .

^ "Diagnosis: Understanding illness | Science Museum" .

External links [ edit ] Look up prognosis in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Computer models at prognosis.org v t e Basic medical terms used to describe disease conditions Signs and symptoms Syndrome Disease Medical diagnosis Differential diagnosis Prognosis Acute Chronic Cure Eponymous disease Acronym or abbreviation Remission Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Prognosis&oldid=1301024401 " Category : Medical terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 18:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Prognosis 46 languages Add topic

