Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Criteria 2 Landscape use 3 Fire Resistant Plants 4 Unintended consequences 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Defensible space (fire control) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Natural or landscaped buffer to reduce fire danger Graphic from the Government Accountability Office showing defensible space surrounding a home A defensible space , in the context of fire control , is a natural or landscaped area around a structure that has been maintained and designed to reduce fire danger. The practice is sometimes called firescaping .

[ 1 ] "Defensible space" is also used in the context of wildfires , especially in the wildland-urban interface (WUI).

[ 2 ] This defensible space reduces the risk that fire will spread from one area to another, or to a structure, and provides firefighters access and a safer area from which to defend a threatened area. Firefighters sometimes do not attempt to protect structures without adequate defensible space, as it is less safe and less likely to succeed.

Criteria [ edit ] A first concept of defensible space for most fire agencies' primary goal of fuel reduction is a recommended or required defensible space around a structure to extend for at least 100 feet (30 m) in all directions.

[ 3 ] A second concept of defensible space is "fuel reduction." This means plants are selectively thinned and pruned to reduce the combustible fuel mass of the remaining plants. The goal is to break up the more continuous and dense uninterrupted layer of vegetation.

A third concept of defensible space is " fuel ladder " management. Like rungs on a ladder, vegetation can be present at varying heights from groundcover to trees. Ground fuel "rungs", such as dried grasses, can transmit fire to shrub rungs, which then transmit up tree branch rungs into the tree canopy. A burning tree produces embers that can blow to new areas, spreading and making it more difficult to control a wildland fire. One guideline is for a typical separation of three times the height of the lower fuel to the next fuel ladder. For example, a 2-foot-high (0.6 m) shrub under a tree would need a spacing of 6 feet (2 m) to the lowest limbs of the tree. Since wildfires burn faster uphill than on flat land, fuel ladder spacing may need to be greater for slopes.

[ 4 ] Landscape use [ edit ] The term defensible space in landscape use ("firescape") refers to the 100-foot (30 m) zone surrounding a structure. Often the location is in the wildland–urban interface . This area need not be devoid of vegetation by using naturally fire resistive plants that are spaced, pruned and trimmed, and irrigated, to minimize the fuel mass available to ignite and also to hamper the spread of a fire.

The first 30 feet (9 m) is the "Defensible Space Zone," of a defensible space around a structure. It is where vegetation is kept to a minimum combustible mass. A guideline used in this zone can be "low, lean and green." Trees should be kept to a minimum of 10 feet (3 m) from other trees to reduce risk of fire spread between trees. Wood piles should be kept in zone 2. No branches should be touching or hanging over the roof of the house or within 10 feet of the structure to help keep the structure safe. Any dead vegetation or plants from zone 1 should be removed, and vegetation near windows should be pruned or removed.

[ 5 ] The second distance of 30 to 100 feet (9 to 30 m), is the "Reduced Fuel Zone" of a defensible space around a structure. In this area of the defensible space, fuels and vegetation are separated vertically and horizontally depending on the vegetation type. This is done by: thinning, pruning, and removal of selected vegetation; and removing lower limbs from trees closer to lower vegetation and the lateral separation of tree canopies .

[ 6 ] Grass height should not exceed 4 inches (10 cm). Trees should be 10 feet away from each other on a flat to mild slope but should be double that on a mild to moderate slope. Shrubs should be as far away as twice its height for flat to mid-slope but four times its height for mild to moderate slope. Leaves, twigs, needles, clones, bark, and small branches should be removed but can be left up to a depth of 3 inches (8 cm).

[ 5 ] Vertical space from trees to ground should be 6 feet (2 m) while the vertical distance from a tree to a shrub should be the height of the shrub times three.

Creating zones to better divide the space is the recommended approach to having effective defensible space. These zones act as partitions to show what can be allowed in certain areas. There should be no dried vegetation or flammable materials near this zone. Zone 0 is anything 0-5 feet from the building. Gravel, pavers and noncombustible mulch should be used to create a barrier between the home and zone 1. Zone 1 is anything within 30 feet of the building. All combustibles should be removed from this zone. This includes dried vegetation, wooden furniture, umbrellas and canopies. Ideal substitutions for this zone would be well irrigated grass, rocks and metal furniture. Zone 2 should have well spaced out trees and other vegetation. Noncombustible furniture and structures should be separating the flammable vegetation. Fire breaks such as gravel pathways and driveways should be used as fire breaks on the property. Grass should be well irrigated and cut regularly. There should be enough vertical space between trees and ground vegetation to prevent fire spread. Zone 3 is the transition zone between the defensible space and the natural land. Maintenance is not as strict bust should still be done.  The main goal of this zone is to slow the speed of the fire and keep it from spreading to the other zones.

[ 7 ] An important component is ongoing maintenance of the fire-resistant landscaping for reduced fuel loads and fire fighting access. Fire-resistive plants that are not maintained can desiccate , die, or amass deadwood debris , and become fire assistive. Irrigation systems and pruning can help maintain a plant's fire resistance. Maintaining access roads and driveways clear of side and low-hanging vegetation can allow large fire equipment to reach properties and structures. Some agencies recommend clearing combustible vegetation at minimum horizontal 10 feet (3 m) from roads and driveways a vertical of 13 feet 6 inches (4 m) above them. Considering the plant material involved is important to not create unintended consequences to habitat integrity and unnecessary aesthetic issues. Street signs, and homes clearly identified with the numerical address, assist access also.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Fire Resistant Plants [ edit ] Some of the best ways to slow the spread of a fire to homes is to reduce the amount of fuel available for the fire. Within each zone, the amount of vegetation should  drastically decrease. Having fire resistant plants in zones farther away form the home will help to slow down the fire even more.

Some things to look for when picking fire resistant plants are high  moisture content in leaves, limited dead vegetation, and low amounts of oils within the plant. Upkeep on these plants are also important for fire protection. Removal of excess branches and leaves will lessen the amount of potential fuel.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Here are a few fire resistant plant examples, there are many different types of flowers, shrubs and trees that have fire resistant properties.

Bugleweed- Spreads across the ground and will cover other weeds and vegetation blocking embers from form potential fuel.

[ 11 ] Sedum- These are part of the plant group called "stonecrops". They are great to have in rock gardens and do not require a ton of soil to grow.

[ 12 ] California Redbud- These shrubs are very good at retaining water and do not leave a lot of dead vegetation.

[ 13 ] Unintended consequences [ edit ] The unintended negative consequences of erosion and native habitat loss can result from some unskillful defensible space applications. The disturbance of the soil surface, such as garden soil cultivation in and firebreaks beyond native landscape zones areas, destroys the native plant cover and exposes open soil, accelerating invasive species of plants ("invasive exotics") spreading and replacing native habitats .

[ 14 ] In suburban and wildland–urban interface areas, the vegetation clearance and brush removal ordinances of municipalities for defensible space can result in mistaken excessive clearcutting of native and non-invasive introduced shrubs and perennials that exposes the soil to more light and less competition for invasive plant species , and also to erosion and landslides. Negative aesthetic consequences to natural and landscaped areas can be minimized with integrated and balanced defensible space practices.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Gardening portal Fire ecology Firefighting Wildfire suppression References [ edit ] ^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-06-26 . Retrieved 2010-04-26 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) SBCFD-Firescaping. Retrieved 4/26/2010 ^ http://www.fire.ca.gov/communications/communications_firesafety_100feet.php Archived 2010-05-10 at the Wayback Machine CAL-FIRE intro Retrieved 4/26/2010 ^ http://www.sbcfire.com/fp/hrp/defensible_space_requlation.pdf Archived 2011-07-16 at the Wayback Machine SBCFD-regulation. Retrieved 4/26/2010 ^ "SBCFD Hazard Reduction" . Archived from the original on 2010-04-19 . Retrieved 2010-04-26 .

SBCFD-intro. Retrieved 4/26/2010 ^ a b "Defensible Space – Ready for Wildfire" .

www.readyforwildfire.org . Retrieved 2020-10-18 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-16 . Retrieved 2010-04-26 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) CAL-FIRE-guidelines. Retrieved 4/26/2010 ^ "Defensible Space: Home Builder's Guide to Construction in Wildfire Zones" (PDF) .

fema.gov . FEMA. March 29, 2025.

^ "SBCFD Retrieved 4/26/2010" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-06-26 . Retrieved 2010-04-26 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-06-26 . Retrieved 2010-04-26 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) SBCFD-checklist. Retrieved 4/26/2010 ^ "Fire-Resistant vs. Highly Flammable Plants | Grants Pass, OR - Official Website" .

www.grantspassoregon.gov . Retrieved 2025-04-14 .

^ a b "Fire-Resistant Plants & Landscaping Tips - Garden Design" .

GardenDesign.com . Retrieved 2025-04-14 .

^ "Sedum" , Wikipedia , 2025-04-01 , retrieved 2025-04-14 ^ "Cercis occidentalis" , Wikipedia , 2024-11-12 , retrieved 2025-04-14 ^ Colautti, Robert I.; MacIsaac, Hugh J. (2004), "A neutral terminology to define 'invasive' species" (PDF) , Diversity and Distributions , 10 (2): 135– 141, Bibcode : 2004DivDi..10..135C , doi : 10.1111/j.1366-9516.2004.00061.x , S2CID 18971654 , archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-09-26 , retrieved 2007-07-11 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ (September 21, 2006).

National Invasive Species Information Center - What are Invasive Species?

.

United States Department of Agriculture: National Agriculture Library . Retrieved on September 1, 2007.

^ USA (1999). Executive Order 13112 of February 3, 1999: Invasive Species. Federal Register 64(25), 6183-6186.

External links [ edit ] CAL-FIRE: Homepage + Links Archived 2010-05-10 at the Wayback Machine Official CA State Board of Forestry and Fire Protection website.

CA State Board of Forestry and Fire Protection: "General Guidelines for Creating Defensible Space " SBCFD Homepage + Links: "Defending Your Home and Hazard Reduction" Official Santa Barbara County Fire Department 'Wildfire' Website.

Santa Barbara County Fire Department: "Landscape Checklist" v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Defensible_space_(fire_control)&oldid=1300808099 " Categories : Wildfire prevention Wildfire suppression Gardening aids Sustainable forest management Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 14:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Defensible space (fire control) Add languages Add topic

