Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Collections 3 Permanent exhibitions 4 Temporary exhibitions 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology 14 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Русский Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Museum in Cambridge, Massachusetts, US Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University Peabody Museum Location within Boston Show map of Boston Peabody Museum Peabody Museum (Massachusetts) Show map of Massachusetts Peabody Museum Peabody Museum (the United States) Show map of the United States Established 1866 ; 159 years ago ( 1866 ) Location Harvard University Cambridge, Massachusetts Coordinates 42°22′41.50″N 71°06′53.30″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3781944°N 71.1148056°W ﻿ / 42.3781944; -71.1148056 Type Archaeology museum Ethnographic museum Accreditation American Alliance of Museums Founder George Peabody Director Jane Pickering William and Muriel Seabury Howells Curator Ingrid Ahlgren Ilisa Barbash Patricia Capone Diana Loren Stephanie Mach Michele Morgan Diana Zlatanovski Owner Harvard University Public transit access Harvard ( MBTA ) Nearest parking Street Website peabody .harvard .edu Hopi Paho ,  for Mamzrauti dance, collected before 1892. Native American collection, Peabody Museum Coclé gold plaque, from Panama, circa 700 AD, excavated by a Peabody Museum expedition, 1930 Bronze plaque depicting chief flanked by two warriors, Benin Empire , 1550–1650 AD. African collection, Peabody Museum.

The Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology is a museum affiliated with Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts , United States. Founded in 1866, the Peabody Museum is one of the oldest and largest museums focusing on anthropological material, with particular focus on the ethnography and archaeology of the Americas . The museum is caretaker to over 1.2 million objects, some 900 feet (270 m) of documents, 2,000 maps and site plans, and about 500,000 photographs.

[ 1 ] The museum is located at Divinity Avenue on the Harvard University campus. The museum is one of the four Harvard Museums of Science and Culture open to the public.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The museum was established through an October 8, 1866, gift from wealthy American financier and philanthropist George Peabody , a native of South Danvers (now eponymously named Peabody, Massachusetts ).

[ 3 ] Peabody committed $150,000 to be used, according to the terms of the trust, to establish the position of Peabody Professor-Curator, to purchase artifacts, and to construct a building to house its collections. Peabody directed his trustees to organize the construction of "a suitable fireproof museum building, upon land to be given for that purpose, free of cost or rental, by the President and Fellows of Harvard College".

[ 3 ] In 1867, the museum opened its first exhibition, which consisted of a small number of prehistoric artifacts from the Merrimack Valley in Harvard University's Boylston Hall . In 1877, the long-awaited museum building was completed and ready for occupancy. The building that houses the Peabody was expanded in 1888 and again in 1913.

Collections [ edit ] Peabody Museum is steward to archaeological, ethnographic, osteological , and archival collections from many countries and covering millions of years of human cultural, social, and biological history, with particular focus on the cultures of North and South America and the Pacific Islands , as well as collections from Africa, Europe, and Asia.

North America. The Peabody's archaeological and ethnographic holdings from North America form more than a quarter of its collections, with artifacts from many parts of the continent and spanning 10,000 years, including from the earliest excavations in the Northeast and Mimbres collections from the Southwest, the Grace Nicholson Collection of California baskets, and the Lewis and Clark Collection.

Central America. The museum's Central American collection focuses on archaeological materials from eastern Honduras , Nicaragua , lower Central America , the Caribbean islands and Central Mexico . The museum hosts a large collection of Mayan material culture from Copán , Holmul , Labna , Piedras Negras , and Uaxactun , stone sculptures from Copán, fine artifacts from the Sacred Cenote of Chichen Itza , and 600 plaster casts of monuments at important Central American sites.

South America. Some of the Peabody's earliest accessions, collected by Louis Agassiz and his son Alexander Emanuel Agassiz , form the main part of the Peabody's South American ethnographic collections. These include the collection of nineteenth- and twentieth-century featherwork headdresses and ornaments from the Amazon Basin , Andean textiles and the William Farabee collection of Bolivian and Peruvian ceremonial and domestic objects. Important archaeological collections include Chimú , Nazca , and Moche pottery; Inca and Chimú metalwork; and a collection of prehistoric-period textiles.

Asia. The museum's Asian holdings include one of the earliest collections of objects made and used by the Ainu people , Japan's indigenous people; Japanese and Chinese ceramics and porcelains; colorful textiles made by the Kachin people living in northeastern Myanmar (Burma) and contiguous areas of India and China, by the Shan people , and Siberian hide costumes and carved wooden household items. Archaeological materials dominate the Asia collections with an extensive collection of excavated artifacts from Tepe Yahya (Iran) and Tarsus (Turkey).

Africa. The museum's holdings include over 20,000 items in four significant collections. The three principal collections, gathered from Liberia , southern Cameroon and Uganda during the first half of the twentieth century, include a diverse range of objects used in daily or ritual life. The fourth collection contains more than 200 musical instruments including drums and hand pianos. Archaeological collections are represented by George Andrew Reisner 's excavations in Egypt and Nubia .

Oceania. Collected by eighteenth-century Boston merchants, traders, and researchers during their Pacific voyages the 23,000 items of this collection include Easter Island tapa figures and carved wooden statues; Hawaiian feather cloaks and Mahiole feather helmets; Maori carved whakairo door panels, bowls, and human figures; Javanese wayang shadow puppets ; and Micronesian canoes and shell jewelry .

Europe. In addition to Paleolithic collections from France, especially from the site of Abri Pataud where Cro-Magnon man once lived, there are materials from Neolithic through Iron Age Europe , with the notable collection of the Duchess Marie Antoinette of Mecklenburg materials, excavated at Hallstatt Archaeological Site in Vače , Slovenia , surveyed by her mother Princess Marie of Windisch-Graetz . The collection also includes a portion of the French archaeologist and political activist Louis Laurent Gabriel de Mortillet ’s collections from Central Europe, a Venus figurine from the Grimaldi Man caves in Italy, and Neolithic stone tools from northwestern Europe.

Paintings and Drawing Collections. Numbering nearly 200 paintings and 950 works on paper, the collection of artwork is a complementary addition to the object collections. About half, representing the David I. Bushnell, Jr. Collection of American Art, contains works by Alexander de Batz, George Catlin , Charles Bird King , George Gibbs, Edward Kern , John Webber , and over 130 oils, watercolors, and drawings by Seth Eastman , the pictorial historian of native North Americans. There are also painted portraits of Native Americans by Elbridge Ayer Burbank , some being the only extant representation of the subject. Other significant pieces include the works of Jean Charlot depicting the monumental architecture of Mesoamerica, twentieth-century works by Native American artists, an extensive series of Inuit prints, and thirty-eight works depicting people and places in India and Tibet by Andre Chéronnet Champollion.

Archival Collections. The holdings of both the records and photographic archives present another dimension to the scholarly work of the anthropologists and archaeologists whose collected artifacts reside in the Peabody. The papers and manuscripts housed in the archives include institutional (departmental and Museum) records, special collections, and materials associated with over 70 anthropological/archaeological expeditions, dozens of faculty and researchers, and other research projects. The daguerreotypes , colored transparencies , and other photographic images in the Peabody's collections number about half a million from the archaeology and ethnology of many countries, with particular emphasis in Native American cultures and portraits, Mexico, northern Central America, China and Southwest Asia, Africa, and pre-Columbian objects and art.

Osteological Collections. The osteological collections of the Peabody Museum derive from more than eighty countries on six continents and include human and non-human primate remains, fossils, and casts. These are collected mainly from the Americas, Eurasia, and Africa. Approximately 40 percent of the more than 18,500 human and non-human individuals (MNI) currently represented in the collections are from the United States. The museum also has anatomical teaching and hominid cast collections. Despite the passage of the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act in 1990, the Peabody Museum is estimated to hold more than 6100 Native American remains that have not been repatriated.

[ 4 ] A feejee mermaid purchased by P.T. Barnum is one of the collections of the museum [ 5 ] Source: The Peabody Museum, Collections by Area [ 6 ] Permanent exhibitions [ edit ] Change & Continuity: Hall of the North American Indian explores North American cultures through the objects produced by indigenous peoples of the Americas of the nineteenth century. The Changes and Continuity exhibit considers historic interactions between native peoples and Europeans during a period of profound social change.

Day of the Dead/Día de los Muertos includes of a Day of the Dead altar or offrenda in the "Encounters with the Americas" gallery. It represents the original Aztec origins of the holiday and the Roman Catholic symbols incorporated into the tradition.

Digging Veritas: The Archaeology and History of the Indian College and Student Life at Colonial Harvard uses archaeological finds from Harvard Yard , historic maps, and other sources to reveal how students lived at colonial Harvard, and the role of the Indian College in Harvard's early years.

Encounters with the Americas explores the native cultures of Latin America before and after Christopher Columbus ' arrival in 1492 Temporary exhibitions [ edit ] Wiyohpiyata: Lakota Images of the Contested West : in this exhibition, co-curators Castle McLaughlin and Lakota artist Butch Thunder Hawk use ambient sound, motion, scent, and historic and contemporary Great Plains art to animate nineteenth century Lakota drawings from a warrior's ledger collected at the Little Bighorn battlefield . This exhibit presents Lakota perspectives on westward expansion while exploring culturally-shaped relationships between words, objects, and images.

All the World Is Here: Harvard’s Peabody Museum and the Invention of American Anthropology traces the Peabody Museum's early days under its second director, Frederic Ward Putnam , including its role in the 1893 World's Fair , with over 600 objects from Asia, Oceania, and the Americas.

Source: The Peabody Museum, Current Exhibitions [ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Peabody Museum Collections" .

www.peabody.harvard.edu . Peabody Museum . Retrieved January 10, 2016 .

^ "About" .

Harvard Museums of Science and Culture . Harvard Museums of Science and Culture . Retrieved June 25, 2022 .

^ a b Watson, Rubie (2001).

Opening the Museum: The Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology (PDF) . Cambridge (Mass.): The Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University. pp.

4– 5.

ISBN 0-87365-839-6 . Retrieved January 10, 2016 .

^ Brewer, Logan Jaffe,Mary Hudetz,Ash Ngu,Graham Lee (January 11, 2023).

"America's Biggest Museums Fail to Return Native American Human Remains" .

ProPublica . Retrieved June 28, 2023 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Radsken, Jill (October 30, 2017).

"Feejee Mermaid offers haunting image at Harvard museum" .

Harvard Gazette .

^ "Collections by Area" . Peabody Museum . Retrieved January 10, 2016 .

^ "Current Exhibitions | Peabody Museum" .

www.peabody.harvard.edu . Retrieved May 4, 2017 .

Further reading [ edit ] Browman, David. (June 2002). The Peabody Museum, Frederic W. Putnam, and the Rise of U.S. Anthropology, 1866–1903.

American Anthropology, 104 (2), 508–519.

https://doi.org/10.1525/aa.2002.104.2.508 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Peabody Museum, Harvard University .

Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Spain Norway Israel Academics CiNii Artists ULAN Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peabody_Museum_of_Archaeology_and_Ethnology&oldid=1303991275 " Categories : Harvard University museums Native American museums in Massachusetts Mesoamerican art museums in the United States Pre-Columbian art museums in the United States Archaeological museums in Massachusetts Art museums and galleries in Massachusetts Ethnic museums in Massachusetts Ethnographic museums in the United States Museums in Cambridge, Massachusetts Natural history museums in Massachusetts Harvard University buildings Pre-Columbian studies Native American arts organizations University museums in Massachusetts Museums established in 1866 1866 establishments in Massachusetts Buildings and structures completed in 1877 Brick buildings and structures in the United States 1870s architecture in the United States Neoclassical architecture in Massachusetts African art museums in the United States Native American museums in the United States Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from June 2023 Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 08:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology 14 languages Add topic

