Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 2.1 Works cited 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Traité Élémentaire de Chimie 10 languages Català Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by Antoine Lavoisier Traité élémentaire de chimie Author Antoine Lavoisier Translator Robert Kerr Language French Genre Textbook Science Publication date 1789 Publication place France Published in English 1790 A diagram from the book Traité élémentaire de chimie [ 1 ] is a textbook written by Antoine Lavoisier published in 1789 and translated into English by Robert Kerr in 1790 under the title Elements of Chemistry in a New Systematic Order containing All the Modern Discoveries .

[ 2 ] It is considered to be the first modern chemical textbook.

[ 3 ] The book defines an element as a single substance that can't be broken down by chemical analysis and from which all chemical compounds are formed, publishing his discovery that fermentation produces carbon dioxide (carbonic gas) and spirit of wine, saying that it is "more appropriately called by the Arabic word alcohol since it is formed from cider or fermented sugar as well as wine", and publishing the first chemical equation "grape must = carbonic acid + alcohol", calling this reaction "one of the most extraordinary in chemistry", noting "In these experiments, we have to assume that there is a true balance or equation between the elements of the compounds with which we start and those obtained at the end of the chemical reaction ." [ 4 ] The book contains 33 elements, only 23 of which are elements in the modern sense.

[ 5 ] The elements given by Lavoisier are: light , caloric , oxygen , azote ( nitrogen ), hydrogen , sulphur , phosphorous ( phosphorus ), charcoal , muriatic radical ( chloride ), fluoric radical ( fluoride ), boracic radical, antimony , arsenic , bismuth , cobalt , copper , gold , iron , lead , manganese , mercury , molybdena ( molybdenite ), nickel , platina ( platinum ), silver , tin , tungstein ( tungsten ), zinc , lime , magnesia ( magnesium ), barytes ( baryte ), argill ( clay or earth of alum ), and silex .

[ 6 ] The law of conservation of mass , which in France is taught as Lavoisier's Law, is paraphrased in the phrase "Rien ne se perd, rien ne se crée, tout se transforme." ("Nothing is lost, nothing is created, everything is transformed.") Volumes I-III of "Traité élémentaire de Chimie" (1789) Discours préliminaire to volume I of "Traité élémentaire de Chimie" (1789) Table of contents to volume I of "Traité élémentaire de Chimie" (1789) First page of volume I of "Traité élémentaire de Chimie" (1789) See also [ edit ] The Sceptical Chymist by Robert Boyle Notes [ edit ] ^ Lavoisier, Antoine (1789).

Traité élémentaire de chimie: présenté dans un ordre nouveau et d'après les découvertes modernes . Paris: Cuchet.

^ See Lavoisier 1790 ^ "American Chemical Society International Historic Chemical Landmarks. Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier: The Chemical Revolution" .

American Chemical Society . Retrieved June 11, 2014 .

^ 'Beginnings of microbiology and biochemistry: the contribution of yeast research' by James A. Barnett (2003) ^ Holleman, A. F.; Wiberg, Egon; Wiberg, Nils (2001).

Inorganic Chemistry . Academic Press. p. 17.

ISBN 978-0-12-352651-9 .

^ Lavoisier 1790 , pp. 175–176.

Works cited [ edit ] Lavoisier, Antoine (1790), Elements of Chemistry in New Systematic Order, Containing All Modern Discoveries, Illustrated with 13 Copperplates, translated from the French by Robert Kerr (1 ed.), Edinburgh: William Creech , retrieved 2012-04-15 External links [ edit ] French Wikisource has original text related to this article: Traité élémentaire de chimie English translation on Project Gutenberg Internet Archive version of a 1965 reprint Traité élémentaire de chimie from Wikimedia Commons Title page, woodcuts, and copperplate engravings by Madame Lavoisier from a 1789 first edition of Traité élémentaire de chimie (all images freely available for download in a variety of formats from Science History Institute Digital Collections at digital.sciencehistory.org .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Traité_Élémentaire_de_Chimie&oldid=1263225478 " Categories : 1789 non-fiction books Chemistry books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 December 2024, at 12:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Traité Élémentaire de Chimie 10 languages Add topic

