Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Northern Song, 960–1127 1.2 Southern Song, 1127–1279 2 Culture and society Toggle Culture and society subsection 2.1 Civil service examinations and the gentry 2.2 Law, justice, and forensic science 2.3 Military and methods of warfare 2.4 Arts, literature, philosophy, and religion 2.5 Cuisine and clothing 3 Economy 4 Science and technology Toggle Science and technology subsection 4.1 Gunpowder warfare 4.2 Measuring distance and mechanical navigation 4.3 Polymaths, inventions, and astronomy 4.4 Mathematics and cartography 4.5 Movable type printing 4.6 Hydraulic and nautical engineering 4.7 Structural engineering and architecture 4.8 Archaeology 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Song dynasty 89 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Bikol Central Български བོད་ཡིག Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 贛語 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Song Empire ) Chinese imperial dynasty from 960 to 1279 Not to be confused with Song (state) or Liu Song dynasty .

Song 宋 960–1279 The Song dynasty at its greatest extent in 1111 Capital Bianjing (960–1127) Yingtian (1127–1128) Yangzhou (1128–1129) Jiangning (1129–1138) Lin'an (1129, 1138–1276) Common languages Middle Chinese Religion Chinese Buddhism , Taoism , Confucianism , Chinese folk religion , Islam , Nestorian Christianity Government Monarchy Emperor • 960–976 Emperor Taizu (founder of Northern Song) • 1127–1162 Emperor Gaozong (founder of Southern Song) • 1278–1279 Zhao Bing (last) Historical era Post-classical • Established 4 February 960 [ 1 ] • Signing of the Chanyuan Treaty with Liao 1005 • Alliance with Jin 1115–1125 • Jingkang incident 1127 • Beginning of Mongol invasion 1235 • Fall of Lin'an 1276 • Battle of Yamen (end of dynasty) 19 March 1279 Area 958 est.

[ 2 ] 800,000 km 2 (310,000 sq mi) 980 est.

[ 2 ] 3,100,000 km 2 (1,200,000 sq mi) 1127 est.

[ 2 ] 2,100,000 km 2 (810,000 sq mi) 1204 est.

[ 2 ] 1,800,000 km 2 (690,000 sq mi) Population • 1120s Northern: 80–110 million [ 3 ] Southern: 65 million [ 4 ] GDP (nominal) estimate • Per capita 26.5 taels [ 5 ] Currency Jiaozi , Guanzi , Huizi , Chinese cash Preceded by Succeeded by Later Zhou Jingnan Later Shu Southern Han Southern Tang Wuyue Northern Han Jin dynasty Yuan dynasty Song dynasty "Song dynasty" in Chinese characters Chinese 宋朝 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Sòngcháo Bopomofo ㄙㄨㄥˋ ㄔㄠˊ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Sonq chaur Wade–Giles Sung 4 chʻao 2 Tongyong Pinyin Sòng cháo IPA [sʊ̂ŋ ʈʂʰǎʊ] Wu Romanization Son zau Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Sung chìuh Jyutping Sung3 ciu4 IPA [sʊŋ˧ tsʰiw˩] Southern Min Tâi-lô Sòng tiâu Middle Chinese Middle Chinese /suoŋ H ʈˠiᴇu/ Part of a series on the History of China Timeline Dynasties Historiography Prehistoric Paleolithic Neolithic ( c.

8500 – c.

2000 BC ) Yellow , Yangtze , and Liao civilization Ancient Xia ( c.

2070 – c.

1600 BC ) Shang ( c.

1600 – c.

1046 BC ) Late Shang ( c.

1250 – c.

1046 BC) Zhou ( c.

1046 – c.

256 BC ) Western Zhou (1046–771 BC) Eastern Zhou (771–256 BC) Spring and Autumn ( c.

770 – c.

476 BC ) Warring States (475–221 BC) Imperial Qin (221–207 BC) Han (202 BC – 220 AD) Chu–Han Contention (206–202 BC) Western Han (202 BC – 9 AD) Xin (9–23 AD) Eastern Han (25–220 AD) Three Kingdoms (220–280 AD) Wei , Shu Han , and Wu Jin (266–420) Western Jin (266–316) Eastern Jin (317–420) Sixteen Kingdoms (304–439) Northern and Southern dynasties (420–589) Sui (581–618) Tang (618–907) Wu Zhou (690–705) Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms (907–979) Song (960–1279) Northern Song (960–1127) Southern Song (1127–1279) Liao (916–1125) Western Xia (1038–1227) Jin (1115–1234) Yuan (1271–1368) Ming (1368–1644) Qing (1644–1912) Modern Republic of China (mainland, 1912–1949) People's Republic of China (1949–present) Republic of China (Taiwan, 1949–present) Related articles Art history Economic history Education history Legal history LGBT history Media history Music history Timeline Military history Naval history History of religion in China Christianity Judaism Islam Science and technology history Archaeology Cartography Discoveries Inventions Transport history Women's history v t e The Song dynasty ( / s ʊ ŋ / SUUNG ) was an imperial dynasty of China that ruled from 960 to 1279. The dynasty was founded by Emperor Taizu of Song , who usurped the throne of the Later Zhou dynasty and went on to conquer the rest of the Ten Kingdoms , ending the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period . The Song often came into conflict with the contemporaneous Liao , Western Xia and Jin dynasties in northern China. After retreating to southern China following attacks by the Jin dynasty, the Song was eventually conquered by the Mongol-led Yuan dynasty .

The dynasty's history is divided into two periods: during the Northern Song ( 北宋 ; 960–1127), the capital was in the northern city of Bianjing (now Kaifeng ) and the dynasty controlled most of what is now East China . The Southern Song ( 南宋 ; 1127–1279) comprise the period following the loss of control over the northern half of Song territory to the Jurchen-led Jin dynasty in the Jin–Song wars . At that time, the Song court retreated south of the Yangtze and established its capital at Lin'an (now Hangzhou ). Although the Song dynasty had lost control of the traditional Chinese heartlands around the Yellow River , the Southern Song Empire contained a large population and productive agricultural land, sustaining a robust economy. In 1234, the Jin dynasty was conquered by the Mongols , who took control of northern China, maintaining uneasy relations with the Southern Song.

Möngke Khan , the fourth Great Khan of the Mongol Empire , died in 1259 while besieging the mountain castle Diaoyucheng in Chongqing . His younger brother Kublai Khan was proclaimed the new Great Khan and in 1271 founded the Yuan dynasty.

[ 6 ] After two decades of sporadic warfare, Kublai Khan's armies conquered the Song dynasty in 1279 after defeating the Southern Song in the Battle of Yamen , and reunited China under the Yuan dynasty.

[ 7 ] Technology , science, philosophy, mathematics, and engineering flourished during the Song era. The Song dynasty was the first in world history to issue banknotes or true paper money and the first Chinese government to establish a permanent standing navy . This dynasty saw the first surviving records of the chemical formula for gunpowder, the invention of gunpowder weapons such as fire arrows , bombs, and the fire lance . It also saw the first discernment of true north using a compass, first recorded description of the pound lock , and improved designs of astronomical clocks . Economically, the Song dynasty was unparalleled with a gross domestic product three times larger than that of Europe during the 12th century.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] China's population doubled in size between the 10th and 11th centuries. This growth was made possible by expanded rice cultivation , use of early-ripening rice from Southeast and South Asia, and production of widespread food surpluses.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The Northern Song census recorded 20 million households, double that of the Han and Tang dynasties. It is estimated that the Northern Song had a population of 90 million people, [ 12 ] and 200 million by the time of the Ming dynasty .

[ 13 ] This dramatic increase of population fomented an economic revolution in pre-modern China .

The expansion of the population, growth of cities, and emergence of a national economy led to the gradual withdrawal of the central government from direct intervention in the economy. The lower gentry assumed a larger role in local administration and affairs.

Song society was vibrant, and cities had lively entertainment quarters. Citizens gathered to view and trade artwork, and intermingled at festivals and in private clubs. The spread of literature and knowledge was enhanced by the rapid expansion of woodblock printing and the 11th-century invention of movable type printing. Philosophers such as Cheng Yi and Zhu Xi reinvigorated Confucianism with new commentary, infused with Buddhist ideals, and emphasized a new organization of classic texts that established the doctrine of Neo-Confucianism . Although civil service examinations had existed since the Sui dynasty , they became much more prominent in the Song period. Officials gaining power through imperial examination led to a shift from a military-aristocratic elite to a scholar-bureaucratic elite.

History [ edit ] Main article: History of the Song dynasty Further information: List of emperors of the Song dynasty Northern Song, 960–1127 [ edit ] Court portrait of Emperor Taizu ( r.

960–976 ) After usurping the throne of the Later Zhou dynasty , Emperor Taizu of Song ( r.

960–976 ) spent sixteen years conquering the rest of China proper , reuniting much of the territory that had once belonged to the Han and Tang empires and ending the upheaval of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period.

[ 1 ] In Kaifeng , he established a strong central government over the empire. The establishment of this capital marked the start of the Northern Song period. He ensured administrative stability by promoting the civil service examination system of drafting state bureaucrats by skill and merit (instead of aristocratic or military position) and promoted projects that ensured efficiency in communication throughout the empire. In one such project, cartographers created detailed maps of each province and city that were then collected in a large atlas .

[ 14 ] Emperor Taizu also promoted groundbreaking scientific and technological innovations by supporting works like the astronomical clock tower designed and built by the engineer Zhang Sixun .

[ 15 ] The Song court maintained diplomatic relations with Chola India , the Fatimid Caliphate of Egypt, Srivijaya , the Kara-Khanid Khanate in Central Asia , the Goryeo Kingdom in Korea, and other countries that were also trade partners with Japan .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Chinese records even mention an embassy from the ruler of "Fu lin" (拂菻, i.e. the Byzantine Empire ), Michael VII Doukas , and its arrival in 1081.

[ 21 ] However, China's closest neighbouring states had the greatest impact on its domestic and foreign policy. From its inception under Taizu, the Song dynasty alternated between warfare and diplomacy with the ethnic Khitans of the Liao dynasty in the northeast and with the Tanguts of the Western Xia in the northwest. The Song dynasty used military force in an attempt to quell the Liao dynasty and to recapture the Sixteen Prefectures , a territory under Khitan control since 938 that was traditionally considered to be part of China proper (most parts of today's Beijing and Tianjin ).

[ 22 ] Song forces were repulsed by the Liao forces, who engaged in aggressive yearly campaigns into Northern Song territory until 1005, when the signing of the Shanyuan Treaty ended these northern border clashes. The Song were forced to provide tribute to the Khitans, although this did little damage to the Song economy since the Khitans were economically dependent upon importing massive amounts of goods from the Song.

[ 23 ] More  significantly, the Song state recognized the Liao state as its diplomatic equal.

[ 24 ] The Song created an extensive defensive forest along the Song–Liao border to thwart potential Khitan cavalry attacks.

[ 25 ] Portrait of Emperor Taizong ( r.

976–997) The Song dynasty managed to win several military victories over the Tanguts in the early 11th century, culminating in a campaign led by the polymath scientist, general, and statesman Shen Kuo (1031–1095).

[ 26 ] However, this campaign was ultimately a failure due to a rival military officer of Shen disobeying direct orders, and the territory gained from the Western Xia was eventually lost.

[ 27 ] The Song fought against the Vietnamese kingdom of Đại Việt twice, the first conflict in 981 and later a significant war from 1075 to 1077 over a border dispute and the Song's severing of commercial relations with Đại Việt.

[ 28 ] After the Vietnamese forces inflicted heavy damages in a raid on Guangxi , the Song commander Guo Kui (1022–1088) penetrated as far as Thăng Long (modern Hanoi ).

[ 29 ] Heavy losses on both sides prompted the Vietnamese commander Thường Kiệt (1019–1105) to make peace overtures, allowing both sides to withdraw from the war effort; captured territories held by both Song and Vietnamese were mutually exchanged in 1082, along with prisoners of war.

[ 30 ] A Song-era wooden Bodhisattva During the 11th century, political rivalries divided members of the court due to the ministers' differing approaches, opinions, and policies regarding the handling of the Song's complex society and thriving economy. The idealist Chancellor , Fan Zhongyan (989–1052), was the first to receive a heated political backlash when he attempted to institute the Qingli Reforms , which included measures such as improving the recruitment system of officials, increasing the salaries for minor officials, and establishing sponsorship programs to allow a wider range of people to be well educated and eligible for state service.

[ 31 ] After Fan was forced to step down from his office, Wang Anshi (1021–1086) became Chancellor of the imperial court. With the backing of Emperor Shenzong (1067–1085), Wang Anshi severely criticized the educational system and state bureaucracy. Seeking to resolve what he saw as state corruption and negligence, Wang implemented a series of reforms called the New Policies . These involved land value tax reform, the establishment of several government monopolies, the support of local militias, and the creation of higher standards for the Imperial examination to make it more practical for men skilled in statecraft to pass.

[ 32 ] The reforms created political factions in the court. Wang Anshi's "New Policies Group" ( Xin Fa ), also known as the "Reformers", were opposed by the ministers in the "Conservative" faction led by the historian and Chancellor Sima Guang (1019–1086).

[ 33 ] As one faction supplanted another in the majority position of the court ministers, it would demote rival officials and exile them to govern remote frontier regions of the empire.

[ 32 ] One of the prominent victims of the political rivalry, the famous poet and statesman Su Shi (1037–1101), was jailed and eventually exiled for criticizing Wang's reforms.

[ 32 ] Auspicious Cranes , a painting of the Song royal palace by Emperor Huizong The continual alternation between reform and conservatism had effectively weakened the dynasty. This decline can also be attributed to Cai Jing (1047–1126), who was appointed by Emperor Zhezong (1085–1100) and who remained in power until 1125. He revived the New Policies and pursued political opponents, tolerated corruption and encouraged Emperor Huizong (1100–1126) to neglect his duties to focus on artistic pursuits. Later, a peasant rebellion broke out in Zhejiang and Fujian, headed by Fang La in 1120. The rebellion may have been caused by an increasing tax burden, the concentration of landownership and oppressive government measures.

[ 34 ] While the central Song court remained politically divided and focused upon its internal affairs, alarming new events to the north in the Liao state finally came to its attention. The Jurchen , a subject tribe of the Liao, rebelled against them and formed their own state, the Jin dynasty .

[ 35 ] The Song official Tong Guan (1054–1126) advised Emperor Huizong to form an alliance with the Jurchens, and the joint military campaign under this Alliance Conducted at Sea toppled and completely conquered the Liao dynasty by 1125. During the joint attack, the Song's northern expedition army removed the defensive forest along the Song–Liao border.

[ 25 ] A Liao dynasty (907–1125) polychrome wood-carved statue of Guanyin , Shanxi However, the poor performance and military weakness of the Song army was observed by the Jurchens, who immediately broke the alliance, beginning the Jin–Song Wars of 1125 and 1127. Because of the removal of the previous defensive forest, the Jin army marched quickly across the North China Plain to Kaifeng.

[ 25 ] In the Jingkang Incident during the latter invasion, the Jurchens captured not only the capital, but the retired Emperor Huizong, his successor Emperor Qinzong , and most of the Imperial court.

[ 35 ] The remaining Song forces regrouped under the self-proclaimed Emperor Gaozong (1127–1162) and withdrew south of the Yangtze to establish a new capital at Lin'an (modern Hangzhou). The Jurchen conquest of North China and shift of capitals from Kaifeng to Lin'an was the dividing line between the Northern and Southern Song dynasties.

After their fall to the Jin, the Song lost control of North China. Now occupying what has been traditionally known as "China proper", the Jin regarded themselves the rightful rulers of China. The Jin later chose earth as their dynastic element and yellow as their royal color. According to the theory of the Five Elements (wuxing), the earth element follows the fire, the dynastic element of the Song, in the sequence of elemental creation. Therefore, their ideological move showed that the Jin considered Song reign in China complete, with the Jin replacing the Song as the rightful rulers of China proper.

[ 36 ] Southern Song, 1127–1279 [ edit ] A portrait of Emperor Gaozong of Song (r. 1127–1162) Southern Song in 1142. The western and southern borders remain unchanged from the previous map. However, the north of the Qinling Huaihe Line was under the control of the Jin dynasty. The Xia dynasty's territory generally remained unchanged. In the southwest, the Song dynasty bordered a territory about a sixth its size, the Dali dynasty .

Although weakened and pushed south beyond the Huai River , the Southern Song found new ways to bolster its strong economy and defend itself against the Jin dynasty. The government sponsored massive shipbuilding and harbor improvement projects, and the construction of beacons and seaport warehouses to support maritime trade abroad, including at the major international seaports , such as Quanzhou , Guangzhou , and Xiamen , that were sustaining China's commerce.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] There were able military officers such as Yue Fei and Han Shizhong .

To protect and support the multitude of ships sailing into the East China Sea and Yellow Sea (to Korea and Japan ), Southeast Asia , the Indian Ocean , and the Red Sea , it was necessary to establish an official standing navy .

[ 40 ] The Song dynasty therefore established China's first permanent navy in 1132, [ 39 ] with a headquarters at Dinghai .

[ 41 ] With a permanent navy, the Song were prepared to face the naval forces of the Jin on the Yangtze River in 1161, in the Battle of Tangdao and the Battle of Caishi . During these battles the Song navy employed swift paddle wheel -driven naval vessels armed with traction trebuchet catapults aboard the decks that launched gunpowder bombs .

[ 41 ] Although the Jin forces commanded by Wanyan Liang (the Prince of Hailing) boasted 70,000 men on 600 warships, and the Song forces only 3,000 men on 120 warships, [ 42 ] the Song dynasty forces were victorious in both battles due to the destructive power of the bombs and the rapid assaults by paddlewheel ships .

[ 43 ] The strength of the navy was heavily emphasized following these victories. A century after the navy was founded it had grown in size to 52,000 fighting marines.

[ 41 ] Clockwise from upper left: Anonymous painting of Cai Wenji and her Xiongnu husband (Zuoxianwang) dating from the Southern Song. A head sculpture of an arhat , 11th century. A seated wooden Bodhisattva statue, Jin dynasty (1115–1234). A wooden Bodhisattva statue from the Song dynasty (960–1279) The Song government confiscated portions of land owned by the landed gentry in order to raise revenue for these projects, an act which caused dissension and loss of loyalty amongst leading members of Song society but did not stop the Song's defensive preparations.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Financial matters were made worse by the fact that many wealthy, land-owning families—some of which had officials working for the government—used their social connections with those in office in order to obtain tax-exempt status.

[ 47 ] Although the Song dynasty was able to hold back the Jin, a new foe came to power over the steppe, deserts, and plains north of the Jin dynasty. The Mongols , led by Genghis Khan (r. 1206–1227), initially invaded the Jin dynasty in 1205 and 1209, engaging in large raids across its borders, and in 1211 an enormous Mongol army was assembled to invade the Jin.

[ 48 ] The Jin dynasty was forced to submit and pay tribute to the Mongols as vassals ; when the Jin suddenly moved their capital city from Beijing to Kaifeng, the Mongols saw this as a revolt.

[ 49 ] Under the leadership of Ögedei Khan (r.1229–1241), both the Jin dynasty and Western Xia dynasty were conquered by Mongol forces in 1233/34.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] The Mongols were allied with the Song, but this alliance was broken when the Song recaptured the former imperial capitals of Kaifeng, Luoyang , and Chang'an at the collapse of the Jin dynasty. After the first Mongol invasion of Vietnam in 1258, Mongol general Uriyangkhadai attacked Guangxi from Hanoi as part of a coordinated Mongol attack in 1259 with armies attacking in Sichuan under Mongol leader Möngke Khan and other Mongol armies attacking in modern-day Shandong and Henan .

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] On August 11, 1259, Möngke Khan died during the siege of Diaoyu Castle in Chongqing .

[ 53 ] His successor Kublai Khan continued the assault against the Song, gaining a temporary foothold on the southern banks of the Yangtze.

[ 54 ] By the winter of 1259, Uriyangkhadai's army fought its way north to meet Kublai's army, which was besieging Ezhou in Hubei .

[ 51 ] Kublai made preparations to take Ezhou , but a pending civil war with his brother Ariq Böke —a rival claimant to the Mongol Khaganate—forced Kublai to move back north with the bulk of his forces.

[ 55 ] In Kublai's absence, the Song forces were ordered by Chancellor Jia Sidao to make an immediate assault and succeeded in pushing the Mongol forces back to the northern banks of the Yangtze.

[ 56 ] There were minor border skirmishes until 1265, when Kublai won a significant battle in Sichuan .

[ 57 ] From 1268 to 1273, Kublai blockaded the Yangtze River with his navy and besieged Xiangyang , the last obstacle in his way to invading the rich Yangtze River basin.

[ 57 ] Kublai officially declared the creation of the Yuan dynasty in 1271. In 1275, a Song force of 130,000 troops under Chancellor Jia Sidao was defeated by Kublai's newly appointed commander-in-chief, general Bayan .

[ 58 ] By 1276, most of the Song territory had been captured by Yuan forces, including the capital Lin'an.

[ 50 ] In the Battle of Yamen on the Pearl River Delta in 1279, the Yuan army, led by the general Zhang Hongfan , finally crushed the Song resistance. The last remaining ruler, the 13-year-old emperor Zhao Bing , committed suicide, along with Prime Minister Lu Xiufu [ 59 ] and approximately 1300 members of the royal clan. On Kublai's orders, carried out by his commander Bayan, the rest of the former imperial family of Song were unharmed; the deposed Emperor Gong was demoted, being given the title 'Duke of Ying', but was eventually exiled to Tibet where he took up a monastic life. The former emperor would eventually be forced to commit suicide under the orders of Kublai's great-great-grandson, Gegeen Khan , out of fear that Emperor Gong would stage a coup to restore his reign.

[ 60 ] Other members of the Song imperial family continued to live in the Yuan dynasty, including Zhao Mengfu and Zhao Yong.

Culture and society [ edit ] Main articles: Culture of the Song dynasty and Society of the Song dynasty A city gate of Shaoxing , Zhejiang province, built in 1223 during the Song dynasty Model of the capital city Kaifeng The Song dynasty [ 61 ] was an era of administrative sophistication and complex social organization. Some of the largest cities in the world were found in China during this period (Kaifeng and Hangzhou had populations of over a million).

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] People enjoyed various social clubs and entertainment in the cities, and there were many schools and temples to provide the people with education and religious services.

[ 62 ] The Song government supported social welfare programs including the establishment of retirement homes , public clinics , and paupers ' graveyards .

[ 62 ] The Song dynasty supported a widespread postal service that was modeled on the earlier Han dynasty (202 BCE – CE 220) postal system to provide swift communication throughout the empire.

[ 64 ] The central government employed thousands of postal workers of various ranks to provide service for post offices and larger postal stations.

[ 65 ] In rural areas, farming peasants either owned their own plots of land , paid rents as tenant farmers , or were serfs on large estates.

[ 66 ] Emperor Taizu of Song , Emperor Taizong of Song , prime minister Zhao Pu and other ministers playing Cuju , an early form of football , by Qian Xuan (1235–1305) A 12th-century painting by Su Hanchen; a girl waves a peacock feather banner like the one used in dramatical theater to signal an acting leader of troops.

Although women were on a lower social tier than men according to Confucian ethics, they enjoyed many social and legal privileges and wielded considerable power at home and in their own small businesses. As Song society became more and more prosperous and parents on the bride's side of the family provided larger dowries for her marriage, women naturally gained many new legal rights in ownership of property.

[ 67 ] Under certain circumstances, an unmarried daughter without brothers, or a surviving mother without sons, could inherit one-half of her father's share of undivided family property.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] There were many notable and well-educated women, and it was a common practice for women to educate their sons during their earliest youth.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] The mother of the scientist, general, diplomat, and statesman Shen Kuo taught him essentials of military strategy.

[ 72 ] There were also exceptional women writers and poets, such as Li Qingzhao (1084–1151), who became famous even in her lifetime.

[ 67 ] The Song Dynasty used the term “jijian” to characterize male homosexual practices, where the “ji” in the term was used to characterize a man receiving sexual acts. Such a term was derogatory by virtue of its connection with animals deemed inferior to humans.

[ 73 ] Song Dynasty observed a few cultural pushbacks—led by the Neo-Confucian movement from the dynasty—against homosexual or bisexual practices as urbanization prompted growing male prostitution and other sex work economies. Significantly, the Song government passed laws prohibiting male prositution, although many other cultural and literary works attested to the continued existence and prominence of men in sex work.

[ 74 ] Religion in China during this period had a great effect on people's lives, beliefs, and daily activities, and Chinese literature on spirituality was popular.

[ 75 ] The major deities of Daoism and Buddhism , ancestral spirits , and the many deities of Chinese folk religion were worshipped with sacrificial offerings. Tansen Sen asserts that more Buddhist monks from India traveled to China during the Song than in the previous Tang dynasty (618–907).

[ 76 ] With many ethnic foreigners travelling to China to conduct trade or live permanently, there came many foreign religions; religious minorities in China included Middle Eastern Muslims , the Kaifeng Jews , and Persian Manichaeans .

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] The populace engaged in a vibrant social and domestic life, enjoying such public festivals as the Lantern Festival and the Qingming Festival . There were entertainment quarters in the cities providing a constant array of amusements. There were puppeteers, acrobats, theatre actors, sword swallowers, snake charmers, storytellers , singers and musicians, prostitutes, and places to relax, including tea houses, restaurants, and organized banquets.

[ 62 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] People attended social clubs in large numbers; there were tea clubs, exotic food clubs, antiquarian and art collectors' clubs, horse-loving clubs, poetry clubs, and music clubs.

[ 62 ] Like regional cooking and cuisines in the Song, the era was known for its regional varieties of performing arts styles as well.

[ 81 ] Theatrical drama was very popular amongst the elite and general populace, although Classical Chinese —not the vernacular language —was spoken by actors on stage.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] The four largest drama theatres in Kaifeng could hold audiences of several thousand each.

[ 84 ] There were also notable domestic pastimes, as people at home enjoyed activities such as the go and xiangqi board games.

Civil service examinations and the gentry [ edit ] Main article: Society of the Song dynasty Clockwise from upper left: A Literary Garden , by Zhou Wenju , 10th century; Zhou Wenju, Go players , Palace Museum, Beijing; "Four Generals of Zhongxing" by Southern Song dynasty artist Liu Songnian (1174–1224); the renowned general Yue Fei (1103–1142) is the second person from the left in the latter painting.

During this period greater emphasis was laid upon the civil service system of recruiting officials; this was based upon degrees acquired through competitive examinations , in an effort to select the most capable individuals for governance. Selecting men for office through proven merit was an ancient idea in China . The civil service system became institutionalized on a small scale during the Sui and Tang dynasties, but by the Song period, it became virtually the only means for drafting officials into the government.

[ 85 ] The advent of widespread printing helped to widely circulate Confucian teachings and to educate more and more eligible candidates for the exams.

[ 86 ] This can be seen in the number of exam takers for the low-level prefectural exams rising from 30,000 annual candidates in the early 11th century to 400,000 candidates by the late 13th century.

[ 86 ] The civil service and examination system allowed for greater meritocracy , social mobility , and equality in competition for those wishing to attain an official seat in government.

[ 87 ] Using statistics gathered by the Song state, Edward A. Kracke, Sudō Yoshiyuki, and Ho Ping-ti supported the hypothesis that simply having a father, grandfather, or great-grandfather who had served as an official of state did not guarantee one would obtain the same level of authority.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] Robert Hartwell and Robert P. Hymes criticized this model, stating that it places too much emphasis on the role of the nuclear family and considers only three paternal ascendants of exam candidates while ignoring the demographic reality of Song China, the significant proportion of males in each generation that had no surviving sons, and the role of the extended family .

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Many felt disenfranchised by what they saw as a bureaucratic system that favored the land-holding class able to afford the best education.

[ 87 ] One of the greatest literary critics of this was the official and famous poet Su Shi . Yet Su was a product of his times, as the identity, habits, and attitudes of the scholar-official had become less aristocratic and more bureaucratic with the transition of the periods from Tang to Song.

[ 90 ] At the beginning of the dynasty, government posts were disproportionately held by two elite social groups: a founding elite who had ties with the founding emperor and a semi-hereditary professional elite who used long-held clan status, family connections , and marriage alliances to secure appointments.

[ 91 ] By the late 11th century, the founding elite became obsolete, while political partisanship and factionalism at court undermined the marriage strategies of the professional elite, which dissolved as a distinguishable social group and was replaced by a multitude of gentry families.

[ 92 ] The Donglin Academy , an educational institution equivalent to modern-day college. It was originally built in 1111 during the Northern Song dynasty.

Due to Song's enormous population growth and the body of its appointed scholar-officials being accepted in limited numbers (about 20,000 active officials during the Song period), the larger scholarly gentry class would now take over grassroots affairs on the vast local level.

[ 93 ] Excluding the scholar-officials in office, this elite social class consisted of exam candidates, examination degree-holders not yet assigned to an official post, local tutors, and retired officials.

[ 94 ] These learned men, degree-holders, and local elites supervised local affairs and sponsored necessary facilities of local communities; any local magistrate appointed to his office by the government relied upon the cooperation of the few or many local gentry in the area.

[ 93 ] For example, the Song government—excluding the educational-reformist government under Emperor Huizong—spared little amount of state revenue to maintain prefectural and county schools; instead, the bulk of the funds for schools was drawn from private financing.

[ 95 ] This limited role of government officials was a departure from the earlier Tang dynasty (618–907), when the government strictly regulated commercial markets and local affairs; now the government withdrew heavily from regulating commerce and relied upon a mass of local gentry to perform necessary duties in their communities.

[ 93 ] The gentry distinguished themselves in society through their intellectual and antiquarian pursuits, [ 96 ] [ 97 ] [ 98 ] while the homes of prominent landholders attracted a variety of courtiers , including artisans, artists, educational tutors, and entertainers.

[ 99 ] Despite the disdain for trade, commerce, and the merchant class exhibited by the highly cultured and elite exam-drafted scholar-officials, commercialism played a prominent role in Song culture and society.

[ 79 ] A scholar-official would be frowned upon by his peers if he pursued means of profiteering outside of his official salary; however, this did not stop many scholar-officials from managing business relations through the use of intermediary agents.

[ 100 ] Law, justice, and forensic science [ edit ] Main article: Society of the Song dynasty The Song judicial system retained most of the legal code of the earlier Tang dynasty, the basis of traditional Chinese law up until the modern era.

[ 101 ] Roving sheriffs maintained law and order in the municipal jurisdictions and occasionally ventured into the countryside.

[ 102 ] Official magistrates overseeing court cases were not only expected to be well-versed in written law but also to promote morality in society.

[ 101 ] Magistrates such as the famed Bao Zheng (999–1062) embodied the upright, moral judge who upheld justice and never failed to live up to his principles. Song judges specified the guilty person or party in a criminal act and meted out punishments accordingly, often in the form of caning .

[ 101 ] [ 103 ] A guilty individual or parties brought to court for a criminal or civil offense were not viewed as wholly innocent until proven otherwise, while even accusers were viewed with a high level of suspicion by the judge.

[ 103 ] Due to costly court expenses and immediate jailing of those accused of criminal offenses, people in the Song preferred to settle disputes and quarrels privately, without the court's interference.

[ 103 ] Shen Kuo's Dream Pool Essays argued against traditional Chinese beliefs in anatomy (such as his argument for two throat valves instead of three); this perhaps spurred the interest in the performance of post-mortem autopsies in China during the 12th century.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] The physician and judge known as Song Ci (1186–1249) wrote a pioneering work of forensic science on the examination of corpses in order to determine cause of death (strangulation, poisoning, drowning, blows, etc.) and to prove whether death resulted from murder, suicide, or accidental death.

[ 106 ] Song Ci stressed the importance of proper coroner 's conduct during autopsies and the accurate recording of the inquest of each autopsy by official clerks.

[ 107 ] Military and methods of warfare [ edit ] Main article: Military history of the Song dynasty Traction trebuchet on an Early Song dynasty warship from the Wujing Zongyao . Trebuchets like this were used to launch the earliest type of explosive bombs.

The Song military was chiefly organized to ensure that the army could not threaten Imperial control, often at the expense of effectiveness in war. Northern Song's Military Council operated under a Chancellor, who had no control over the imperial army. The imperial army was divided among three marshals, each independently responsible to the Emperor. Since the Emperor rarely led campaigns personally, Song forces lacked unity of command.

[ 108 ] The imperial court often believed that successful generals endangered royal authority, and relieved or even executed them (notably Li Gang, [ 109 ] Yue Fei, and Han Shizhong [ 110 ] ).

Armoured Song cavalry Although the scholar-officials viewed soldiers as lower members in the hierarchic social order, [ 111 ] a person could gain status and prestige in society by becoming a high-ranking military officer with a record of victorious battles.

[ 112 ] At its height, the Song military had one million soldiers [ 32 ] divided into platoons of 50 troops, companies made of two platoons, battalions composed of 500 soldiers.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] Crossbowmen were separated from the regular infantry and placed in their own units as they were prized combatants, providing effective missile fire against cavalry charges.

[ 114 ] The government was eager to sponsor new crossbow designs that could shoot at longer ranges, while crossbowmen were also valuable when employed as long-range snipers .

[ 115 ] Song cavalry employed a slew of different weapons, including halberds, swords, bows, spears, and ' fire lances ' that discharged a gunpowder blast of flame and shrapnel .

[ 116 ] The Liaodi Pagoda , the tallest pre-modern Chinese pagoda , built in 1055; it was intended as a Buddhist religious structure , yet served a military purpose as a watchtower for observation of potential dangers.

[ 117 ] Military strategy and military training were treated as sciences that could be studied and perfected; soldiers were tested in their skills of using weaponry and in their athletic ability.

[ 118 ] The troops were trained to follow signal standards to advance at the waving of banners and to halt at the sound of bells and drums.

[ 114 ] The Song navy was of great importance during the consolidation of the empire in the 10th century; during the war against the Southern Tang state, the Song navy employed tactics such as defending large floating pontoon bridges across the Yangtze River in order to secure movements of troops and supplies.

[ 119 ] There were large ships in the Song navy that could carry 1,000 soldiers aboard their decks, [ 120 ] while the swift-moving paddle-wheel craft were viewed as essential fighting ships in any successful naval battle.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] In a battle on January 23, 971, massive arrow fire from Song dynasty crossbowmen decimated the war elephant corps of the Southern Han army.

[ 122 ] This defeat not only marked the eventual submission of the Southern Han to the Song dynasty, but also the last instance where a war elephant corps was employed as a regular division within a Chinese army.

[ 122 ] There was a total of 347 military treatises written during the Song period, as listed by the history text of the Song Shi (compiled in 1345).

[ 123 ] However, only a handful of these military treatises have survived, which includes the Wujing Zongyao written in 1044. It was the first known book to have listed formulas for gunpowder; [ 124 ] it gave appropriate formulas for use in several different kinds of gunpowder bombs.

[ 125 ] It also provided detailed descriptions and illustrations of double-piston pump flamethrowers , as well as instructions for the maintenance and repair of the components and equipment used in the device.

[ 126 ] Arts, literature, philosophy, and religion [ edit ] Further information: Religion in the Song dynasty Close up on Double Happiness (Cui Bai) . It was painted by Cui Bai , active during the reign of Shenzong.

National Palace Museum Cats in the Garden , by Mao Yi, 12th century.

The visual arts during the Song dynasty were heightened by new developments such as advances in landscape and portrait painting. The gentry elite engaged in the arts as accepted pastimes of the cultured scholar-official, including painting , composing poetry , and writing calligraphy .

[ 127 ] The poet and statesman Su Shi and his associate Mi Fu (1051–1107) enjoyed antiquarian affairs, often borrowing or buying art pieces to study and copy.

[ 31 ] Poetry and literature profited from the rising popularity and development of the ci poetry form . Enormous encyclopedic volumes were compiled, such as works of historiography and dozens of treatises on technical subjects. This included the universal history text of the Zizhi Tongjian , compiled into 1000 volumes of 9.4 million written Chinese characters . The genre of Chinese travel literature also became popular with the writings of the geographer Fan Chengda (1126–1193) and Su Shi, the latter of whom wrote the 'daytrip essay' known as Record of Stone Bell Mountain that used persuasive writing to argue for a philosophical point.

[ 128 ] Although an early form of the local geographic gazetteer existed in China since the 1st century, the matured form known as "treatise on a place", or fangzhi , replaced the old "map guide", or transl.

zho – transl.

tujing , during the Song dynasty.

[ 129 ] The imperial courts of the emperor's palace were filled with his entourage of court painters, calligraphers, poets, and storytellers.

Emperor Huizong was the eighth emperor of the Song dynasty and he was a renowned artist as well as a patron of the art and the catalogue of his collection listed over 6,000 known paintings.

[ 130 ] A prime example of a highly venerated court painter was Zhang Zeduan (1085–1145) who painted an enormous panoramic painting , Along the River During the Qingming Festival . Emperor Gaozong of Song initiated a massive art project during his reign, known as the Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute from the life story of Cai Wenji (b. 177). This art project was a diplomatic gesture to the Jin dynasty while he negotiated for the release of his mother from Jurchen captivity in the north.

[ 131 ] Chinese calligraphy of mixed styles written by Song dynasty poet Mi Fu (1051–1107) Portrait of the Chinese Zen Buddhist Wuzhun Shifan , painted in 1238 AD.

In philosophy, Chinese Buddhism had waned in influence but it retained its hold on the arts and on the charities of monasteries. Buddhism had a profound influence upon the budding movement of Neo-Confucianism , led by Cheng Yi (1033–1107) and Zhu Xi (1130–1200).

[ 132 ] Mahayana Buddhism influenced Fan Zhongyan and Wang Anshi through its concept of ethical universalism , [ 133 ] while Buddhist metaphysics deeply affected the pre–Neo-Confucian doctrine of Cheng Yi.

[ 132 ] The philosophical work of Cheng Yi in turn influenced Zhu Xi. Although his writings were not accepted by his contemporary peers, Zhu's commentary and emphasis upon the Confucian classics of the Four Books as an introductory corpus to Confucian learning formed the basis of the Neo-Confucian doctrine. By the year 1241, under the sponsorship of Emperor Lizong , Zhu Xi's Four Books and his commentary on them became standard requirements of study for students attempting to pass the civil service examinations.

[ 134 ] The neighbouring countries of Japan and Korea also adopted Zhu Xi's teaching, known as the Shushigaku (朱子學, School of Zhu Xi) of Japan, and in Korea the Jujahak (주자학). Buddhism's continuing influence can be seen in painted artwork such as Lin Tinggui 's Luohan Laundering . However, the ideology was highly criticized and even scorned by some. The statesman and historian Ouyang Xiu (1007–1072) called the religion a "curse" that could only be remedied by uprooting it from Chinese culture and replacing it with Confucian discourse.

[ 135 ] The Chan sect experienced a literary flourishing in the Song period, which saw the publication of several major classical koan collections which remain influential in Zen philosophy and practice to the present day. A true revival of Buddhism in Chinese society would not occur until the Mongol rule of the Yuan dynasty, with Kublai Khan's sponsorship of Tibetan Buddhism and Drogön Chögyal Phagpa as the leading lama . The Christian sect of Nestorianism , which had entered China in the Tang era, would also be revived in China under Mongol rule.

[ 136 ] Cuisine and clothing [ edit ] Sumptuary laws regulated the food that one consumed and the clothes that one wore according to status and social class. Clothing was made of hemp or cotton cloths, restricted to a color standard of black and white. Trousers were the acceptable attire for peasants, soldiers, artisans, and merchants, although wealthy merchants might choose to wear more ornate clothing and male blouses that came down below the waist. Acceptable apparel for scholar-officials was rigidly defined by the social ranking system. However, as time went on this rule of rank-graded apparel for officials was not as strictly enforced. Each official was able to display his awarded status by wearing different-colored traditional silken robes that hung to the ground around his feet, specific types of headgear, and even specific styles of girdles that displayed his graded-rank of officialdom.

[ 137 ] Women wore long dresses, blouses that came down to the knee, skirts, and jackets with long or short sleeves, while women from wealthy families could wear purple scarves around their shoulders. The main difference in women's apparel from that of men was that it was fastened on the left, not on the right.

[ 138 ] Dried jujubes such as these were imported to Song China from South Asia and the Middle East.

[ 139 ] The main food staples in the diet of the lower classes remained rice, pork, and salted fish.

[ 140 ] In 1011, Emperor Zhenzong of Song introduced Champa rice to China from Vietnam 's Kingdom of Champa , which sent 30,000 bushels as a tribute to Song. Champa rice was drought-resistant and able to grow fast enough to offer two harvests a year instead of one.

[ 141 ] Song restaurant and tavern menus are recorded. They list entrees for feasts, banquets, festivals, and carnivals. They reveal a diverse and lavish diet for those of the upper class. They could choose from a wide variety of meats and seafood, including shrimp, geese, duck, mussel, shellfish, fallow deer , hare, partridge, pheasant, francolin, quail, fox, badger, clam, crab, and many others.

[ 140 ] [ 142 ] [ 143 ] Dairy products were rare in Chinese cuisine at this time. Beef was rarely consumed since the bull was a valuable draft animal, and dog meat was absent from the diet of the wealthy, although the poor could choose to eat dog meat if necessary (yet it was not part of their regular diet).

[ 144 ] People also consumed dates , raisins, jujubes , pears, plums, apricots, pear juice, lychee -fruit juice, honey and ginger drinks, spices and seasonings of Sichuan pepper , ginger , soy sauce, vegetable oil, sesame oil, salt, and vinegar.

[ 142 ] [ 145 ] Economy [ edit ] Main article: Economy of the Song dynasty City views of the Song dynasty from paintings. Clockwise from upper left: A Northern Song dynasty (960–1127) era Chinese painting of a water-powered mill for grain, with surrounding river transport. The bridge scene from Zhang Zeduan 's (1085–1145) painting Along the River During Qingming Festival .

Ships depicted in Along the River During Qingming Festival .

Leifeng Pagoda during the Southern Song dynasty by Li Song .

The Song dynasty had one of the most prosperous and advanced economies in the medieval world. Song Chinese invested their funds in joint stock companies and in multiple sailing vessels at a time when monetary gain was assured from the vigorous overseas trade and domestic trade along the Grand Canal and Yangtze River.

[ 146 ] Both private and government-controlled industries met the needs of a growing Chinese population in the Song; prominent merchant families and private businesses were allowed to occupy industries that were not already government-operated monopolies.

[ 32 ] [ 147 ] Economic historians emphasize this toleration of market mechanisms over population growth or new farming technologies as the major cause of Song economic prosperity.

[ 148 ] [ page needed ] Artisans and merchants formed guilds that the state had to deal with when assessing taxes, requisitioning goods, and setting standard workers' wages and prices on goods.

[ 146 ] [ 149 ] The iron industry was pursued by both private entrepreneurs who owned their own smelters as well as government-supervised smelting facilities.

[ 150 ] The Song economy was stable enough to produce over 100,000,000 kg (220,000,000 lb) of iron products per year.

[ 151 ] Large-scale deforestation would have continued if not for the 11th-century innovation of the use of coal instead of charcoal in blast furnaces for smelting cast iron .

[ 151 ] Much of this iron was reserved for military use in crafting weapons and armouring troops, but some was used to fashion the many iron products needed to fill the demands of the growing domestic market. The iron trade within China was advanced by the construction of new canals, facilitating the flow of iron products from production centres to the large market in the capital city.

[ 152 ] Junks from the 13th century featured hulls with watertight compartments .

A painting shows a pair of cargo ships with stern-mounted rudders accompanied by a smaller craft.

The annual output of minted copper currency in 1085 reached roughly six billion coins.

[ 10 ] The most notable advancement in the Song economy was the establishment of the world's first government issued paper-printed money, known as Jiaozi (see also Huizi ).

[ 10 ] For the printing of paper money , the Song court established several government-run factories in the cities of Huizhou , Chengdu , Hangzhou , and Anqi.

[ 153 ] The size of the workforce employed in paper money factories was large; it was recorded in 1175 that the factory at Hangzhou employed more than a thousand workers a day.

[ 153 ] The economic power of Song China can be attested by the growth of the urban population of its capital city Hangzhou. The population was 200,000 at the start of the 12th century and increased to 500,000 around 1170 and doubled to over a million a century later.

[ 154 ] This economic power also heavily influenced foreign economies abroad. In 1120 alone, the Song government collected 18,000,000 ounces (510,000 kg) of silver in taxes.

[ 155 ] The Moroccan geographer al-Idrisi wrote in 1154 of the prowess of Chinese merchant ships in the Indian Ocean and of their annual voyages that brought iron, swords, silk, velvet, porcelain, and various textiles to places such as Aden ( Yemen ), the Indus River , and the Euphrates .

[ 40 ] Foreigners, in turn, affected the Chinese economy. For example, many West and Central Asian Muslims went to China to trade, becoming a preeminent force in the import and export industry, while some were even appointed as officers supervising economic affairs.

[ 78 ] [ 156 ] Sea trade with the South-west Pacific, the Hindu world, the Islamic world, and East Africa brought merchants great fortune and spurred an enormous growth in the shipbuilding industry of Song-era Fujian .

[ 157 ] However, there was risk involved in such long overseas ventures. In order to reduce the risk of losing money on maritime trade missions abroad, wrote historians Ebrey, Walthall, and Palais: Jiaozi and corresponding printing plate. The Jiaozi was a form of promissory banknote which appeared around the 11th century in the Sichuan capital of Chengdu, China. Numismatists regard it as the first paper money in history.

[Song era] investors usually divided their investment among many ships, and each ship had many investors behind it. One observer thought eagerness to invest in overseas trade was leading to an outflow of copper cash. He wrote, "People along the coast are on intimate terms with the merchants who engage in overseas trade, either because they are fellow-countrymen or personal acquaintances. ... [They give the merchants] money to take with them on their ships for purchase and return conveyance of foreign goods. They invest from ten to a hundred strings of cash, and regularly make profits of several hundred percent".

[ 90 ] Science and technology [ edit ] Main articles: Science and technology of the Song dynasty and Architecture of the Song dynasty Further information: List of Chinese inventions and List of Chinese discoveries Gunpowder warfare [ edit ] Further information: History of gunpowder Earliest known written formula for gunpowder from the Wujing Zongyao (1044) Advancements in weapons technology enhanced by gunpowder, including the evolution of the early flamethrower , explosive grenades , firearms , cannons , and land mines , enabled the Song Chinese to ward off their militant enemies until the Song's ultimate collapse in the late 13th century.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] [ 160 ] [ 161 ] [ 162 ] The Wujing Zongyao manuscript of 1044 was the first book in history to provide formulas for gunpowder and their specified use in different types of bombs.

[ 163 ] While engaged in a war with the Mongols, in 1259 the official Li Zengbo wrote in his Kezhai Zagao, Xugaohou that the city of Qingzhou was manufacturing one to two thousand strong iron-cased bombshells a month, dispatching to Xiangyang and Yingzhou about ten to twenty thousand such bombs at a time.

[ 164 ] In turn, the invading Mongols employed northern Chinese soldiers and used these same types of gunpowder weapons against the Song.

[ 165 ] By the 14th century the firearm and cannon could also be found in Europe, India, and the Middle East, during the early age of gunpowder warfare .

Measuring distance and mechanical navigation [ edit ] As early as the Han dynasty , when the state needed to accurately measure distances traveled throughout the empire, the Chinese relied on a mechanical odometer .

[ 166 ] The Chinese odometer was a wheeled carriage, its gearwork being driven by the rotation of the carriage's wheels; specific units of distance—the Chinese li —were marked by the mechanical striking of a drum or bell as an auditory signal.

[ 167 ] The specifications for the 11th-century odometer were written by Chief Chamberlain Lu Daolong, who is quoted extensively in the historical text of the Song Shi (compiled by 1345).

[ 168 ] In the Song period, the odometer vehicle was also combined with another old complex mechanical device known as the south-pointing chariot .

[ 169 ] This device, originally crafted by Ma Jun in the 3rd century, incorporated a differential gear that allowed a figure mounted on the vehicle to always point in the southern direction, no matter how the vehicle's wheels turned about.

[ 170 ] The concept of the differential gear that was used in this navigational vehicle is now found in modern automobiles in order to apply an equal amount of torque to a car's wheels even when they are rotating at different speeds.

Polymaths, inventions, and astronomy [ edit ] Further information: Chinese astronomy and List of Chinese inventions Star map of the south polar projection for Su's celestial globe, Xin Yi Xiang Fa Yao , 1092 One of the star charts from Su Song 's Xin Yi Xiang Fa Yao published in 1092, featuring cylindrical projection similar to Mercator projection and the corrected position of the pole star thanks to Shen Kuo's astronomical observations.

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] Su Song's celestial atlas of five star maps is actually the oldest in printed form.

[ 173 ] Polymaths such as the scientists and statesmen Shen Kuo (1031–1095) and Su Song (1020–1101) embodied advancements in all fields of study, including botany , zoology , geology , mineralogy , metallurgy , mechanics , magnetics , meteorology , horology , astronomy , pharmaceutical medicine , archeology , mathematics , cartography , optics , art criticism , hydraulics , and many other fields.

[ 97 ] [ 174 ] [ 175 ] Shen Kuo was the first to discern magnetic declination of true north while experimenting with a compass.

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] Shen theorized that geographical climates gradually shifted over time.

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] He created a theory of land formation involving concepts accepted in modern geomorphology .

[ 180 ] He performed optical experiments with camera obscura just decades after Ibn al-Haytham was the first to do so.

[ 181 ] He also improved the designs of astronomical instruments such as the widened astronomical sighting tube , which allowed Shen Kuo to fix the position of the pole star (which had shifted over centuries of time).

[ 182 ] Shen Kuo was also known for hydraulic clockworks, as he invented a new overflow-tank clepsydra which had more efficient higher-order interpolation instead of linear interpolation in calibrating the measure of time.

[ 182 ] An interior diagram of the astronomical clock tower of Kaifeng featured in Su Song's book, written by 1092 and published in print by 1094.

A depiction of the 13th century "long serpent" rocket launcher. The holes in the frame are designed to keep the rockets separate, from the 1510 edition of Wujing Zongyao .

The oldest known illustration of an endless power-transmitting chain drive. It was used for coupling the main driving shaft of the Kaifeng clock tower to the armillary sphere gear box.

Su Song was best known for his horology treatise written in 1092, which described and illustrated in great detail his hydraulic -powered, 12 m (39 ft) tall astronomical clock tower built in Kaifeng. The clock tower featured large astronomical instruments of the armillary sphere and celestial globe , both driven by an early intermittently working escapement mechanism (similarly to the western verge escapement of true mechanical clocks appeared in medieval clockworks, derived from ancient clockworks of classical times).

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] Su's tower featured a rotating gear wheel with 133 clock jack mannequins who were timed to rotate past shuttered windows while ringing gongs and bells, banging drums , and presenting announcement plaques.

[ 185 ] In his printed book, Su published a celestial atlas of five star charts . These star charts feature a cylindrical projection similar to Mercator projection , the latter being a cartographic innovation of Gerardus Mercator in 1569.

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] The Song Chinese observed supernovae , including SN 1054 , the remnants of which would form the Crab Nebula . Moreover, the Soochow Astronomical Chart on Chinese planispheres was prepared in 1193 for instructing the crown prince on astronomical findings. The planispheres were engraved in stone several decades later.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] Mathematics and cartography [ edit ] Further information: Chinese mathematics and Chinese geography Facsimile of Zhu Shijie's Jade Mirror of Four Unknowns The Yu Ji Tu , or "Map of the Tracks of Yu", carved into stone in 1137, located in the Stele Forest of Xi'an . This 3 ft (0.91 m) squared map features a graduated scale of 100 li for each rectangular grid. China's coastline and river systems are clearly defined and precisely pinpointed on the map.

Yu refers to the Chinese deity described in the geographical chapter of the Book of Documents , dated 5th–3rd centuries BCE.

There were many notable improvements to Chinese mathematics during the Song era. Mathematician Yang Hui 's 1261 book provided the earliest Chinese illustration of Pascal's triangle , although it had earlier been described by Jia Xian in around 1100.

[ 188 ] Yang Hui also provided rules for constructing combinatorial arrangements in magic squares , provided theoretical proof for Euclid 's forty-third proposition about parallelograms , and was the first to use negative coefficients of 'x' in quadratic equations .

[ 189 ] Yang's contemporary Qin Jiushao ( c.

1202 –1261) was the first to introduce the zero symbol into Chinese mathematics; [ 190 ] before this blank spaces were used instead of zeroes in the system of counting rods .

[ 191 ] He is also known for working with the Chinese remainder theorem , Heron's formula , and astronomical data used in determining the winter solstice . Qin's major work was the Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections published in 1247.

Geometry was essential to surveying and cartography . The earliest extant Chinese maps date to the 4th century BCE, [ 192 ] yet it was not until the time of Pei Xiu (224–271) that topographical elevation , a formal rectangular grid system, and use of a standard graduated scale of distances was applied to terrain maps.

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] Following a long tradition , Shen Kuo created a raised-relief map , while his other maps featured a uniform graduated scale of 1:900,000.

[ 195 ] [ 196 ] A 3 ft (0.91 m) squared map of 1137—carved into a stone block—followed a uniform grid scale of 100 li for each gridded square, and accurately mapped the outline of the coasts and river systems of China, extending all the way to India.

[ 197 ] Furthermore, the world's oldest known terrain map in printed form comes from the edited encyclopedia of Yang Jia in 1155, which displayed western China without the formal grid system that was characteristic of more professionally made Chinese maps.

[ 198 ] Although gazetteers had existed since 52 CE during the Han dynasty and gazetteers accompanied by illustrative maps (Chinese: tujing ) since the Sui dynasty, the illustrated gazetteer became much more common during the Song dynasty, when the foremost concern was for illustrative gazetteers to serve political, administrative, and military purposes.

[ 199 ] Movable type printing [ edit ] Further information: History of printing in East Asia The innovation of movable type printing was made by the artisan Bi Sheng (990–1051), first described by the scientist and statesman Shen Kuo in his Dream Pool Essays of 1088.

[ 200 ] [ 201 ] The collection of Bi Sheng's original clay-fired typeface was passed on to one of Shen Kuo's nephews, and was carefully preserved.

[ 201 ] [ 202 ] Movable type enhanced the already widespread use of woodblock methods of printing thousands of documents and volumes of written literature, consumed eagerly by an increasingly literate public. The advancement of printing deeply affected education and the scholar-official class, since more books could be made faster while mass-produced, printed books were cheaper in comparison to laborious handwritten copies.

[ 86 ] [ 90 ] The enhancement of widespread printing and print culture in the Song period was thus a direct catalyst in the rise of social mobility and expansion of the educated class of scholar elites, the latter which expanded dramatically in size from the 11th to 13th centuries.

[ 86 ] [ 203 ] The movable type invented by Bi Sheng was ultimately trumped by the use of woodblock printing due to the limitations of Chinese characters , yet movable type printing continued to be used and was improved in later periods. The Yuan scholar-official Wang Zhen ( fl.

1290–1333 ) implemented a faster typesetting process, improved Bi's baked-clay movable type character set with a wooden one, and experimented with tin-metal movable type.

[ 204 ] The wealthy printing patron Hua Sui (1439–1513) of the Ming dynasty established China's first metal movable type (using bronze) in 1490.

[ 205 ] In 1638, the Peking Gazette switched their printing process from woodblock to movable type printing.

[ 206 ] Yet it was during the Qing dynasty that massive printing projects began to employ movable type printing. This includes the printing of sixty-six copies of a 5,020 volume long encyclopedia in 1725, the Complete Classics Collection of Ancient China , which necessitated the crafting of 250,000 movable type characters cast in bronze.

[ 207 ] By the 19th century the European style printing press replaced the old Chinese methods of movable type, while traditional woodblock printing in modern East Asia is used sparsely and for aesthetic reasons.

Hydraulic and nautical engineering [ edit ] Main article: Science and technology of the Song dynasty The most important nautical innovation of the Song period seems to have been the introduction of the magnetic mariner's compass , which permitted accurate navigation on the open sea regardless of the weather.

[ 195 ] The magnetized compass needle – known in Chinese as the "south-pointing needle" – was first described by Shen Kuo in his 1088 Dream Pool Essays and first mentioned in active use by sailors in Zhu Yu 's 1119 Pingzhou Table Talks .

A plan and side view of a canal pound lock , a concept pioneered in 984 by the Assistant Commissioner of Transport for Huainan , the engineer Qiao Weiyo.

[ 208 ] There were other considerable advancements in hydraulic engineering and nautical technology during the Song dynasty. The 10th-century invention of the pound lock for canal systems allowed different water levels to be raised and lowered for separated segments of a canal, which significantly aided the safety of canal traffic and allowed for larger barges.

[ 209 ] There was the Song-era innovation of watertight bulkhead compartments that allowed damage to hulls without sinking the ships.

[ 90 ] [ 210 ] If ships were damaged, the Chinese of the 11th century employed drydocks to repair them while suspended out of the water.

[ 211 ] The Song used crossbeams to brace the ribs of ships in order to strengthen them in a skeletal-like structure.

[ 212 ] Stern -mounted rudders had been mounted on Chinese ships since the 1st century, as evidenced by a preserved Han tomb model of a ship. In the Song period, the Chinese devised a way to mechanically raise and lower rudders in order for ships to travel in a wider range of water depths.

[ 212 ] The Song arranged the protruding teeth of anchors in a circular pattern instead of in one direction.

[ 212 ] David Graff and Robin Higham state that this arrangement "[made] them more reliable" for anchoring ships.

[ 212 ] Structural engineering and architecture [ edit ] Main article: Architecture of the Song dynasty The Iron Pagoda of Kaifeng, built in 1049 The Xiude Temple Pagoda in Quyang , Hebei Architecture during the Song period reached new heights of sophistication. Authors such as Yu Hao and Shen Kuo wrote books outlining the field of architectural layouts, craftsmanship, and structural engineering in the 10th and 11th centuries, respectively. Shen Kuo preserved the written dialogues of Yu Hao when describing technical issues such as slanting struts built into pagoda towers for diagonal wind bracing.

[ 213 ] Shen Kuo also preserved Yu's specified dimensions and units of measurement for various building types.

[ 214 ] The architect Li Jie (1065–1110), who published the Yingzao Fashi ('Treatise on Architectural Methods') in 1103, greatly expanded upon the works of Yu Hao and compiled the standard building codes used by the central government agencies and by craftsmen throughout the empire.

[ 215 ] He addressed the standard methods of construction, design, and applications of moats and fortifications, stonework, greater woodwork, lesser woodwork, wood-carving, turning and drilling, sawing, bamboo work, tiling, wall building, painting and decoration, brickwork, glazed tile making, and provided proportions for mortar formulas in masonry .

[ 216 ] [ 217 ] In his book, Li provided detailed and vivid illustrations of architectural components and cross-sections of buildings. These illustrations displayed various applications of corbel brackets, cantilever arms, mortise and tenon work of tie beams and cross beams, and diagrams showing the various building types of halls in graded sizes.

[ 218 ] He also outlined the standard units of measurement and standard dimensional measurements of all building components described and illustrated in his book.

[ 219 ] The 42-metre (138 ft) tall, brick and wood Lingxiao Pagoda of Zhengding , Hebei, built in 1045.

Close-up view of the Lingxiao Pagoda Grandiose building projects were supported by the government, including the erection of towering Buddhist Chinese pagodas and the construction of enormous bridges (wood or stone, trestle or segmental arch bridge ). Many of the pagoda towers built during the Song period were erected at heights that exceeded ten stories. Some of the most famous are the Iron Pagoda built in 1049 during the Northern Song and the Liuhe Pagoda built in 1165 during the Southern Song, though there were others. The tallest is the Liaodi Pagoda built in 1055 in Hebei , towering 84 m (276 ft) in total height. Some of the bridges reached lengths of 1,220 m (4,000 ft), with many being wide enough to allow two lanes of cart traffic simultaneously over a waterway or ravine.

[ 220 ] The government also oversaw construction of their own administrative offices, palace apartments, city fortifications, ancestral temples, and Buddhist temples.

[ 221 ] The professions of the architect, craftsman, carpenter, and structural engineer were not seen as professionally equal to that of a Confucian scholar-official. Architectural knowledge had been passed down orally for thousands of years in China, in many cases from a father craftsman to his son. Structural engineering and architecture schools were known to have existed during the Song period; one prestigious engineering school was headed by the renowned bridge-builder Cai Xiang (1012–1067) in medieval Fujian province.

[ 222 ] Temple of the Saintly Mother, Jin Temple , Taiyuan, built in 1032 Bracket arm clusters containing cantilevers , from Li Jie's building manual Yingzao Fashi , printed in 1103.

Besides existing buildings and technical literature of building manuals, Song dynasty artwork portraying cityscapes and other buildings aid modern-day scholars in their attempts to reconstruct and realize the nuances of Song architecture. Song dynasty artists such as Li Cheng , Fan Kuan , Guo Xi , Zhang Zeduan , Emperor Huizong of Song , and Ma Lin painted close-up depictions of buildings as well as large expanses of cityscapes featuring arched bridges , halls and pavilions , pagoda towers , and distinct Chinese city walls . The scientist and statesman Shen Kuo was known for his criticism relating to architecture, saying that it was more important for an artist to capture a holistic view of a landscape than it was to focus on the angles and corners of buildings.

[ 223 ] For example, Shen criticized the work of the painter Li Cheng for failing to observe the principle of "seeing the small from the viewpoint of the large" in portraying buildings.

[ 223 ] There were also pyramidal tomb structures in the Song era, such as the Song imperial tombs located in Gongxian, Henan .

[ 224 ] About 100 km (62 mi) from Gongxian is another Song dynasty tomb at Baisha, which features "elaborate facsimiles in brick of Chinese timber frame construction, from door lintels to pillars and pedestals to bracket sets, that adorn interior walls." [ 224 ] The two large chambers of the Baisha tomb also feature conical-shaped roofs.

[ 225 ] Flanking the avenues leading to these tombs are lines of Song dynasty stone statues of officials, tomb guardians, animals, and legendary creatures .

Archaeology [ edit ] Further information: History of Chinese archaeology Scholars of the Song dynasty claim to have collected ancient relics dating back as far as the Shang dynasty , such as this bronze ding vessel .

In addition to the Song gentry's antiquarian pursuits of art collecting, scholar-officials during the Song became highly interested in retrieving ancient relics from archaeological sites, in order to revive the use of ancient vessels in ceremonies of state ritual.

[ 226 ] Scholar-officials of the Song period claimed to have discovered ancient bronze vessels that were created as far back as the Shang dynasty (1600–1046 BCE), which bore the oracle bone script of the Shang era.

[ 227 ] Some attempted to recreate these bronze vessels by using imagination alone, not by observing tangible evidence of relics; this practice was criticized by Shen Kuo in his work of 1088.

[ 226 ] Yet Shen Kuo had much more to criticize than this practice alone. Shen objected to the idea of his peers that ancient relics were products created by famous "sages" in lore or the ancient aristocratic class ; Shen rightfully attributed the discovered handicrafts and vessels from ancient times as the work of artisans and commoners from previous eras.

[ 226 ] He also disapproved of his peers' pursuit of archaeology simply to enhance state ritual, since Shen not only took an interdisciplinary approach with the study of archaeology, but he also emphasized the study of functionality and investigating what was the ancient relics' original processes of manufacture.

[ 226 ] Shen used ancient texts and existing models of armillary spheres to create one based on ancient standards; Shen described ancient weaponry such as the use of a scaled sighting device on crossbows; while experimenting with ancient musical measures , Shen suggested hanging an ancient bell by using a hollow handle.

[ 226 ] Despite the gentry's overriding interest in archaeology simply for reviving ancient state rituals, some of Shen's peers took a similar approach to the study of archaeology. His contemporary Ouyang Xiu (1007–1072) compiled an analytical catalogue of ancient rubbings on stone and bronze which pioneered ideas in early epigraphy and archaeology.

[ 97 ] During the 11th century, Song scholars discovered the ancient shrine of Wu Liang (78–151 CE), a scholar of the Han dynasty; they produced rubbings of the carvings and bas-reliefs decorating the walls of his tomb so that they could be analyzed elsewhere.

[ 228 ] On the unreliability of historical works written after the fact, the epigrapher and poet Zhao Mingcheng (1081–1129) stated "... the inscriptions on stone and bronze are made at the time the events took place and can be trusted without reservation, and thus discrepancies may be discovered." [ 229 ] Historian R.C. Rudolph states that Zhao's emphasis on consulting contemporary sources for accurate dating is parallel with the concern of the German historian Leopold von Ranke (1795–1886), [ 229 ] and was in fact emphasized by many Song scholars.

[ 230 ] The Song scholar Hong Mai (1123–1202) heavily criticized what he called the court's "ridiculous" archaeological catalogue Bogutu compiled during the Huizong reign periods of Zheng He and Xuan He (1111–1125).

[ 231 ] Hong Mai obtained old vessels from the Han dynasty and compared them with the descriptions offered in the catalogue, which he found so inaccurate he stated he had to "hold my sides with laughter." [ 232 ] Hong Mai pointed out that the erroneous material was the fault of Chancellor Cai Jing , who prohibited scholars from reading and consulting written histories .

[ 232 ] See also [ edit ] Emperors' family tree Four Great Books of Song House of Zhao Lu You Shao Yong Tang Clan Taxation in premodern China Tianchao Daguo Tiger Cave Kiln Timeline of the Song dynasty Wang Chongyang Water Margin Wen Tianxiang Zeng Gong References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Lorge 2015 , pp. 4–5.

^ a b c d Taagepera 1997 , p. 493.

^ Chaffee 2015 , pp. 29, 327.

^ Chaffee 2015 , p. 625.

^ Broadberry, Stephen.

"China, Europe and the Great Divergence: A study in historical national accounting, 980–1850" (PDF) . Economic History Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 January 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 .

^ Rossabi 1988 , p. 115.

^ Rossabi 1988 , p. 76.

^ Chaffee 2015 , p. 435.

^ Liu 2015 , p. 294.

^ a b c Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 156.

^ Brook 1998 , p. 96.

^ Durand, John (1960). "The Population Statistics of China, A.D. 2–1953".

Population Studies .

13 (3): 209– 256.

doi : 10.2307/2172247 .

JSTOR 2172247 .

^ Veeck et al. 2007 , pp. 103–104.

^ Needham 1986b , p. 518.

^ Needham 1986c , pp. 469–471.

^ Ebrey 1999 , p. 138.

^ Hall 1985 , p. 23.

^ Sastri 1984 , pp. 173, 316.

^ Shen 1996 , p. 158.

^ Brose 2008 , p. 258.

^ Halsall, Paul (2000) [1998]. Arkenberg, Jerome S. (ed.).

"East Asian History Sourcebook: Chinese Accounts of Rome, Byzantium and the Middle East, c. 91 B.C.E. – 1643 C.E." Fordham University . Retrieved 2016-09-14 .

^ Mote 1999 , p. 69.

^ Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 154.

^ Mote 1999 , pp. 70–71.

^ a b c Chen 2018 .

^ Sivin 1995 , p. 8.

^ Sivin 1995 , p. 9.

^ Anderson 2008 , p. 207.

^ Anderson 2008 , p. 208.

^ Anderson 2008 , pp. 208–209.

^ a b Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 163.

^ a b c d e Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 164.

^ Sivin 1995 , pp. 3–4.

^ Roberts, J. A. G. (1996).

A History of China . New York: St Martin's Press. p. 148.

ISBN 9780312163341 .

^ a b Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 165.

^ Chen 2014 .

^ Wang 2000 , p. 14.

^ Sivin 1995 , p. 5.

^ a b Paludan 1998 , p. 136.

^ a b Shen 1996 , pp. 159–161.

^ a b c Needham 1986d , p. 476.

^ Levathes 1994 , pp. 43–47.

^ Needham 1986a , p. 134.

^ Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 239.

^ Embree & Gluck 1997 , p. 385.

^ Adshead 2004 , pp. 90–91.

^ Rossabi 1988 , p. 80.

^ Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 235.

^ a b Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 236.

^ a b Needham 1986a , p. 139.

^ a b Haw, Stephen G.

(2013). "The deaths of two Khaghans: a comparison of events in 1242 and 1260".

Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London .

76 (3): 361– 371.

doi : 10.1017/S0041977X13000475 .

JSTOR 24692275 .

^ Rossabi, Morris (2009).

Khubilai Khan: His Life and Times . University of California Press. p. 45.

ISBN 978-0520261327 .

^ Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 240.

^ Rossabi 1988 , p. 49.

^ Rossabi 1988 , pp. 50–51.

^ Rossabi 1988 , p. 56.

^ a b Rossabi 1988 , p. 82.

^ Rossabi 1988 , p. 88.

^ Rossabi 1988 , p. 94.

^ Rossabi 1988 , p. 90.

^ China in 1000 CE: The Most Advanced Society in the World , in Ebrey, Patricia, & Conrad Schirokauer, consultants, The Song dynasty in China (960–1279): Life in the Song Seen through a 12th-century Scroll ([§] Asian Topics on Asia for Educators ) (Asia for Educators, Columbia Univ.) , as accessed October 6 & 9, 2012.

^ a b c d e Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 167.

^ Fairbank & Goldman 2006 , p. 89.

^ Needham 1986d , p. 35.

^ Needham 1986d , p. 36.

^ Ebrey 1999 , p. 155.

^ a b Ebrey 1999 , p. 158.

^ "Fenjia: household division and inheritance in Qing and Republican China Written", David Wakefield [1] ^ Li, Lillian M. (2001).

"Women and Property in China, 960-1949 (review)" (PDF) .

Journal of Interdisciplinary History .

32 (1): 160– 162.

doi : 10.1162/jinh.2001.32.1.160 .

S2CID 142559461 .

Project MUSE 16192 .

^ The Study on the Daughters' Rights to Possess and Arrange Their Parents' Property during the Period from Tang to Song dynasty http://en.cnki.com.cn/Article_en/CJFDTOTAL-TSSF201003024.htm Archived 2014-03-07 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 71.

^ a b Sivin 1995 , p. 1.

^ Hinsch, Bret.

Passions of the Cut Sleeve: The Male Homosexual Tradition in China . University of California Press, 1990. p. 89, https://doi.org/10.1525/9780520912656.

^ Hinsch, Bret.

Passions of the Cut Sleeve: The Male Homosexual Tradition in China . University of California Press, 1990. pp.95-97, https://doi.org/10.1525/9780520912656.

^ Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 172.

^ Sen 2003 , p. 13.

^ Gernet 1962 , pp. 82–83.

^ a b Needham 1986d , p. 465.

^ a b "China" , Encyclopædia Britannica , 2007 , retrieved June 28, 2007 ^ Gernet 1962 , pp. 222–225.

^ West 1997 , pp. 69–70.

^ Gernet 1962 , p. 223.

^ Rossabi 1988 , p. 162.

^ West 1997 , p. 76.

^ Ebrey 1999 , pp. 145–146.

^ a b c d Ebrey 1999 , p. 147.

^ a b c Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 162.

^ a b Hartwell 1982 , pp. 417–418.

^ a b Hymes 1986 , pp. 35–36.

^ a b c d Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 159.

^ Hartwell 1982 , pp. 405–413.

^ Hartwell 1982 , pp. 416–420.

^ a b c Fairbank & Goldman 2006 , p. 106.

^ Fairbank & Goldman 2006 , pp. 101–106.

^ Yuan 1994 , pp. 196–199.

^ Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , pp. 162–163.

^ a b c Ebrey 1999 , p. 148.

^ Fairbank & Goldman 2006 , p. 104.

^ Gernet 1962 , pp. 92–93.

^ Gernet 1962 , pp. 60–61, 68–69.

^ a b c Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 161.

^ McKnight 1992 , pp. 155–157.

^ a b c Gernet 1962 , p. 107.

^ Sivin 1995 , pp. 30–31.

^ Sivin 1995 , pp. 30–31, footnote 27.

^ Gernet 1962 , p. 170.

^ Sung 1981 , pp. 12, 72.

^ Bai 2002 , pp. 239.

^ Bai 2002 , pp. 250.

^ Bai 2002 , p. 254.

^ Graff & Higham 2002 , pp. 25–26.

^ Lorge 2005 , p. 43.

^ Lorge 2005 , p. 45.

^ a b c Peers 2006 , p. 130.

^ Peers 2006 , pp. 130–131.

^ Peers 2006 , p. 131.

^ Cai 2011 , pp. 81–82.

^ Peers 2006 , p. 129.

^ Graff & Higham 2002 , p. 87.

^ a b Graff & Higham 2002 , pp. 86–87.

^ Needham 1986d , p. 422.

^ a b Schafer 1957 , p. 291.

^ Needham 1986e , p. 19.

^ Needham 1986e , p. 119.

^ Needham 1986e , pp. 122–124.

^ Needham 1986e , pp. 82–84.

^ Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , pp. 81–83.

^ Hargett 1985 , pp. 74–76.

^ Bol 2001 , p. 44.

^ Ebrey, Cambridge, 149.

^ Ebrey 1999 , p. 151.

^ a b Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 168.

^ Wright 1959 , p. 93.

^ Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 169.

^ Wright 1959 , pp. 88–89.

^ Gernet 1962 , p. 215.

^ Gernet 1962 , pp. 127–30.

^ Gernet 1962 , p. 129.

^ Gernet 1962 , p. 134.

^ a b Gernet 1962 , pp. 134–137.

^ Yen-Mah 2008 , p. 102.

^ a b Rossabi 1988 , p. 78.

^ West 1997 , p. 73.

^ Gernet 1962 , pp. 135–136.

^ West 1997 , p. 86.

^ a b Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 157.

^ Needham 1986c , p. 23.

^ Liu 2015 .

^ Gernet 1962 , pp. 88, 94.

^ Wagner 2001 , pp. 178–179, 181–183.

^ a b Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , p. 158.

^ Embree & Gluck 1997 , p. 339.

^ a b Needham 1986e , p. 48.

^ Gernet 1962 , p. 38.

^ Ebrey, Cambridge Illustrated History of China , 142.

^ "Islam in China (650–present): Origins" , Religion & Ethics – Islam , BBC, archived from the original on February 8, 2007 , retrieved 2007-08-01 ^ Golas 1980 .

^ Needham 1986e , p. 80.

^ Needham 1986e , p. 82.

^ Needham 1986e , pp. 220–221.

^ Needham 1986e , p. 192.

^ Rossabi 1988 , p. 79.

^ Needham 1986e , p. 117.

^ Needham 1986e , pp. 173–174.

^ Needham 1986e , pp. 174–175.

^ Needham 1986c , p. 283.

^ Needham 1986c , pp. 281–282.

^ Needham 1986c , pp. 283–284.

^ Needham 1986c , p. 291.

^ Needham 1986c , p. 287.

^ a b Needham 1986d , p. 569.

^ a b Needham 1986b , p. 208.

^ Sivin 1995 , p. 32.

^ Needham 1986a , p. 136.

^ Needham 1986c , p. 446.

^ Mohn 2003 , p. 1.

^ Embree & Gluck 1997 , p. 843.

^ Chan, Clancey & Loy 2002 , p. 15.

^ Needham 1986b , p. 614.

^ Sivin 1995 , pp. 23–24.

^ Needham 1986c , p. 98.

^ a b Sivin 1995 , p. 17.

^ Needham 1986c , p. 445.

^ Needham 1986c , p. 448.

^ Needham 1986c , pp. 165, 445.

^ "Book Review: The Soochow Astronomical Chart" .

Nature .

160 (4061): 279. 30 August 1947.

doi : 10.1038/160279b0 .

hdl : 2027/mdp.39015071688480 .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

S2CID 9218319 .

^ Needham 1986b , pp. 278, 280, 428.

^ Needham 1986b , pp. 134–137.

^ Needham 1986b , pp. 46, 59–60, 104.

^ Needham 1986b , p. 43.

^ Needham 1986b , pp. 62–63.

^ Hsu 1993 , pp. 90–93.

^ Hsu 1993 , pp. 96–97.

^ Needham 1986b , pp. 538–540.

^ a b Sivin 1995 , p. 22.

^ Temple 1986 , p. 179.

^ Needham 1986b , pp. 547–549, Plate LXXXI.

^ Needham 1986b , p. 549, Plate LXXXII.

^ Hargett 1996 , pp. 406, 409–412.

^ Needham 1986e , pp. 201–203.

^ a b Sivin 1995 , p. 27.

^ Needham 1986c , p. 33.

^ Ebrey, Walthall & Palais 2006 , pp. 159–160.

^ Needham 1986e , pp. 206–208, 217.

^ Needham 1986e , pp. 212–213.

^ Brook 1998 , p. xxi.

^ Needham 1986e , pp. 215–216.

^ Needham 1986d , p. 350.

^ Needham 1986d , pp. 350–351.

^ Needham 1986d , p. 463.

^ Needham 1986d , p. 660.

^ a b c d Graff & Higham 2002 , p. 86.

^ Needham 1986d , p. 141.

^ Needham 1986d , pp. 82–84.

^ Guo 1998 , pp. 4–6.

^ Needham 1986d , p. 85.

^ Guo 1998 , p. 5.

^ Needham 1986d , pp. 96–100, 108–109.

^ Guo 1998 , pp. 1–6.

^ Needham 1986d , pp. 151–153.

^ Needham 1986d , p. 84.

^ Needham 1986d , p. 153.

^ a b Needham 1986d , p. 115.

^ a b Steinhardt 1993 , p. 375.

^ Steinhardt 1993 , p. 376.

^ a b c d e Fraser & Haber 1986 , p. 227.

^ Fairbank & Goldman 2006 , p. 33.

^ Hansen 2000 , p. 142.

^ a b Rudolph 1963 , p. 170.

^ Rudolph 1963 , p. 172.

^ Rudolph 1963 , pp. 170–171.

^ a b Rudolph 1963 , p. 171.

Sources [ edit ] Adshead, S. A. M. (2004), T'ang China: The Rise of the East in World History , New York: Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 978-1-4039-3456-7 (hardback).

Anderson, James A. (2008), " 'Treacherous Factions': Shifting Frontier Alliances in the Breakdown of Sino-Vietnamese Relations on the Eve of the 1075 Border War", in Wyatt, Don J. (ed.), Battlefronts Real and Imagined: War, Border, and Identity in the Chinese Middle Period , New York: Palgrave MacMillan, pp.

191– 226, ISBN 978-1-4039-6084-9 Bai, Shouyi (2002), An Outline History of China (Revised ed.), Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, ISBN 978-7-119-02347-2 Bol, Peter K. (2001), "The Rise of Local History: History, Geography, and Culture in Southern Song and Yuan Wuzhou", Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies , 61 (1): 37– 76, doi : 10.2307/3558587 , JSTOR 3558587 Brook, Timothy (1998), The Confusions of Pleasure: Commerce and Culture in Ming China , Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-22154-3 Brose, Michael C. (2008), "People in the Middle: Uyghurs in the Northwest Frontier Zone", in Wyatt, Don J. (ed.), Battlefronts Real and Imagined: War, Border, and Identity in the Chinese Middle Period , New York: Palgrave MacMillan, pp.

253– 289, ISBN 978-1-4039-6084-9 Cai, Yanxin (2011) [2010], Chinese Architecture , Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press (first published by China Intercontinental Press), ISBN 978-0-521-18644-5 Chan, Alan Kam-leung; Clancey, Gregory K.; Loy, Hui-Chieh (2002), Historical Perspectives on East Asian Science, Technology and Medicine , Singapore: Singapore University Press , ISBN 978-9971-69-259-9 Chaffee, John W. (2015), The Cambridge History of China Volume 5 Part Two Sung China, 960-1279 , Cambridge University Press Chen, Yuan Julian (2014), "Legitimation Discourse and the Theory of the Five Elements in Imperial China" , Journal of Song-Yuan Studies , 44 : 325– 364, doi : 10.1353/sys.2014.0000 , S2CID 147099574 Chen, Yuan Julian (2018), "Frontier, Fortification, and Forestation: Defensive Woodland on the Song-Liao Border in the Long Eleventh Century", Journal of Chinese History , 2 (2): 313– 334, doi : 10.1017/jch.2018.7 Ebrey, Patricia Buckley; Walthall, Anne; Palais, James B. (2006), East Asia: A Cultural, Social, and Political History , Boston: Houghton Mifflin , ISBN 978-0-618-13384-0 Ebrey, Patricia Buckley (1999), The Cambridge Illustrated History of China , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , ISBN 978-0-521-66991-7 (paperback).

Embree, Ainslie Thomas ; Gluck, Carol (1997), Asia in Western and World History: A Guide for Teaching , Armonk: ME Sharpe, ISBN 978-1-56324-264-9 Fairbank, John King; Goldman, Merle (2006) [1992], China: A New History (2nd enlarged ed.), Cambridge; London: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press , ISBN 978-0-674-01828-0 Fraser, Julius Thomas; Haber, Francis C. (1986), Time, Science, and Society in China and the West , Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press , ISBN 978-0-87023-495-8 Gernet, Jacques (1962), Daily Life in China on the Eve of the Mongol Invasion, 1250–1276 , Translated by H. M. Wright, Stanford: Stanford University Press , ISBN 978-0-8047-0720-6 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Golas, Peter (1980), "Rural China in the Song", The Journal of Asian Studies , 39 (2): 291– 325, doi : 10.2307/2054291 , JSTOR 2054291 , S2CID 162997737 Graff, David Andrew; Higham, Robin (2002), A Military History of China , Boulder: Westview Press Guo, Qinghua (1998), "Yingzao Fashi: Twelfth-Century Chinese Building Manual", Architectural History , 41 : 1– 13, doi : 10.2307/1568644 , JSTOR 1568644 , S2CID 192365949 Hall, Kenneth (1985), Maritime trade and state development in early Southeast Asia , Hawaii: University of Hawaii Press , ISBN 978-0-8248-0959-1 Halsall, Paul (2000) [1998]. Jerome S. Arkenberg (ed.).

"East Asian History Sourcebook: Chinese Accounts of Rome, Byzantium and the Middle East, c. 91 B.C.E. – 1643 C.E." Fordham.edu .

Fordham University . Retrieved 2016-09-16 .

Hansen, Valerie (2000), The Open Empire: A History of China to 1600 , New York & London: W.W. Norton & Company, ISBN 978-0-393-97374-7 Hargett, James M. (1985), "Some Preliminary Remarks on the Travel Records of the Song Dynasty (960–1279)", Chinese Literature: Essays, Articles, Reviews , 7 (1/2): 67– 93, doi : 10.2307/495194 , JSTOR 495194 ——— (1996), "Song Dynasty Local Gazetteers and Their Place in The History of Difangzhi Writing", Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies , 56 (2): 405– 442, doi : 10.2307/2719404 , JSTOR 2719404 Hartwell, Robert M. (1982), "Demographic, Political, and Social Transformations of China, 750-1550", Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies , 42 (2): 365– 442, doi : 10.2307/2718941 , JSTOR 2718941 Hymes, Robert P. (1986), Statesmen and Gentlemen: The Elite of Fu-Chou, Chiang-Hsi, in Northern and Southern Sung , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-30631-7 Hsu, Mei-ling (1993), "The Qin Maps: A Clue to Later Chinese Cartographic Development", Imago Mundi , 45 : 90– 100, doi : 10.1080/03085699308592766 Levathes, Louise (1994), When China Ruled the Seas , New York: Simon & Schuster , ISBN 978-0-671-70158-1 Liu, William Guangling (2015), The Chinese Market Economy 1000-1500 , SUNY Press, ISBN 978-1-4384-5567-9 Lorge, Peter (2005), War, Politics and Society in Early Modern China, 900–1795 (1st ed.), New York: Routledge Lorge, Peter (2015), The Reunification of China: Peace through War under the Song Dynasty , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , ISBN 978-1-107-08475-9 McKnight, Brian E. (1992), Law and Order in Sung China , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Mohn, Peter (2003), Magnetism in the Solid State: An Introduction , New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-43183-1 Mote, F. W. (1999), Imperial China: 900–1800 , Harvard: Harvard University Press Needham, Joseph (1986a), Science and Civilisation in China: Volume 1, Introductory Orientations , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press ——— (1986b), Science and Civilisation in China: Volume 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and the Earth , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press ——— (1986c), Science and Civilisation in China: Volume 4, Physics and Physical Technology, Part 2: Mechanical Engineering , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press ——— (1986d), Science and Civilisation in China: Volume 4, Physics and Physical Technology, Part 3: Civil Engineering and Nautics , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press ——— (1986e), Science and Civilisation in China: Volume 5, Chemistry and Chemical Technology, Part 7: Military Technology; The Gunpowder Epic , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Paludan, Ann (1998), Chronicle of the Chinese Emperors , London: Thames & Hudson , ISBN 978-0-500-05090-3 Peers, C. J. (2006), Soldiers of the Dragon: Chinese Armies 1500 BCE–CE 1840 , Oxford: Osprey Publishing Rossabi, Morris (1988), Khubilai Khan: His Life and Times , Berkeley: University of California Press , ISBN 978-0-520-05913-9 Rudolph, R. C. (1963), "Preliminary Notes on Sung Archaeology", The Journal of Asian Studies , 22 (2): 169– 177, doi : 10.2307/2050010 , JSTOR 2050010 , S2CID 164153713 Sastri, Nilakanta, K.A. (1984), The CōĻas , Madras: University of Madras {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Schafer, Edward H. (1957), "War Elephants in Ancient and Medieval China", Oriens , 10 (2): 289– 291, doi : 10.2307/1579643 , JSTOR 1579643 Sen, Tansen (2003), Buddhism, Diplomacy, and Trade: The Realignment of Sino-Indian Relations, 600–1400 , Manoa: Asian Interactions and Comparisons, a joint publication of the University of Hawaii Press and the Association for Asian Studies, ISBN 978-0-8248-2593-5 Shen, Fuwei (1996), Cultural flow between China and the outside world , Beijing: Foreign Languages Press, ISBN 978-7-119-00431-0 Sivin, Nathan (1995), Science in Ancient China , Brookfield, Vermont: VARIORUM, Ashgate Publishing Steinhardt, Nancy Shatzman (1993), "The Tangut Royal Tombs near Yinchuan", Muqarnas: An Annual on Islamic Art and Architecture , X : 369– 381, doi : 10.2307/1523201 , JSTOR 1523201 Sung, Tz'u (1981), The Washing Away of Wrongs: Forensic Medicine in Thirteenth-Century China , translated by Brian E. McKnight, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press , ISBN 978-0-89264-800-9 Taagepera, Rein (1997), "Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large Polities: Context for Russia" , International Studies Quarterly , 41 (3): 475– 504, doi : 10.1111/0020-8833.00053 , JSTOR 2600793 Temple, Robert (1986), The Genius of China: 3,000 Years of Science, Discovery, and Invention , with a foreword by Joseph Needham, New York: Simon and Schuster, ISBN 978-0-671-62028-8 Veeck, Gregory; Pannell, Clifton W.; Smith, Christopher J.; Huang, Youqin (2007), China's Geography: Globalization and the Dynamics of Political, Economic, and Social Change , Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, ISBN 978-0-7425-5402-3 Wagner, Donald B. (2001), "The Administration of the Iron Industry in Eleventh-Century China", Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient , 44 (2): 175– 197, doi : 10.1163/156852001753731033 Wang, Lianmao (2000), Return to the City of Light: Quanzhou, an eastern city shining with the splendour of medieval culture , Fujian People's Publishing House West, Stephen H. (1997), "Playing With Food: Performance, Food, and The Aesthetics of Artificiality in The Sung and Yuan", Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies , 57 (1): 67– 106, doi : 10.2307/2719361 , JSTOR 2719361 Wright, Arthur F. (1959), Buddhism in Chinese History , Stanford: Stanford University Press Yen-Mah, Adeline (2008), China; Land of Dragon and Emperors , New York: Random House, Inc., ISBN 978-0-385-73748-7 Yuan, Zheng (1994), "Local Government Schools in Sung China: A Reassessment", History of Education Quarterly , 34 (2): 193– 213, doi : 10.2307/369121 , JSTOR 369121 , S2CID 144538656 Further reading [ edit ] Bol, Peter K. (1992).

"This Culture of Ours": Intellectual Transitions in T'ang and Sung China . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-1920-9 .

Cotterell, Arthur (2007), The Imperial Capitals of China – An Inside View of the Celestial Empire , London: Pimlico, ISBN 978-1-84595-009-5 Gascoigne, Bamber (2003), The Dynasties of China: A History , New York: Carroll & Graf, ISBN 978-1-84119-791-3 Gernet, Jacques (1982), A history of Chinese civilization , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-24130-4 Kruger, Rayne (2003), All Under Heaven: A Complete History of China , Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 978-0-470-86533-0 Kuhn, Dieter (2009).

The Age of Confucian Rule: The Song Transformation of China . Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-03146-3 .

Rossabi, Morris (1983).

China among Equals: The Middle Kingdom and Its Neighbors, 10th–14th Centuries . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-04383-1 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Song Dynasty .

Song dynasty at China Heritage Quarterly Song dynasty at bcps.org Song and Liao artwork Song dynasty art with video commentary Archived 2008-09-07 at the Wayback Machine The Newly Compiled Overall Geographical Survey Preceded by Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Dynasties in Chinese history 960–1279 Succeeded by Yuan dynasty v t e Song dynasty topics History ( Timeline ) Chenqiao mutiny Unification Later Shu Southern Han Southern Tang Gaoliang River Song–Đại Cồ Việt war Song–Xia wars Chanyuan Treaty Wang Ze rebellion Nong Zhigao rebellions Song–Tibet relations Song–Viet war (1075–1077) Fang La rebellion Alliance Conducted at Sea Jin–Song Wars Jingkang Huangtiandang De'an Yancheng Treaty of Shaoxing Tangdao Caishi Caizhou Mongol conquest Diaoyucheng Xiangyang Yamen Government Emperors Family tree Imperial examinations Administrative units Sixteen Prefectures Military Bureau of Military Affairs Qingli Reforms New Policies Baojia system Three Bureaus Three Departments Department of State Affairs Secretariat Chancellery ( Secretariat-Chancellery ) Six Ministries Ministry of Personnel Ministry of Revenue Ministry of Rites Ministry of War Ministry of Justice Ministry of Works Culture and Society Religion Poetry Five Great Kilns Ding ware Ge ware Guan ware Jun ware Ru ware Longquan celadon Cizhou ware Qingbai ware Yaozhou ware Jian ware Great Bodhisattva of Zhengding Along the River During the Qingming Festival Four Great Books of Song Dongjing Meng Hua Lu Writers Fan Zhongyan (989–1052) Yan Shu (991–1055) Song Qi (998–1061) Mei Yaochen (1002–1060) Ouyang Xiu (1007–1072) Su Xun (1009–1066) Shao Yong (1011–1077) Cai Xiang (1012–1067) Zhou Dunyi (1017–1073) Zeng Gong (1019–1083) Sima Guang (1019–1086) Zhang Zai (1022–1077) Cheng Hao (1032–1085) Cheng Yi (1033–1107) Su Shi (1037–1101) Su Zhe (1039–1112) Huang Tingjian (1045–1105) Cai Jing (1047–1126) Zhou Bangyan (1056–1121) Li Qingzhao (1084–1155) Zhu Bian (1085–1144) Zhu Yu ( fl.

1111–1117 ) Lu You (1125–1209) Fan Chengda (1126–1193) Yang Wanli (1127–1206) Zhu Xi (1130–1200) Xin Qiji (1140–1207) Zhao Rukuo (1170–1231) Painters Fan Kuan (960–1030) Xu Daoning (970–1053) Zhao Chang (10th c.) Yi Yuanji (1000–1064) Wen Tong (1019–1079) Guo Xi (1020–1090) Wang Shen (1036–1093) Li Gonglin (1049–1106) Cui Bai ( fl.

1050–1080 ) Mi Fu (1051–1107) Emperor Huizong (1082–1135) Zhang Zeduan (1085–1145) Su Hanchen (1094–1172) Wang Ximeng (1096–1119) Li Di (1100–1197) Zhao Boju (1120–1182) Liang Kai (1140–1210) Lin Tinggui ( fl.

1174–1189 ) Zhou Jichang (12th c.) Wuzhun Shifan (1178–1249) Li Song (1190–1230) Zhao Mengjian (1199–1295) Muqi (1210–1269) Gong Kai (1222–1307) Qian Xuan (1235–1305) Economy Wang Anshi (1021–1086) Joint-stock company Banknote Jiaozi Guanzi Huizi Southern Song dynasty coinage Champa rice Nanhai One Zhu Fan Zhi Science and technology Gunpowder Gunpowder weapons Wujing Zongyao Coke Early Bessemer process Endless power transmitting chain drive Astronomical clock Movable type Compass Pound lock Dry dock Watertight bulkhead Fishing reel Tianchi basin Horner's method Architecture Liaodi Pagoda Yingzao Fashi Forensic entomology Collected Cases of Injustice Rectified Dream Pool Essays Inventors Bi Sheng (972–1051) Zhang Sixun ( fl.

10th c.

) Jia Xian (1010–1070) Su Song (1020–1101) Shen Kuo (1031–1095) Song Ci (1186–1249) Li Ye (1192–1279) Qin Jiushao (1202–1261) Guo Shoujing (1231–1316) v t e Administrative divisions of the Song dynasty Jingji (京畿) Upper Kāifēng (開封) Jingdong East (京東東) Upper Jǐ'nán (濟南) Lower Qīngzhōu (青州) | Mìzhōu (密州) | Yízhōu (沂州) | Dēngzhōu (登州) | Láizhōu (萊州) | Wéizhōu (濰州) | Zīzhōu (淄州) Armies Huáiyáng (淮陽) Jingdong West (京東西) Upper Yīngtiān (應天) Lower Yǎnzhōu (兗州) | Xúzhōu (徐州) | Cáozhōu (曹州) | Yùnzhōu (鄆州) | Jìzhōu (濟州) | Shànzhōu (單州) | Púzhōu (濮州) Jingxi South (京西南) Lower Xiāngzhōu (襄州) | Suízhōu (隨州) | Tángzhōu (唐州) | Dèngzhōu (鄧州) | Jūnzhōu (均州) | Fángzhōu (房州) | Jīnzhou (金州) | Yǐngzhōu (郢州) Armies Guānghuà (光化) Jingxi North (京西北) Upper Hénán (河南) | Yǐngchāng (潁昌) Lower Zhèngzhōu (鄭州) | Huázhōu (滑州) | Mèngzhōu (孟州) | Càizhōu (蔡州) | Chénzhōu (陳州) | Yǐngzhōu (穎州) | Rǔzhōu (汝州) Armies Xìnyáng (信陽) Hebei East (河北東) Upper Dàmíng (大名) Lower Chánzhōu (澶州) | Cāngzhōu (滄州) | Jìzhōu (冀州) | Yíngzhōu (瀛州) | Bózhōu (博州) | Dìzhōu (棣州) | Mòzhōu (莫州) | Xióngzhōu (雄州) | Bàzhōu (霸州) | Dézhōu (德州) | Bīnzhōu (濱州) | Ēnzhōu (恩州) Armies Qiánníng (乾寧) | Yǒngjìng (永靜) | Bǎodìng (保定) | Xìn'ān (信安) Hebei West (河北西) Upper Zhēndìng (真定) Lower Xiāngzhōu (相州) | Dìngzhōu (定州) | Xíngzhōu (邢州) | Huáizhōu (懷州) | Wèizhōu (衛州) | Míngzhōu (洺州) | Shēnzhōu (深州) | Cízhōu (磁州) | Qízhōu (祁州) | Zhàozhōu (趙州) | Bǎozhōu (保州) Armies Ānsù (安肅) | Yǒngníng (永寧) | Guǎngxìn (廣信) | Shùn'ān (順安) Hedong (河東) Upper Tàiyuán (太原) Lower Lùzhōu (潞州) | Jìnzhōu (晉州) | Jiàngzhōu (絳州) | Zézhōu (澤州) | Dàizhōu (代州) | Xīnzhōu (忻州) | Fénzhōu (汾州) | Liáozhōu (遼州) | Xiànzhōu (憲州) | Lánzhōu (嵐州) | Shízhōu (石州) | Xízhōu (隰州) | Línzhōu (麟州) | Fǔzhōu (府州) | Fēngzhōu (豐州) Armies Wēishèng (威勝) | Píngdìng (平定) | Kělán (岢嵐) | Nínghuà (寧化) | Huǒshān (火山) | Bǎodé (保德) Yongxing Army (永興軍) Upper Jīngzhào (京兆) | Hézhōng (河中) Lower Xìezhōu (解州) | Shǎnzhōu (陝州) | Shāngzhōu (商州) | Guózhōu (虢州) | Tóngzhōu (同州) | Huázhōu (華州) | Yàozhōu (耀州) | Yánzhōu (延州) | Fūzhōu (鄜州) | Fāngzhōu (坊州) | Qìngzhōu (慶州) | Huánzhōu (環州) | Bīnzhōu (邠州) | Níngzhōu (寧州) | Dānzhōu (丹州) Armies Bǎoān (保安) Qinfeng (秦鳳) Upper Fèngxiáng (鳳翔) Lower Qínzhōu (秦州) | Lǒngzhōu (隴州) | Chéngzhōu (成州) | Fèngzhōu (鳳州) | Jīngzhōu (涇州) | Wèizhōu (渭州) | Yuánzhōu (原州) | Xīzhōu (熙州) | Hézhōu (河州) | Mínzhōu (岷州) | Lánzhōu (蘭州) | Jiēzhōu (階州) Armies Déshùn (德順) | Zhènróng (鎮戎) | Tōngyuǎn (通遠) Liangzhe (兩浙) Lower Hángzhōu (杭州) | Yuèzhōu (越州) | Sūzhōu (蘇州) | Rùnzhōu (潤州) | Húzhōu (湖州) | Wùzhōu (婺州) | Míngzhōu (明州) | Wēnzhōu (溫州) | Táizhōu (台州) | Chǔzhōu (處州) | Qúzhōu (衢州) | Mùzhōu (睦州) | Xiùzhōu (秀州) | Chángzhōu (常州) Huainan East (淮南東) Lower Yángzhōu (揚州) | Bózhōu (亳州) | Sùzhōu (宿州) | Chǔzhōu (楚州) | Hǎizhōu (海州) | Tàizhōu (泰州) | Sìzhōu (泗州) | Chúzhōu (滁州) | Zhēnzhōu (真州) | Tōngzhōu (通州) Huainan West (淮南西) Upper Shòuchūn (壽春) Lower Lúzhōu (廬州) | Qízhōu (蘄州) | Hézhōu (和州) | Shūzhōu (舒州) | Háozhōu (濠州) | Guāngzhōu (光州) | Huángzhōu (黃州) Armies Wúwéi (無為) Jiangnan East (江南東) Upper Jiāngníng (江寧) Lower Xuánzhōu (宣州) | Shèzhōu (歙州) | Chízhōu (池州) | Jiāngzhōu (江州) | Rāozhou (饒州) | Xìnzhōu (信州) | Tàipíngzhōu (太平州) Armies Guǎngdé (廣德) | Nánkāng (南康) Jiangnan West (江南西) Lower Hóngzhōu (洪州) | Qiánzhōu (虔州) | Jízhōu (吉州) | Yuánzhōu (袁州) | Fǔzhōu (撫州) | Yúnzhōu (筠州) Armies Xīngguó (興國) | Ānnán (南安) | Línjiāng (臨江) | Jiànchāng (建昌) Jinghu North (荊湖北) Upper Jiānglín (江陵) Lower Èzhōu (鄂州) | Ānzhōu (安州) | Fùzhōu (復州) | Dǐngzhōu (鼎州) | Lǐzhōu (澧州) | Xiázhōu (峽州) | Yuèzhōu (岳州) | Guīzhōu (歸州) | Chénzhōu (辰州) | Yuánzhōu (沅州) | Chéngzhōu (誠州) Jinghu South (荊湖南) Lower Tánzhōu (潭州) | Héngzhōu (衡州) | Dàozhōu (道州) | Yǒngzhōu (永州) | Chēnzhōu (郴州) | Shàozhōu (邵州) | Quánzhōu (全州) Inspectorate Guìyáng (桂陽) Fujian (福建) Lower Fúzhōu (福州) | Jiànzhōu (建州) | Quánzhōu (泉州) | Nánjiànzhōu (南劍州) | Zhāngzhōu (漳州) | Tīngzhōu (汀州) Army Shàowǔ (邵武) | Xīnghuà (興化) Chengdu (成都) Upper Chéngdū (成都) Lower Qióngzhōu (邛州) | Méizhōu (眉州) | Shǔzhōu (蜀州) | Péngzhōu (彭州) | Miánzhōu (綿州) | Hànzhōu (漢州) | Jiāzhōu (嘉州) | Jiǎnzhōu (簡州) | Lízhōu (黎州) | Yǎzhōu (雅州) | Màozhōu (茂州) | Wēizhōu (威州) Army Yǒngkāng (永康) | Shíquán (石泉) Inspectorate Língjǐng (陵井) Zizhou (梓州) Lower Zǐzhōu (梓州) | Suìzhōu (遂州) | Guǒzhōu (果州) | Zīzhōu (資州) | Pǔzhōu (普州) | Chāngzhōu (昌州) | Róngzhōu (戎州) | Lúzhōu (瀘州) | Hézhōu (合州) | Róngzhōu (榮州) | Qúzhōu (渠州) Army Huáiān (懷安) | Guǎng'ān (廣安) Inspectorate Fùshùn (富順) Lizhou (利州) Upper Xīngyuán (興元) Lower Lìzhōu (利州) | Yángzhōu (洋州) | Làngzhōu (閬州) | Jiànzhōu (劍州) | Bāzhōu (巴州) | Wénzhōu (文州) | Xīngzhōu (興州) | Péngzhōu (蓬州) | Lóngzhōu (龍州) Kuizhou (夔州) Lower Kuízhōu (夔州) | Qiánzhōu (黔州) | Shīzhōu (施州) | Zhōngzhōu (忠州) | Wànzhōu (萬州) | Dázhōu (達州) | Fúzhōu (涪州) | Yúzhōu (渝州) | Kāizhōu (開州) Army Yún'ān (雲安) | Liángshān (梁山) | Nánpíng (南平) Inspectorate Dàníng (大寧) Guangnan East (廣南東) Lower Guǎngzhōu (廣州) | Sháozhōu (韶州) | Xúnzhōu (循州) | Cháozhōu (潮州) | Liánzhōu (連州) | Méizhōu (梅州) | Xióngzhōu (雄州) | Yīngzhōu (英州) | Hèzhōu (賀州) | Fēngzhōu (封州) | Duānzhōu (端州) | Xīnzhōu (新州) | Kāngzhōu (康州) | Nán'ēnzhōu (南恩州) | Huìzhōu (惠州) Guangnan West Lower Guìzhōu (桂州) | Róngzhōu (容州) | Yōngzhōu (邕州) | Róngzhōu (融州) | Xiàngzhōu (象州) | Zhāozhōu (昭州) | Téngzhōu (藤州) | Gōngzhōu (龔州) | Xúnzhōu (潯州) | Liǔzhōu (柳州) | Guìzhōu (貴州) | Yízhōu (宜州) | Bīnzhōu (賓州) | Héngzhōu (橫州) | Huàzhōu (化州) | Gāozhōu (高州) | Léizhōu (雷州) | Qīnzhōu (欽州) | Báizhōu (白州) | Yùlínzhōu (鬱林州) | Liánzhōu (廉州) | Qióngzhōu (瓊州) Army Chānghuà (昌化) | Wàn'ān (萬安) | Zhūyái (朱崖) v t e Empires Ancient ( colonies ) Akkadian Armenian Urartu Orontid Ancient Assyrian Middle Assyrian Neo-Assyrian Babylonian Old Babylonian Kassite Neo-Babylonian Chinese Qin Han Jin Dʿmt Egyptian Old Kingdom Middle Kingdom New Kingdom Goguryeo Harsha Hellenistic Macedonian Seleucid Ptolemaic Bactrian Indo-Greek Hittite Hunnic White Xiongnu Iranian Median Achaemenid Parthian Sasanian Kush Kushan Magadha Haryanka Shaishunaga Nanda Maurya Shunga Gupta Phoenician Carthaginian Roman Western Eastern Satavahana Neo-Sumerian Xianbei Rouran Post-classical Angevin Aragonese Armenian Bagratid Vaspurakan Artsakh Cilician Zakarid Ayyubid Aztec Benin Bornu Bruneian Bulgarian First Second Burmese First Calakmul Caliphate Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Fatimid Chalukya Western Eastern Chinese Sui Tang Liao Song Jīn Yuan Chola Ethiopian Aksum Zagwe Solomonic Genoese Georgian Huetar Inca Kannauj Pala Gurjara-Pratihara Rashtrakuta Iranian Tahirid Saffarid Samanid Buyid Japanese Yamato Kamakura Muromachi Edo Kanem Khmer Latin Lithuanian Grand Duchy Commonwealth Majapahit Mali Mongol Yuan Golden Horde Chagatai Khanate Ilkhanate Berber Almoravid Almohad Norwegian North Sea Oyo Polish Kingdom Commonwealth Roman Byzantine Nicaea Thessalonica Trebizond Epirus Morea Romano-Germanic Carolingian Holy Roman Serbian Singhasari Songhai Srivijaya Tibetan Tikal Tiwanaku Toltec Turco-Persian Ghaznavid Great Seljuk Khwarezmian Timurid Turkic First Western Eastern Second Türgesh Uighur Kyrgyz Venetian Vietnamese Dinh Early Le Ly Tran Ho Later Tran Later Le Vijayanagara Wagadou Wari Modern Afghan Ashanti Austro-Hungarian Brazilian Burmese Second Third Central African Chinese Ming Qing China Manchukuo Contemporary Ethiopian Haitian First Second French First Second German German Empire Nazi Germany Indian Indo-Persian Mughal Sikh Iranian Safavid Afsharid Zand Qajar Pahlavi Japanese Korean Maratha Mexican First Second Mongol Oirat Khoshut Dzungar Kalmyk Bogd Moroccan Saadi 'Alawi Polish Russian Tsarist Imperial Contemporary Sokoto Somali Isaaq Warsengeli Ajuran Geledi Swedish Tongan Vietnamese Mạc Revival Lê Tay Sơn Dainam Vietnam Colonial American Austrian attempts Belgian British English Scottish Chinese Danish Dutch French German attempts Italian Venetian Genoese Maltese attempts Japanese Mongol Norwegian Omani Ottoman Polish–Lithuanian Couronian attempts Portuguese Russian Spanish Catalan-Aragonese Basque Swedish Lists Empires largest Ancient great powers Medieval great powers Modern great powers European colonialism African empires Miscellaneous Academic Anti-imperialism Cultural Ecological Green Media Nuclear Liberal Linguistic Social Soviet Theories U.S.

Portals : China History Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Song_dynasty&oldid=1306056054 " Categories : Song dynasty 10th-century establishments in China 11th century in China 12th century in China 1279 disestablishments in Asia 13th-century disestablishments in China 960 establishments Confucian dynasties Dynasties of China Former countries in Chinese history Medieval East Asia States and territories disestablished in 1279 States and territories established in the 960s Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2023 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Commons category link from Wikidata Featured articles This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 17:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Song dynasty 89 languages Add topic

