Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Earlier similar phrases 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Information superhighway 17 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term used in the 1990s to refer to the Internet The information superhighway (from German: infobahn ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is a late-20th-century descriptive phrase that aspirationally referred to the increasingly mainstream availability of digital communication systems (and ultimately the Internet and its World Wide Web ).

To some extent, it is associated with United States Senator and later Vice President Al Gore .

[ 3 ] Definitions [ edit ] There are a number of definitions of this term. The 1996 publication Wired Style: Principles of English Usage in the Digital Age defines the term as "the whole digital enchilada - interactive, cable, broadband, 500-channel [...] then-Senator Al Gore Jr. introduced it at a 1978 meeting of computer industry folk, in homage to his father, Senator Albert Gore Sr ." [ 4 ] The McGraw-Hill Computer Desktop Encyclopedia , published in 2001, defines the term as "a proposed high-speed communications system that was touted by the Clinton/Gore administration to enhance education in America in the 21st century. Its purpose was to help all citizens regardless of their income level. The Internet was originally cited as a model for this superhighway; however, with the explosion of the World Wide Web , the Internet became the information superhighway".

[ 5 ] The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) defines the term as "a route or network for the high-speed transfer of information; esp. (a) a proposed national fiber-optic network in the United States; (b) the Internet ." The OED also cites usage of this term in three periodicals: the January 3, 1983 issue of Newsweek : "...information superhighways being built of fiber-optic cable will link Boston, New York, Philadelphia, and Washington, D. C. in a 776-mile system on the East Coast." the December 19, 1991 issue of the Christian Science Monitor : "Senator Gore calls NREN the "information superhighway" - a catalyst for what he hopes will become one day a national fiber-optic network." the October 26, 1993 issue of the New York Times : "One of the technologies Vice President Al Gore is pushing is the information superhighway, which will link everyone at home or office to everything else—movies and television shows, shopping services, electronic mail and huge collections of data." The working paper No.179, 1994, of the Center for Coordination Science at Massachusetts Institute of Technology describes the concept as follows: "The information superhighway directly connects millions of people, each both a consumer of information and a potential provider. (...) Most predictions about commercial opportunities on the information superhighway focus on the provision of information products, such as video on demand, and on new sales outlets for physical products, as with home shopping. (...) The information superhighway brings together millions of individuals who could exchange information with one another. Any conception of a traditional market for making beneficial exchanges, such as an agricultural market or trading pit, or any system where individuals respond to posted prices on a computer screen is woefully inadequate for the extremely large number of often complex trades that will be required." [ 6 ] Earlier similar phrases [ edit ] Some other people used the term "superhighway" in application to telecommunications even earlier.

In 1964, M. Brotherton in his book " Masers and Lasers ; How They Work, What They Do" on p. 5, wrote about laser beams and used the term "superhighways" for communication.

[ 7 ] The term "electronic super highway" was used by RCA engineer James Hillier in 1971 to describe the future evolution of cable television and home communications [ 8 ] In addition, this cable will run past every bank, school, store, and place of business. It will be an electronic super highway carrying entertainment, education, and informational commerce, making possible a new and closer coupling of the citizen to his society and culture, but from the retained privacy and convenience of his own home.

In 1974, Nam June Paik also used the term "super highway" in application to telecommunications, which gave rise to the mistaken opinion that he may have been the author of the term "information superhighway".

[ 9 ] In 1972, Andrew Targowski presented the Polish National Development Program at the State Council for Informatics, which included the plan of developing the public computer network INFOSTRADA (INFO-STRADA), with autostrada meaning motorway in Polish. Later this plan and its topology were published in his book INFORMATYKA modele rozwoju i systemów (INFORMATICS, models of development and systems) [ 10 ] The building of new electronic super highways will become an even huger enterprise. Assuming we connect New York with Los Angeles by means of an electronic telecommunication network that operates in strong transmission ranges, as well as with continental satellites, wave guides, bundled coaxial cable, and later also via laser beam fiber optics: the expenditure would be about the same as for a Moon landing , except that the benefits in term of by-products would be greater.

See also [ edit ] Look up information superhighway in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Al Gore and information technology National Information Infrastructure The Superhighway Summit Knowledge policy Cyberspace Global village HTTP and HTTPS References [ edit ] ^ "Infobahn" was invented as an analogy with the German word Autobahn for " highway " ^ The October, 1994 issue of the American Journalism Review , "Panel Vision" Archived 2013-07-22 at the Wayback Machine : "Over the last year countless articles have trumpeted the coming of the information superhighway. Infobahn entrepreneurs promise interactive television with text, video and audio delivered to living rooms via fiber optic cable or enhanced phone lines." ^ Gregory Gromov Roads and Crossroads of the Internet History: Chapter #1 - First 130 Years of Internet History ^ Hale, Constance (1996).

Wired Style: Principles of English Usage in the Digital Age . San Francisco: Hardwired. p. 71.

^ Freedman, Alan (2001).

McGraw-Hill Computer Desktop Encyclopedia . New York: McGraw Hill. p. 464.

^ Paul Resnick Roles for Electronic Brokers ^ M. Brotherton, "Masers and Lasers; How They Work, What They Do," (McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1964).

^ Future Electronic Alternatives to Travel, James Hillier, January 11-15, 1971 https://doi.org/10.4271/710055 ^ "An interview with Nam June Paik" . Archived from the original on 12 March 2009 . Retrieved 29 March 2018 .

^ Warsaw: PWE, pp. 197–199 Further reading [ edit ] Articles Andrews, Edmund. " Policy Blueprint Ready for Data Superhighway ." New York Times , Sept. 15, 1993.

Besser, Howard. " The Information SuperHighway: Social and Cultural Impact ," 1995.

Broad, William (November 10, 1992), "Clinton to Promote High Technology, With Gore in Charge" , New York Times Ferranti, Marc. " Europe Seeks a Lane on Info Highway ," International Herald Tribune , October 1995.

Gore, Al. " Remarks given by Vice President Gore at The Superhighway Summit , UCLA ," January 11, 1994.

" Information Superhighways: The Next Information Revolution ." The Futurist , January–February 1991, Vol. 25: 21–23.

Kahn, Jeffery. " Building and Rescuing the Information Superhighway Archived 2020-03-02 at the Wayback Machine ," 1993.

Special Issue: TIME magazine, 12 April 1993.

" Take A Trip into the Future on the ELECTRONIC SUPERHIGHWAY " Gomery, Douglas. " What's At the End of the Infobahn?

," American Journalism Review , May 1996.

Magazine covers Special Issue: TIME magazine, 12 April 1993 . " The Info Highway: Bringing a revolution in entertainment, news, and communication [ permanent dead link ] " Popular Mechanics , January, 1994. " Understanding the Information Superhighway " v t e Al Gore 45th Vice President of the United States (1993–2001) U.S. Senator from Tennessee (1985–1993) U.S. Representative for TN–4 and TN–6 (1977–1985) Politics Atari Democrat Prevention of Genocide Act of 1988 Vice presidency Electoral History U.S. House 1976 1978 1980 1982 U.S. Senate 1984 1990 Vice presidential 1992 campaign selection convention debate election transition 1996 campaign convention debate election Presidential 1988 campaign primaries 2000 campaign primaries running mate selection convention debates election Bush v. Gore Bush transition Environment Global Marshall Plan Environmental activism Alliance for Climate Protection An Inconvenient Truth " I Need to Wake Up " Live Earth The Climate Reality Project An Inconvenient Sequel: Truth to Power " Truth to Power " Technology Role in information technology High Performance Computing Act of 1991 National Information Infrastructure Information superhighway The Superhighway Summit Deep Space Climate Observatory 24 Hours in Cyberspace NetDay Digital Earth Current TV Recognition Awards and honors Books Earth in the Balance An Inconvenient Truth The Assault on Reason Our Choice The Future: Six Drivers of Global Change An Inconvenient Sequel Family Tipper Gore (wife, separated ) Karenna Gore (daughter) Kristin Gore (daughter) Albert Gore Sr.

(father) Pauline LaFon Gore (mother) Category Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Information_superhighway&oldid=1306198017 " Categories : Internet terminology History of the Internet 1970s neologisms 1990s in technology 1990s fads and trends Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 12:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Information superhighway 17 languages Add topic

