Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 Attack by Johann Daniel Müller 4 Selected works Toggle Selected works subsection 4.1 English translations 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Gotthold Ephraim Lessing 69 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Sardu Scots Seeltersk Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German Enlightenment writer (1729–1781) Gotthold Ephraim Lessing Portrait of Lessing by Anna Rosina Lisiewska during his time as dramaturg of Abel Seyler 's Hamburg National Theatre (1767/1768) Born ( 1729-01-22 ) 22 January 1729 Kamenz , Upper Lusatia , Saxony , Holy Roman Empire Died 15 February 1781 (1781-02-15) (aged 52) Braunschweig , Brunswick-Lüneburg , Holy Roman Empire Occupation Writer, philosopher, dramatist , publicist , art critic , and dramaturg Alma mater Leipzig University University of Wittenberg Notable works Miss Sara Sampson , Emilia Galotti , Minna von Barnhelm , Nathan the Wise , Laocoön , Hamburgische Dramaturgie Spouse Eva König Signature Gotthold Ephraim Lessing ( / ˈ l ɛ s ɪ ŋ / ; [ 1 ] German: [ˈɡɔthɔlt ˈʔeːfʁa.ɪm ˈlɛsɪŋ] ⓘ ; 22 January 1729 – 15 February 1781) was a German philosopher , dramatist , publicist and art critic , and a representative of the Enlightenment era. His plays and theoretical writings substantially influenced the development of German literature . He is widely considered by theatre historians to be the first dramaturg in his role at Abel Seyler 's Hamburg National Theatre .

[ 2 ] The word Dramaturgy first appears in his work Hamburg Dramaturgy .

[ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Lessing, 1771 Lessing was born in Kamenz , a small town in Saxony , to pastor and theologian Johann Gottfried Lessing [ de ] (1693–1770) and his wife Justine Salome Feller (1703–1777), daughter of pastor of Kamenz , Gottfried Feller (1674–1733). His father was a Lutheran minister and wrote on theology. Young Lessing studied at the Latin School in Kamenz from 1737 to 1741. With a father who wanted his son to follow in his footsteps, Lessing next attended the Fürstenschule St. Afra in Meissen . After completing his education at St. Afra's, he enrolled at Leipzig University where he pursued a degree in theology, medicine, philosophy, and philology (1746–1748).

[ 4 ] It was here that his relationship with Karoline Neuber , a famous German actress, began. He translated several French plays for her, and his interest in theatre grew. During this time, he wrote his first play, The Young Scholar.

Neuber eventually produced the play in 1748.

From 1748 to 1760, Lessing lived in Leipzig and Berlin. He began to work as a reviewer and editor for the Vossische Zeitung and other periodicals. Lessing formed a close connection with his cousin, Christlob Mylius, and decided to follow him to Berlin. In 1750, Lessing and Mylius teamed together to begin a periodical publication named Beiträge zur Historie und Aufnahme des Theaters . The publication ran only four issues, but it caught the public's eye and revealed Lessing to be a serious critic and theorist of drama.

In 1752, he took his master's degree in Wittenberg . From 1760 to 1765, he worked in Breslau (now Wrocław ) as secretary to General Tauentzien during the Seven Years' War between Britain and France, which had effects in Europe. It was during this time that he wrote his famous Laocoön, or the Limitations of Poetry [ de ] .

In 1765, Lessing returned to Berlin, leaving in 1767 to work for three years at the Hamburg National Theatre . Actor-manager Konrad Ackermann began construction of Germany's first permanent national theatre in Hamburg, established by Johann Friedrich Löwen [ de ] . The owners of the new Hamburg National Theatre hired Lessing as the theatre's critic of plays and acting, an activity later known as dramaturgy (based on his own words), making Lessing the very first dramaturge . The theatre's main backer was Abel Seyler , a former currency speculator who since became known as "the leading patron of German theatre." [ 5 ] There he met Eva König , his future wife. His work in Hamburg formed the basis of his pioneering work on drama, titled Hamburgische Dramaturgie . Unfortunately, because of financial losses due to pirated editions of the Hamburgische Dramaturgie , the Hamburg Theatre closed just three years later.

[ 6 ] In 1770, Lessing became librarian at the ducal library, now the Herzog August Library ( Herzog-August-Bibliothek , Bibliotheca Augusta ), in Wolfenbüttel under the commission of the Duke of Brunswick. His tenure there was energetic, if interrupted by many journeys. In 1775, for example, he accompanied Prince Leopold to Italy. Follower of Spinoza 's philosophy, [ 7 ] on 14 October 1771, Lessing was initiated into Freemasonry in the lodge "Zu den drei Goldenen Rosen" in Hamburg.

[ 8 ] In 1773, he discovered Archimedes ' cattle problem in a Greek manuscript containing a poem of 44 lines, in the Herzog August Library in Wolfenbüttel. This problem would remain unsolved until 1880. In 1776, he married Eva König , who was then a widow, in Jork (near Hamburg). She died in 1778 after giving birth to a short-lived son. On 15 February 1781, Lessing, aged 52, died during a visit to the wine dealer Angott in Brunswick .

Lessing was also famous for his friendship with Jewish-German philosopher Moses Mendelssohn . A 2003 biography of Mendelssohn's grandson, Felix , describes their friendship as one of the most "illuminating metaphors [for] the clarion call of the Enlightenment for religious tolerance ".

[ 9 ] It was this relationship that sparked his interest in popular religious debates of the time. He began publishing heated pamphlets on his beliefs which were eventually banned. It was this banishment that inspired him to return to theatre to portray his views and to write Nathan the Wise .

Works [ edit ] Early in his life, Lessing showed interest in the theatre. In his theoretical and critical writings on the subject—as in his own plays—he tried to contribute to the development of a new type of theatre in Germany. With this he especially turned against the then predominant literary theory of Gottsched [ 10 ] and his followers. Lessing's Hamburgische Dramaturgie ran critiques of plays that were performed in the Hamburg Theatre, but after dealing with dissatisfied actors and actresses, Lessing redirected his writings to more of an analysis on the proper uses of drama. Lessing advocated the outline of drama in Aristotle's Poetics . He believed the French Academy had devalued the uses of drama through their neoclassical rules of form and separation of genres. His repeated opinions on this issue influenced theatre practitioners who began the movement of rejecting theatre rules known as Sturm und Drang ("Storm and Stress").

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] He also supported serious reception of Shakespeare 's works. He worked with many theatre groups (e.g. that of the Neuberin ).

Eva Lessing Home, Wolfenbüttel In Hamburg he tried with others to set up the German National Theatre . Today his own works appear as prototypes of the later developed bourgeois German drama. Scholars see Miss Sara Sampson and Emilia Galotti as amongst the first bourgeois tragedies , Minna von Barnhelm (Minna of Barnhelm) as the model for many classic German comedies, Nathan the Wise ( Nathan der Weise ) as the first German drama of ideas ("Ideendrama"). His theoretical writings Laocoön and Hamburg Dramaturgy ( Hamburgische Dramaturgie ) set the standards for the discussion of aesthetic and literary theoretical principles. Lessing advocated that dramaturgs should carry their work out working directly with theatre companies rather than in isolation.

[ 13 ] In his religious and philosophical writings he defended the faithful Christian's right for freedom of thought. He argued against the belief in revelation and the holding on to a literal interpretation of the Bible by the predominant orthodox doctrine through a problem later to be called Lessing's Ditch . Lessing outlined the concept of the religious "Proof of Power": How can miracles continue to be used as a base for Christianity when we have no proof of miracles? Historical truths which are in doubt cannot be used to prove metaphysical truths (such as God's existence). As Lessing says it: "That, then, is the ugly great ditch which I cannot cross, however often and however earnestly I have tried to make that leap." [ 14 ] In the final leg of his life, Lessing threw himself into an intense evaluation of theology and religion. He did much of his studying by reading manuscripts he found while working as a librarian. While working for the Duke, he formed a close friendship with a family by the name of Reimarus. The family held an unpublished manuscript by Hermann Samuel Reimarus which attacked the historicity of Christian revelation. Despite discouragement from his brother Karl Gotthelf Lessing , he began publishing pieces of the manuscript in pamphlets known as Fragments from an Unnamed Author . The controversial pamphlets resulted in a heated debate between him and another theologian, Johann Melchior Goeze . In concern for tarnishing his reputation, Goeze requested the government put an end to the feud, and Lessing was silenced through a law that took away his freedom from censorship.

[ 15 ] In response, Lessing relied upon his skills as a playwright to write what is undoubtedly his most influential play, Nathan the Wise . In the play, Lessing set up tension between Judaism , Islam , and Christianity by having one character ask Nathan which religion was the most genuine. Nathan avoids the question by telling the parable of the three rings, which implies the idea that no specific religion is the "correct religion." The Enlightenment ideas to which Lessing held tight were portrayed through his "ideal of humanity," stating that religion is relative to the individual's ability to reason.

Nathan the Wise is considered to be the first example of the German "literature of humanity". 
As a child of the Enlightenment he trusted in a "Christianity of Reason", which oriented itself by the spirit of religion. He believed that human reason (initiated by criticism and dissent) would develop, even without help by a divine revelation. In his writing The Education of Humankind ( Die Erziehung des Menschengeschlechts ), often translated as The Education of the Human Race , he extensively and coherently lays out his position.

The idea of freedom (for the theatre against the dominance of its French model; for religion from the church's dogma) is his central theme throughout his life. Therefore, he also stood up for the liberation of the upcoming middle and upper class from the nobility making up their minds for them.

In his own literary existence he also constantly strove for independence. But his ideal of a possible life as a free author was hard to keep up against the economic constraints he faced. His project of authors self-publishing their works, which he tried to accomplish in Hamburg with C. J. Bode , failed.

[ citation needed ] Lessing is important as a literary critic for his work Laocoon: An Essay on the Limits of Painting and Poetry . In this work, he argues against the tendency to take Horace 's ut pictura poesis (as painting, so poetry) as prescriptive for literature. In other words, he objected to trying to write poetry using the same devices as one would in painting. Instead, poetry and painting each has its character (the former is extended in time; the latter is extended in space). This is related to Lessing's turn from French classicism to Aristotelian mimesis , discussed above.

Attack by Johann Daniel Müller [ edit ] The Radical Pietist Johann Daniel Müller [ de ] (born 1716 in Wissenbach/Nassau, today part of Eschenburg , deceased after 1785) published the following anonymous book against Lessing and Reimarus: Johann Daniel Müller: Der Sieg der Wahrheit des Worts Gottes über die Lügen des Wolfenbüttelschen Bibliothecarii , [Gotthold] Ephraim Lessing, und seines Fragmenten-Schreibers [i. e. Hermann Samuel Reimarus] in ihren Lästerungen gegen Jesum Christum, seine Jünger, Apostel, und die ganze Bibel.

1780.

Cf. Reinhard Breymayer: Ein unbekannter Gegner Gotthold Ephraim Lessings. Der ehemalige Frankfurter Konzertdirektor Johann Daniel Müller aus Wissenbach/Nassau (1716 bis nach 1785), Alchemist im Umkreis [Johann Wolfgang] Goethes, Kabbalist , separatistischer Chiliast , Freund der Illuminaten von Avignon ("Elias / Elias Artista") Dietrich Meyer (Ed.): Pietismus – Herrnhutertum – Erweckungsbewegung .

Festschrift für Erich Beyreuther . Köln [Pulheim-Brauweiler] and Bonn 1982 ( Schriftenreihe des Vereins für Rheinische Kirchengeschichte , volume 70), pp. 109–145, and p. 108 Silhouette of [Johann] Daniel Müller.

Selected works [ edit ] Grave, Brunswick Second edition of Nathan the Wise in its first year of publication 1779. In the Jewish Museum of Switzerland's collection.

Der junge Gelehrte ( The Young Scholar ) (1748) Der Freigeist ( The Freethinker ) (1749) Die Juden ( The Jews ) (1749) Miss Sara Sampson (1755) Philotas (1759) Fabeln ( Fables ) (1759) Laokoön oder Über die Grenzen der Malerei und Poesie (Laocoön) (1767) Minna von Barnhelm (Minna of Barnhelm) (1767) Hamburgische Dramaturgie (1767–69) Emilia Galotti (1772) Anti-Goeze (1778) (written against Johann Melchior Goeze , pastor in Hamburg) Nathan der Weise ( Nathan the Wise ) (1779) Ernst und Falk – Gespräche für Freymäurer (1776–1778) Die Erziehung des Menschengeschlechts ( The Education of the Human Race ) (1780) English translations [ edit ] An 1886 edition of Lessing's collected works Fables and epigrams . London, Printed for J.& H.L. Hunt, 1825.

Laocoon: or, The limits of Poetry and Painting , translated by William Ross. London, Ridgeway, 1836.

Nathan the Wise: a dramatic poem in five acts , translated by Adolph Reich. London, A. W. Bennett, 1860.

Nathan, the Wise. A dramatic poem of five acts , translated by Dr. Isidor Kalisch. New York, Waldheimer & Zenn, 1869.

The Education of the Human Race , translated by Fred W. Robertson, M.A.. London, C.K. Paul & Co., 1881.

Plays of Lessing: Nathan the Wise and Minna von Barnhelm , translated by Ernest Bell. London, G. Bell, 1888.

Selected prose works of G. E. Lessing , translated by E. C. Beasley, B. A., and Helen Zimmern. London, G. Bell and sons, 1890.

Lessing’s Emilia Galotti , with footnotes and vocabulary; New York, Hinds & Noble, 1899.

Lessing’s Nathan der Weise , with footnotes and vocabulary. New York, Hinds & Noble, 1899.

Laocoon. An essay upon the limits of painting and poetry: With remarks illustrative of various points in the history of ancient art , translated by Ellen Frothingham . Boston, Little, Brown, 1904.

Laocoon , translated by Sir Robert Phillimore, London, G. Routledge & sons, 1905.

Minna von Barnhelm , edited with an introduction, German questions, notes and vocabulary, by Philip Schuyler Allen. New York, Charles E. Merrill Co., 1907.

Minna von Barnhelm; or, Soldier’s fortune translated by Otto Heller . New York, H. Holt and company, 1917.

Nathan the Wise; a dramatic poem in five acts , translated and edited by Leo Markun. Girard, Kan., Haldeman-Julius Co., 1926.

Laocoon, Nathan the Wise, Minna von Barnhelm , translated by William A. Steel. London, J. M. Dent & sons, ltd.; New York, E. P. Dutton & co., inc., 1930.

Nathan the Wise , translated by Berthold August Eisenlohr. Ann Arbor, Mich., Lithoprinted by Edwards Brothers, inc., 1942.

Nathan the Wise , translated by Guenther Reinhardt . Brooklyn, Barron's Educational Series, inc., 1950.

Nathan the Wise; a dramatic poem in five acts , translated into English verse by Bayard Quincy Morgan. New York, Ungar, 1955.

Theological Writings; Selections in Translation with an Introductory Essay , by Henry Chadwick. London, A. & C. Black, 1956.

Lessing's Theological Writings . Selections in Translation, edited by Henry Chadwick. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1957.

Emilia Galotti: a tragedy in five acts , translated by Anna Johanna Gode von Aesch. Great Neck, N.Y., Barron's Educational Series, inc., 1959.

Emilia Galotti, a tragedy in five acts , translated by Edward Dvoretzky. New York, Ungar, 1962, reprinted German Book Center, 2003.

Hamburg dramaturgy , translated by Victor Lange. New York, Dover Publications, 1962. Reprint of Helen Zimmern's 1890 translation.

Laocoon: an essay on the limits of painting and poetry , translated by Edward Allen McCormick. Indianapolis, Bobbs-Merrill, 1962.

Minna von Barnhelm: a comedy in five acts , translated by Kenneth J. Northcott. Chicago, University of Chicago Press [1972] Nathan the Wise, Minna von Barnhelm, and Other Plays and Writings , edited by Peter Demetz with a foreword by Hannah Arendt. New York: Continuum, 1991.

Nathan the Wise, with Related Documents , translated, edited, and with an introduction by Ronald Schechter. Boston/New York: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2004.

Philosophical and Theological Writings , edited by H. B. Nisbet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.

See also [ edit ] Poetry portal Fable Greek revival Lessing Monument , Tiergarten, Berlin Lessing Theater Pantheism controversy References [ edit ] ^ "Lessing" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins .

^ Luckhurst, Mary (2006).

Dramaturgy: A Revolution in Theatre . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p.

24 .

Gotthold Ephraim Lessing was the world's first officially appointed dramaturg.

^ Cardullo, Bert, ed. (1995).

What is dramaturgy?

. American university studies. New York: P. Lang.

ISBN 978-0-8204-2177-3 .

^ Lamport, F. J.

Lessing and the Drama . New York: Oxford UP, 1981. Print.

^ Wilhelm Kosch , "Seyler, Abel", in Dictionary of German Biography , eds.

Walther Killy and Rudolf Vierhaus , Vol. 9, Walter de Gruyter, 2005, ISBN 978-3-11-096629-9 , p. 308 ^ Lamport, F. J.

Lessing and the Drama . New York: Oxford UP, 1981. Print.

^ Oscar Patterson III (2017).

Rough Mason, Mason, Freemason, Accepted Mason . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 169.

ISBN 9780761869610 .

^ "Gotthold Ephraim Lessing" .

2013 . Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon . Retrieved 12 September 2013 .

^ Todd, R. Larry (2003).

Mendelssohn: A Life in Music . New York: Oxford University Press. p.

1 . Archived from the original on 14 March 2012.

^ Cf.

Andreas Dorschel : Polemik und Schadenfreude. In: Zeitschrift für Ideengeschichte XIII/3 (Autumn 2019), pp. 117–122, esp. p. 119.

^ Wilson, Edwin, and Alvin Goldfarb.

Living Theatre: History of Theatre . 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, 2012. Print.

^ Karen Otterweell, Lessing and the Sturm und Drang: A Reappraisal Revisited , Peter Lang Pub, Inc., 2002. Print.

^ Eckersley, M. 1997. Soundings in the Dramaturgy of the Australian Theatre Director. University of Melbourne. Melbourne. p 9.

^ Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. "On the proof of the spirit and of power." Lessing: Philosophical and theological writings , p. 87. H. B. Nisbet (translator and editor). Cambridge University Press, 2005 ^ Vallee, Gerard.

Soundings in G.E. Lessing's Philosophy of Religion . Lanham: University of America, 2000. Print.

Further reading [ edit ] Hazard, Paul.

European thought in the eighteenth century from Montesquieu to Lessing (1954). pp 416–34 on his deism.

Nisbet, Hugh Barr.

Gotthold Ephraim Lessing: His Life, Works and Thought , Oxford University Press, 2013 Liptzin, Sol. Historical Survey of German Literature. New York: Cooper Square Publishers, 1936.

Priest, George. A Brief History of German Literature. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1909.

Robertson, John. A History of German Literature. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1902.

Rose, Ernst. A History of German Literature. New York: New York University, 1960.

Sime, James (1882).

"Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. XIV (9th ed.).

Sime, James ; Robertson, John George (1911).

"Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 16 (11th ed.). pp.

496– 499.

Tononi, Fabio. “Gotthold Ephraim Lessing on Laocoön : Empathy, Motor Imagery, and Predictive Processing”, in History, Practice and Pedagogy: Empathic Engagements in the Visual Arts , ed. by Susan Barahal and Elizabeth Pugliano. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, 2024, pp. 11–30.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Gotthold Ephraim Lessing Wikiquote has quotations related to Gotthold Ephraim Lessing .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gotthold Ephraim Lessing .

Works by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Gotthold Ephraim Lessing at the Internet Archive Works by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Minna von Barnhelm , by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (in English) Literary and Philosophical Essays: French, German and Italian, 1910, includes The Education of the Human Race , by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (in English) Nathan the Wise , by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (in English) The Parable of the Ring (in English) Laocoon (in English) The Dramatic Works of G.E. Lessing (in English) Gotthold Ephraim Lessing: His Life and his Works (1878) by Helen Zimmern "Works by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing" .

Zeno.org (in German).

Works by Gotthold Ephraim Lessing at Projekt Gutenberg (in German) All poems of Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (in German) Coin to commemorate his 200th birth anniversary v t e Gotthold Ephraim Lessing Works The Jews (1754) Miss Sara Sampson (1755) Minna von Barnhelm (1767) Hamburg Dramaturgy (1767–69) Emilia Galotti (1772) Nathan the Wise (1779) Other Hamburg National Theatre Eva König (wife) Lessing Monument Lessing Theater v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e German-language literature Related articles German language History of Germany History of Austria History of Switzerland History of Liechtenstein Old High German literature Middle High German literature Early New High German literature Sturm und Drang Weimar Classicism Romanticism Literary realism Weimar culture Exilliteratur Pop literature Austrian literature Swiss literature German studies Related categories Austrian writers German writers Liechtenstein writers Swiss writers in German Category:Translators of William Shakespeare Reformation era literature Medieval Minnesang Courtly romance Der von Kürenberg Dietmar von Aist Reinmar von Hagenau Hartmann von Aue Walther von der Vogelweide Wolfram von Eschenbach Albrecht von Johansdorf Heinrich von Morungen Gottfried von Strassburg Dietrich von Bern Nibelungenlied Early modern Simon Dach Paul Fleming Hans Folz Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen Andreas Gryphius Christian Hoffmann von Hoffmannswaldau Johann Michael Moscherosch Martin Opitz Hans Sachs Angelus Silesius Anthony Ulrich, Duke of Brunswick Georg Wickram 18th century Barthold Heinrich Brockes Christian Gellert Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Johann Christoph Gottsched Johann Christian Günther Friedrich Hölderlin Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock Meta Klopstock Jakob Michael Reinhold Lenz Gotthold Ephraim Lessing Magnus Gottfried Lichtwer Novalis (Friedrich von Hardenberg) Jean Paul Friedrich Schiller Johann Gottfried Schnabel Christoph Martin Wieland 19th century Bettina von Arnim Achim von Arnim Clemens Brentano Georg Büchner Adelbert von Chamisso Annette von Droste-Hülshoff Marie von Ebner-Eschenbach Joseph von Eichendorff Theodor Fontane Gustav Freytag Jeremias Gotthelf Franz Grillparzer Jacob Grimm Wilhelm Grimm Gerhart Hauptmann Christian Friedrich Hebbel Johann Peter Hebel Heinrich Heine Georg Herwegh Paul Heyse E. T. A. Hoffmann Friedrich Hölderlin Gottfried Keller Heinrich von Kleist Nikolaus Lenau Karl May Conrad Ferdinand Meyer Eduard Mörike Johann Nestroy Wilhelm Raabe Adalbert Stifter Theodor Storm Ludwig Tieck Ludwig Uhland 20th century Ilse Aichinger May Ayim Ingeborg Bachmann Hermann Bahr Vicki Baum Johannes R. Becher Gottfried Benn Thomas Bernhard Hugo Bettauer Heinrich Böll Thomas Brasch Volker Braun Bertolt Brecht Rolf Dieter Brinkmann Hermann Broch Arnolt Bronnen Hermann Burger Elias Canetti Paul Celan Alfred Döblin Heimito von Doderer Friedrich Dürrenmatt Lion Feuchtwanger Marieluise Fleißer Erich Fried Max Frisch Stefan George Günter Grass Peter Handke Marlen Haushofer Hermann Hesse Georg Heym Wolfgang Hilbig Hugo von Hofmannsthal Ödön von Horváth Ricarda Huch Peter Huchel Ernst Jandl Uwe Johnson Ernst Jünger Franz Kafka Marie Luise Kaschnitz Erich Kästner Bernhard Kellermann Hermann Kesten Irmgard Keun Sarah Kirsch Egon Erwin Kisch Siegfried Kracauer Karl Kraus Else Lasker-Schüler Kurd Laßwitz Gert Ledig Siegfried Lenz Heinrich Mann Klaus Mann Thomas Mann Friederike Mayröcker Christian Morgenstern Erich Mühsam Heiner Müller Adolf Muschg Robert Musil Erich Maria Remarque Rainer Maria Rilke Joseph Roth Nelly Sachs Ernst von Salomon Paul Scheerbart Arthur Schnitzler Helga Schubert Kurt Schwitters W. G. Sebald Anna Seghers Bertha von Suttner Ernst Toller Georg Trakl Kurt Tucholsky Robert Walser Josef Weinheber Peter Weiss Franz Werfel Christa Wolf Stefan Zweig Contemporary writers Zsuzsa Bánk Thomas Brussig Dietmar Dath Jenny Erpenbeck Rainald Goetz Durs Grünbein Peter Handke Judith Hermann Elfriede Jelinek Reinhard Jirgl Wladimir Kaminer Daniel Kehlmann Esther Kinsky Alexander Kluge Barbara Köhler Christian Kracht Monika Maron Clemens Meyer Terézia Mora Herta Müller Sharon Dodua Otoo Emine Sevgi Özdamar Teresa Präauer Julya Rabinowich Rafik Schami Ingo Schulze Lutz Seiler Clemens J. Setz Botho Strauss Yoko Tawada Uwe Timm Ilija Trojanow Jan Wagner Martin Walser Peter Wawerzinek Wolf Wondratschek Feridun Zaimoğlu Juli Zeh German-language Nobel laureates Theodor Mommsen Rudolf Christoph Eucken Paul Heyse Gerhart Hauptmann Carl Spitteler Thomas Mann Hermann Hesse Nelly Sachs Heinrich Böll Elias Canetti Günter Grass Elfriede Jelinek Herta Müller Peter Handke German-language literary awards Ingeborg Bachmann Prize Georg Büchner Prize Sigmund Freud Prize Adelbert von Chamisso Prize Hans Fallada Prize Goethe Prize Heinrich Heine Prize Kleist Prize Leipzig Book Fair Prize Nelly Sachs Prize Kurd Laßwitz Award Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz RKD Artists KulturNav FID People Netherlands BMLO Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐48pdp
Cached time: 20250817045428
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.886 seconds
Real time usage: 1.051 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3899/1000000
Revision size: 26097/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 158414/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5109/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 72305/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.581/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18193844/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  880.701      1 -total
 16.46%  144.952      1 Template:IPA
 15.17%  133.585      1 Template:Infobox_writer
 14.36%  126.504      1 Template:Infobox
 12.95%  114.028      3 Template:Sister_project
 12.77%  112.428      3 Template:Side_box
 12.41%  109.257      1 Template:Wikisource
 12.34%  108.699      1 Template:Reflist
 12.09%  106.460      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
 11.76%  103.556      1 Template:Wikisource/inner_core Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12305:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045428 and revision id 1302026466. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gotthold_Ephraim_Lessing&oldid=1302026466 " Categories : Gotthold Ephraim Lessing 1729 births 1781 deaths 18th-century German dramatists and playwrights 18th-century German Protestant theologians 18th-century German poets 18th-century German philosophers Christian poets Enlightenment philosophers German Christians German male non-fiction writers Members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences People from Kamenz People from the Electorate of Saxony People of the Age of Enlightenment Protestant philosophers Leipzig University alumni University of Wittenberg alumni Wolfenbüttel German Freemasons German male poets German male dramatists and playwrights German-language poets Vossische Zeitung people Spinozists Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2023 Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Commons link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 23:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gotthold Ephraim Lessing 69 languages Add topic

