Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early history and overview 2 Russian left communism 3 1952–1968 4 Since 1968 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Left communism 27 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political ideology Not to be confused with the Left Opposition , a Russian communist faction led by Leon Trotsky in the 1920s.

"Left Communists" redirects here. For the historical groups, see Left Communists (Soviet Russia) and Left Communists (Weimar Republic) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Left communism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Left communism Concepts Anti-Leninism Anti-Stalinist left Class consciousness Class struggle Communism Mass strike Organic centralism Proletarian internationalism Workers' council World revolution Movements Bordigism In China Communization Council communism Situationist International People Jan Appel Amadeo Bordiga Arrigo Cervetto Marc Chirik Onorato Damen Bruno Fortichiari Herman Gorter Paul Mattick Grandizo Munis Gavril Myasnikov Sylvia Pankhurst Anton Pannekoek Lorenzo Parodi Otto Rühle Karl Schröder Julien Coupat Organizations Extant Communist Struggle Communist Workers' Organisation International Communist Current International Communist Party Internationalist Communist Party The Invisible Committee Defunct Anti-Parliamentary Communist Federation Communist Bulletin Group Communist League Communist Workers' International Communist Workers' Party of Germany Forward Hunan Provincial Proletarian Revolutionary Great Alliance Committee International Socialists of Germany League for Proletarian Culture Left Communists Marxist Working Group Revolutionary Socialist Party Revolutionary Workers Ferment Socialism or Barbarism Solidarity Workers' Group Workers' Opposition Workers' Socialist Federation Workers' Truth Tiqqun Related topics Autonomism Classical Marxism Impossibilism Industrial unionism Ultra-leftism Workerism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Left communism , or the communist left , is a position held by the left wing of communism , which criticises the political ideas and practices held by Marxist–Leninists and social democrats .

[ 1 ] Left communists assert positions which they regard as more authentically Marxist than the views of Marxism–Leninism espoused by the Communist International after its Bolshevization by Joseph Stalin and during its second congress .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] There have been two primary currents of left communism since World War I , namely the Italian left and the Dutch–German left. The Italian left tends to follow Bordigism and considers itself to be Leninist , but denounces Marxism–Leninism as a form of bourgeois opportunism materialized in the Soviet Union under Stalin . The Dutch–German left split from Vladimir Lenin prior to Stalin's rule and supports a firmly council communist and libertarian Marxist viewpoint as opposed to the Italian left which emphasised the need for an international revolutionary party.

[ 5 ] The Italian current of left communism was historically represented by the Italian Socialist Party and the Communist Party of Italy but today is embodied in the Internationalist Communist Party of Italy , International Communist Party , and the International Communist Current . The Dutch–German current of left communism was historically represented by the Communist Workers' Party of Germany , General Workers' Union of Germany , and the Communist Workers' International .

Left communism differs from most other forms of Marxism in believing that communists should not participate in democratic elections, and some argue against participating in trade unions. However, many left communists split over their criticism of the Bolsheviks .

Council communists criticised the Bolsheviks for use of the party form and emphasised a more autonomous organisation of the working class, without political parties.

Although she was murdered in 1919 before left communism became a distinct tendency, Rosa Luxemburg has been heavily influential for most left communists, both politically and theoretically. Proponents of left communism have included Herman Gorter , Antonie Pannekoek , Otto Rühle , Karl Korsch , Amadeo Bordiga and Paul Mattick .

[ 2 ] Other proponents of left communism have included Onorato Damen , Jacques Camatte , and Sylvia Pankhurst . Later prominent theorists are shared with other tendencies such as Antonio Negri , a founding theorist of the autonomist tendency .

[ 6 ] Early history and overview [ edit ] Two major traditions can be observed within left communism, namely the Dutch–German current and the Italian current.

[ 7 ] The political positions those traditions share are opposition to popular fronts , to many kinds of nationalism and national liberation movements and to parliamentarianism .

[ citation needed ] The historical origins of left communism come from World War I .

[ 8 ] Most left communists are supportive of the October Revolution in Russia, but retain a critical view of its development. However, some in the Dutch–German current would in later years come to reject the idea that the revolution had a proletarian or socialist nature, arguing that it had simply carried out the tasks of the bourgeois revolution by creating a state capitalist system.

[ 9 ] Left communism first came into focus as a distinct movement around 1918. Its essential features were a stress on the need to build a communist party or workers' council entirely separate from the reformist and centrist elements who "betrayed the proletariat", opposition to all but the most restricted participation in elections and an emphasis on militancy. Apart from this, there was little in common between the two wings. Only the Italians accepted the need for electoral work at all for a very short period of time which they later vehemently opposed, attracting criticism from Vladimir Lenin in "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder .

[ 10 ] Russian left communism [ edit ] Left Bolshevism emerged in 1907 as the Vpered group challenged Vladimir Lenin 's perceived authoritarianism and parliamentarianism. The group included Alexander Bogdanov , Maxim Gorky , Anatoly Lunacharsky , Mikhail Pokrovsky , Grigory Aleksinsky , Stanislav Volski and Martyn Liadov . The Otzovists , or Recallists, advocated the recall of RSDLP representatives from the Third Duma . Bogdanov and his allies accused Lenin and his partisans of promoting liberal democracy through " parliamentarism at any price".

[ 11 ] : 8 The faction largely died out by the end of 1918, as its leaders accepted that much of their program was unrealistic under the circumstances of the Russian Civil War and as the policies of War Communism satisfied their demands for a radical transformation of the economy. The Military Opposition and the Workers' Opposition inherited some characteristics and members of the Left Bolsheviks, as did Gavril Myasnikov 's Workers Group of the Russian Communist Party during the debates on the New Economic Policy and the succession to Lenin. Most Left Bolsheviks were affiliated with the Left Opposition in the 1920s, and were expelled from the party in 1927 and later killed during Joseph Stalin 's Great Purge .

[ 12 ] 1952–1968 [ edit ] See also: Left communism in China and Shengwulian Examples of left communism ideological currents existed in China during the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution (GPCR). For example, the Hunan rebel group the Shengwulian argued for "smashing" the existing state apparatus and establishing a "People's Commune of China" based on the democratic ideals of the Paris Commune .

[ 13 ] Since 1968 [ edit ] The uprisings of May 1968 led to a large resurgence of interest in left communist ideas in France where various groups were formed and published journals regularly until the late 1980s when the interest started to fade.

[ 14 ] A tendency called communization was invented in the early 1970s by French left communists, synthesizing different currents of left communism. It remains influential in libertarian marxist and left communist circles today.

[ 15 ] Outside of France, various small left communist groups emerged, predominantly in the leading capitalist countries.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] In the late 1970s and early 1980s the Internationalist Communist Party initiated a series of conferences of the communist left to engage those new elements, also attended by the International Communist Current .

[ 20 ] As a result of these, in 1983 the International Bureau for the Revolutionary Party (later renamed as the Internationalist Communist Tendency) was established by the Internationalist Communist Party and the British Communist Workers' Organisation .

[ 21 ] Prominent post-1968 proponents of left communism have included Paul Mattick and Maximilien Rubel . Prominent left communist groups existing today include the International Communist Party , the International Communist Current and the Internationalist Communist Tendency .

[ 22 ] In addition to the left communist groups in the direct lineage of the Italian and Dutch traditions, a number of groups with similar positions have flourished since 1968, such as the workerist and autonomist movements in Italy; Kolinko, Kurasje, Wildcat; [ 23 ] Subversion and Aufheben in England; Théorie Communiste, Echanges et Mouvements and Démocratie Communiste in France; TPTG [ 24 ] and Blaumachen [ 25 ] in Greece; Kamunist Kranti in India; and Collective Action Notes and Loren Goldner in the United States.

See also [ edit ] Communism portal Marxism Orthodox Marxism Autonomism Authoritarian socialism Council communism Left-wing politics Left communism in China Libertarian socialism List of left-wing internationals List of left communists Luxemburgism Ultra-leftism References [ edit ] ^ Bordiga, Amadeo (1926).

The Communist Left in the Third International . Retrieved 23 September 2021 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ a b Gorter, Hermann ; Pannekoek, Antonie ; Pankhurst, Sylvia ; Rühle, Otto (2007).

Non-Leninist Marxism: Writings on the Workers Councils . St. Petersburg, Florida: Red and Black Publishers .

ISBN 978-0-9791813-6-8 .

^ Bordiga, Amadeo .

Dialogue with Stalin . Retrieved 15 May 2019 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Kowalski, Ronald I. (1991).

The Bolshevik Party in Conflict: The Left Communist Opposition of 1918 . Basingstoke, England: Palgrave MacMillan . p. 2.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-10367-6 .

ISBN 978-1-349-10369-0 .

^ Bourrinet, Philippe.

"The Bordigist Current (1919-1999)" . Archived from the original on 20 January 2022.

^ Negri, Antonio (1991).

Marx beyond Marx: Lessons on the Grundrisse . Translated by Ryan, Michael. New York: Autonomedia .

^ Smeaton, A. (1 August 2003).

"Background on the Italian Communist Left, Bordiga and Bordigism" .

Internationalist Communist . No. 22 . Retrieved 17 October 2013 – via Leftcom.

^ Luxemburg, Rosa (1915).

The Junius Pamphlet . Retrieved 23 September 2021 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Fox, Michael S. (Spring 1991).

"Ante Ciliga, Trotskii, and State Capitalism: Theory, Tactics, and Reevaluation during the Purge Era, 1935–1939" (PDF) .

Slavic Review .

50 (1).

Cambridge University Press : 127– 143.

doi : 10.2307/2500604 .

JSTOR 2500604 .

S2CID 155654843 . Archived from the original on 27 October 2009 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 – via GeoCities.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Lenin, V.I.

Left-Wing Communism: an Infantile Disorder . Retrieved 17 October 2013 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Sochor, Z. A. (28 March 1988).

Revolution and Culture: The Bogdanov-Lenin Controversy .

Cornell University Press . pp.

4– 8.

ISBN 9780801420887 .

^ Smele, Jonathan D. (2015).

Historical Dictionary of the Russian Civil Wars, 1916–1926 . Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield . pp.

667– 668.

ISBN 978-1-4422-5280-6 .

^ Meisner, Maurice J.

(1986).

Mao's China and after: a history of the People's Republic (A revised and expanded edition of Mao's China ed.). New York. pp.

343– 344.

ISBN 0-02-920870-X .

OCLC 13270932 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Archive of French left communist journals after 1952" .

Archives Autonomies . Retrieved 12 April 2020 .

^ "On Communisation and Its Theorists" .

Endnotes . Retrieved 12 April 2020 .

^ "May 68: the student movement in France and the world" .

Internationalism . Retrieved 19 December 2015 .

^ Lassou (May 2012).

"Contribution to a history of the workers' movement in Africa (v): May 1968 in Senegal" .

Internationalism . Retrieved 19 December 2015 .

^ Ken (23 March 2008).

"1968 in Japan: the student movement and workers' struggles" .

Internationalism . Retrieved 19 December 2015 .

^ "1968 in Germany (Part 1): Behind the protest movement – the search for a new society" .

Internationalism . 26 May 2008 . Retrieved 19 December 2015 .

^ Bourrinet, Philippe (2000).

The "Bordigist" Current (1912-1952) . pp.

332– 333.

^ "Internationalist Communist Tendency" . January 2000.

^ Bourseiller, Christophe (2003).

Histoire générale de l'Ultra-Gauche [ General history of the Ultra-Left ] (in French). Paris: Editions Denoël.

ISBN 2207251632 .

^ "Wildcat" . Wildcat-www.de. 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 17 October 2013 .

^ "Ta paidiá tis galarías" Τα παιδιά της γαλαρίας [The children of the gallery] (in Greek). Tapaidiatisgalarias.org . Retrieved 17 October 2013 .

^ "Blaumachen – journal" . Blaumachen.gr . Retrieved 17 October 2013 .

Further reading [ edit ] Non-Leninist Marxism: Writings on the Workers Councils (2007) (includes texts by Herman Gorter , Antonie Pannekoek , Sylvia Pankhurst and Otto Rühle ). St. Petersburg, Florida: Red and Black Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-9791813-6-8 .

Alexandra Kollontai: Selected Writing . Allison & Busby, 1984.

Pannekoek, Anton.

Workers Councils . AK Press, 2003. Introduction by Noam Chomsky The International Communist Current, itself a left communist grouping, has produced a series of studies of what it views as its own antecedents. In particular, the book on the Dutch–German current, which is by Philippe Bourrinet (who later left the ICC), contains an exhaustive bibliography.

The Italian Communist Left 1926–1945 ( ISBN 1897980132 ).

The Dutch-German Communist Left ( ISBN 1899438378 ).

The Russian Communist Left, 1918–1930 ( ISBN 1897980108 ).

The British Communist Left, 1914–1945 ( ISBN 1897980116 ).

Also of interest is volume 5 number 4 of Spring 1995 of the journal Revolutionary History . "Through Fascism, War and Revolution: Trotskyism and Left Communism in Italy".

In addition, there is a good deal of material published on the Internet in various languages. A useful starting point is the Left Communism collection published on the Marxists Internet Archive .

v t e Left communism Concepts Anti-Leninism Anti-Stalinist left Class consciousness Class struggle Communism Mass strike Organic centralism Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary spontaneity Workers' council World revolution People Jan Appel Amadeo Bordiga Jacques Camatte Cornelius Castoriadis Marc Chirik Onorato Damen Gilles Dauvé Guy Debord Bruno Fortichiari Herman Gorter Rosa Luxemburg Paul Mattick Grandizo Munis Gavril Myasnikov Sylvia Pankhurst Antonie Pannekoek Otto Rühle Karl Schröder Organizations Communist Workers' Party of Germany Communist Workers' International Communist Workers' Organisation (UK) Internationalist Communist Party (Italy) International Communist Party International Communist Current List of left communist organizations by country Revolutionary Socialist Party (Netherlands) Socialisme ou Barbarie Related topics Autonomism Classical Marxism Impossibilism Ultra-leftism Workerism Politics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Left_communism&oldid=1301104840 " Categories : Left communism Communism Anti-Stalinist left Marxist schools of thought Types of socialism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 uses Greek-language script (el) CS1 Greek-language sources (el) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2021 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from June 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 03:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Left communism 27 languages Add topic

