Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Operations 3 Programming Toggle Programming subsection 3.1 PBS Kids 3.2 Sports 4 Governance 5 Member stations Toggle Member stations subsection 5.1 Participating stations 6 PBS networks Toggle PBS networks subsection 6.1 Independent networks 7 Visual identity 8 Reception Toggle Reception subsection 8.1 Critical response 8.2 On-air fundraising 9 Controversies Toggle Controversies subsection 9.1 Accusations of political/ideological bias 9.1.1 Accusations during Tomlinson tenure 9.2 Second Trump administration 9.2.1 FCC underwriting investigation 9.2.2 Executive Order 14290 9.2.3 Rescissions Act of 2025 9.3 Lawsuit with Pacific Arts 10 Warning, Alert and Response Network (WARN) 11 See also Toggle See also subsection 11.1 Similar public broadcasting services 12 Notes 13 References Toggle References subsection 13.1 Works cited 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents PBS 48 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Русский Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°51′44″N 77°03′01″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8621°N 77.0503°W ﻿ / 38.8621; -77.0503 Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 17 August 2025 .

American public broadcaster and television network This article is about the American broadcaster. For other uses, see PBS (disambiguation) .

"Public Broadcasting Service" redirects here. For other uses, see Public broadcasting service (disambiguation) .

Television channel PBS Logo used since 2019.

Type Non-commercial Free-to-air television network Public broadcaster Country United States 38°51′44″N 77°03′01″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8621°N 77.0503°W ﻿ / 38.8621; -77.0503 Broadcast area Nationwide United States Parts of Canada Northern Mexico ( OTA only) Affiliates List of member stations Headquarters Arlington County, Virginia , U.S.

Programming Language(s) English Spanish (via SAP audio track, select programs) Picture format HDTV 1080i (some stations transmit PBS programming in 720p or 1080p via ATSC 3.0 in some markets) Ownership Owner PBS's member public television stations [ 1 ] Key people Paula Kerger (president & CEO) Jonathan Barzilay (COO) History Founded November 3, 1969 ; 55 years ago ( 1969-11-03 ) Launched October 5, 1970 ; 54 years ago ( 1970-10-05 ) Founder Hartford N. Gunn Jr.

John Macy James Day Kenneth A. Christiansen Replaced National Educational Television (1952–1970) Links Webcast Watch live (US only) Website www .pbs .org Availability Streaming media Service(s) DirecTV Stream , Hulu + Live TV , Prime Video Live TV , YouTube TV The Public Broadcasting Service ( PBS ) is an American public broadcaster and non-commercial, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] free-to-air television network based in Arlington, Virginia .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] PBS is a publicly funded nonprofit organization and the most prominent provider of educational programs to public television stations in the United States, [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] distributing shows such as Nature , Nova , Frontline , PBS News Hour , Washington Week , Masterpiece , American Experience , and children’s programs such as Mister Rogers' Neighborhood , Sesame Street , Barney & Friends , Arthur , Curious George , The Magic School Bus , and others .

[ 14 ] Certain stations also provide spillover service to Canada .

[ 15 ] PBS is funded by a combination of member station dues, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting , pledge drives , and donations from both private foundations and individual citizens. All proposed funding for programming is subject to a set of standards to ensure the program is free of influence from the funding source.

[ 16 ] PBS has over 350 member television stations , [ 17 ] many owned by educational institutions , nonprofit groups both independent or affiliated with one particular local public school district or collegiate educational institution, or entities owned by or related to state government .

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Former PBS headquarters in Crystal City, Virginia PBS was established on November 3, 1969, by Hartford N. Gunn Jr.

(president of WGBH ), John Macy (president of CPB), James Day (last president of National Educational Television ), and Kenneth A. Christiansen (chairman of the department of broadcasting at the University of Florida ).

[ 18 ] It began operations on October 5, 1970, taking over many of the functions of its predecessor, National Educational Television (NET), which later merged with Newark, New Jersey station WNDT to form WNET . In 1973, it merged with Educational Television Stations .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Around the same time, the groups started out the National Public Affairs Broadcast Center (later National Public Affairs Center for Television), which offered news and national affairs to the service.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The group was later merged into member station WETA-TV in 1972.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Immediately after public disclosure of the Watergate scandal , on May 17, 1973, the United States Senate Watergate Committee commenced proceedings; PBS broadcast the proceedings nationwide, with Robert MacNeil and Jim Lehrer as commentators. Although all of the Big Three TV Networks ran coverage of the hearings, PBS rebroadcast them on prime time.

[ 26 ] For seven months, nightly "gavel-to-gavel" broadcasts drew great public interest, and raised the profile of the fledgling PBS network.

[ 27 ] In 1991, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting resumed funding for most PBS shows that debuted prior to 1977, with the exceptions of Washington Week in Review and Wall Street Week (CPB resumed funding of Washington Week in 1997).

In 1994, The Chronicle of Philanthropy released the results of the largest study on the popularity and credibility of charitable and non-profit organizations. PBS ranked as the 11th "most popular charity/non-profit in America" from over 100 charities researched in the study conducted by the industry publication, with 38.2% of Americans over the age of 12 choosing "love" and "like a lot" for PBS.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Since the mid-2000s, Roper Opinion Research polls commissioned by PBS have consistently placed the service as the most-trusted national institution in the United States.

[ 3 ] [ 32 ] A 2016–2017 study by Nielsen Media Research found 80% of all US television households view the network's programs over the course of a year.

[ 5 ] However, PBS is not responsible for all programming carried on public television stations, a large proportion of which may come from its member stations —including WGBH-TV , WETA-TV , WNET , WTTW , WQED , WHYY-TV , Twin Cities PBS — American Public Television , and independent producers. This distinction regarding the origin of different programs on the service presents a frequent source of viewer confusion.

[ 33 ] In December 2009, PBS signed up for the Nielsen ratings audience measurement reports, and began to be included in its primetime and daily "Television Index" reports, alongside the major commercial broadcast networks.

[ 34 ] In May 2011, PBS announced that it would incorporate breaks containing underwriter spots for corporate and foundation sponsors, program promotions and identification spots within four breaks placed within episodes of Nature and NOVA , airing episodes broken up into segments of up to 15 minutes, rather than airing them as straight 50- to 55-minute episodes. The strategy began that fall, with the intent to expand the in-program breaks to the remainder of the schedule if successful.

[ 35 ] In 2011, PBS released apps for iOS and Android to allow viewing of full-length videos on mobile devices.

[ 36 ] "PBS UK" was launched as a paid subscription channel in the United Kingdom on November 1, 2011, featuring American documentary programming sourced from PBS. Better identifying its subject matter, this channel was renamed " PBS America " on July 4, 2012. The channel has subsequently become available in other parts of Europe and Australia.

On February 28, 2012, PBS partnered with AOL to launch Makers: Women Who Make America , a digital documentary series focusing on high-achieving women in male-dominated industries such as war, comedy, space, business, Hollywood and politics.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] PBS initially struggled to compete with online media such as YouTube for market share. In a 2012 speech to 850 top executives from PBS stations, Senior Vice President of Digital Jason Seiken warned that PBS was in danger of being disrupted by YouTube studios such as Maker Studios . In the speech, later described as a "seminal moment" for public television, [ 39 ] he laid out his vision for a new style of PBS digital video production. Station leadership rallied around his vision and Seiken formed PBS Digital Studios , which began producing educational but edgy videos, something Seiken called "PBS-quality with a YouTube sensibility".

[ 40 ] The studio's first hit, an auto-tuned version of the theme from one of their most famous television programs, Mister Rogers' Neighborhood , was one of YouTube's 10 most viral videos of 2012.

[ 41 ] By 2013, monthly video views on PBS.org had risen from 2 million to a quarter-billion, PBS.org traffic had surpassed that of the CBS , NBC , and ABC web sites, PBSKids.org had become the dominant US children's site for video, and PBS had won more 2013 Webby Awards than any other media company in the world.

[ 42 ] On May 8, 2013, full-length episodes of PBS' prime time, news and children's programs were made available through the Roku streaming player; programming is available on Roku as separate streaming channels for "PBS" and " PBS Kids " content.

[ 43 ] Some content is only available with a PBS Passport member benefit subscription.

[ 44 ] On July 1, 2016, Amazon Prime Video and PBS Distribution entered into a multi-year agreement which saw several PBS Kids series on other streaming services move to Amazon Prime Video.

[ 45 ] PBS Distribution partnered with MultiChoice to launch PBS Kids on May 22, 2019, on DStv and GOtv subscription platforms across its Sub-Saharan Africa footprint.

[ 46 ] In mid-2021, the channel was added to Australia's Foxtel subscription platform.

[ 47 ] At the summer 2019 Television Critics Association press tour day for PBS on July 29, 2019, it was announced that MVPD YouTube TV would begin to carry PBS programming and member stations in the fall of 2019. Member stations have the choice of having their traditional channel on the service with its full programming schedule received by Google over-the-air and uploaded to the service, a YouTube TV-only feed provided by the station with some programming substitutions due to lack of digital rights, or a PBS-provided feed with limited localization, though with no local programming or pledge drive programming.

[ 48 ] In 2019, PBS announced plans to move its headquarters to another building in the Crystal Gateway complex, while remaining in Crystal City, Virginia , and did so in 2020, which included a top building sign visible off the Richmond Highway .

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 17 ] On August 4, 2020, the Amazon Prime Video platform added a "PBS Documentaries" package.

[ 51 ] As of that time it offered four separately-subscribable selections of PBS programming in the United States, "PBS Documentaries", "PBS Living" (also on Apple TV), "PBS Masterpiece" (also in Canada) and "PBS KIDS".

[ 52 ] In the UK, a "PBS America" documentaries package became available on Amazon Prime Video.

[ 53 ] On September 3, 2020, PBS began to offer a livestream of their member stations for free via its website (as well as the websites from the member stations), on smart TVs, and on their mobile apps. However, only a small handful of stations currently do not have a livestream of their stations set up.

[ 54 ] Jefferson Graham of USA Today called it "arguably the best bargain in streaming".

[ 55 ] July 1, 2021, saw a PBS Julia Child channel added to Pluto TV and Tubi in the United States.

[ 56 ] The channels "PBS Antiques Roadshow", "Julia Child", "Antiques Road Trip" and "PBS Nature" were added to a number of American FAST platforms in January 2023.

[ 57 ] Antiques Road Trip later became available in Australia. The channels "PBS Food" (in the United States) and "PBS History" (in the UK and Australia) launched on certain FAST platforms in late 2023.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] The channel "PBS Retro" was added to Roku 's live TV channel lineup in the United States on April 23, 2024, airing PBS Kids shows from the 70s, 80s and 90s.

[ 60 ] The "PBS Science" [ 61 ] [ 62 ] channel became available in Australia in 2024. It is also available in the UK and Ireland.

On August 1, 2025, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting , which PBS gets much of its funding from, announced they were going to end operations due to being entirely de-funded by the Rescissions Act of 2025 .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Operations [ edit ] Even with its status as a non-profit [ 8 ] [ 2 ] and educational television network, PBS engages in program distribution. PBS provides television content and related services to its member stations, each of which together cooperatively owns the network.

[ 1 ] Unlike the affiliates for commercial TV networks, each non-profit PBS member station is charged with the responsibility of programming local content such as news, interviews, cultural, and public affairs programs for its individual market or state that supplements content provided by PBS and other public television distributors.

In a commercial broadcast television network structure, affiliates give up portions of their local advertising airtime in exchange for carrying network programming, and the network pays its affiliates a share of the revenue it earns from advertising. By contrast, PBS member stations pay fees for the shows acquired and distributed by the national organization. Under this relationship, PBS member stations have greater latitude in local scheduling than their commercial broadcasting counterparts. Scheduling of PBS-distributed series may vary greatly depending on the market. This can be a source of tension as stations seek to preserve their localism, and PBS strives to market a consistent national lineup. However, PBS has a policy of "common carriage", which requires most stations to clear the national prime time programs on a common programming schedule to market them nationally more effectively. Management at former Los Angeles member KCET cited unresolvable financial and programming disputes among its major reasons for leaving PBS after over 40 years in January 2011, although it would return to PBS in 2019.

[ 65 ] Although PBS has a set schedule of programming, particularly in regard to its prime time schedule, member stations reserve the right to schedule PBS-distributed programming in other time slots or not clear it at all if they choose to do so; few of the service's members carry all its programming. Most PBS stations timeshift some distributed programs. Once PBS accepts a program offered for distribution, PBS, rather than the originating member station, retains exclusive rebroadcasting rights during an agreed period. Suppliers, however, retain the right to sell the program's intellectual property in non-broadcast media such as DVDs, books, and sometimes PBS- licensed merchandise .

Programming [ edit ] Main article: List of programs broadcast by PBS The evening and primetime schedule on PBS features a diverse array of programming including fine arts ( Great Performances ); drama ( Masterpiece , Downton Abbey , American Family: Journey of Dreams ); science ( Nova , Nature ); history ( American Experience , American Masters , History Detectives , Antiques Roadshow ); music ( Austin City Limits , Soundstage ); public affairs ( Frontline , PBS NewsHour , Washington Week , Nightly Business Report ); independent films and documentaries ( P.O.V.

, Independent Lens ); home improvement ( This Old House ); and interviews ( Amanpour & Company , Tavis Smiley , The Dick Cavett Show ).

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] In 2012, PBS began organizing much of its prime time programming around a genre-based schedule (for example, drama series encompass the Sunday schedule, while science-related programs are featured on Wednesdays).

[ 68 ] Unlike its radio counterpart, National Public Radio , PBS does not have a central program production arm or news division. All of the programming carried by PBS, whether news, documentary or entertainment, is created by (or in most cases produced under contract with) other parties, such as individual member stations.

Boston member WGBH-TV is one of the largest producers of educational television programming, including shows like American Experience , Arthur (with Canada-based CINAR ), Masterpiece Theatre , Nova , Antiques Roadshow and Frontline as well as many other children's and lifestyle programs.

[ 69 ] News programs are produced by WETA-TV ( PBS News Hour ) in Washington, D.C., WNET in New York City and WPBT in Miami. Newark, New Jersey/New York City member WNET produces or distributes programs such as Secrets of the Dead , Nature , and Cyberchase . PBS also works with other networks for programming such as CNN International for Amanpour & Company which is a co-production of CNN International and WNET.

[ 70 ] PBS member stations are known for rebroadcasting British television costume dramas , comedies and science fiction programs (acquired from the BBC and other sources) such as Downton Abbey ; 'Allo 'Allo!

; Are You Being Served?

; The Benny Hill Show , Red Dwarf ; The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin ; Father Ted ; Fawlty Towers ; Harry Enfield & Chums ; Keeping Up Appearances ; Monty Python's Flying Circus ; Mr. Bean , The Vicar of Dibley , the original run of Doctor Who , and Sherlock . However, a significant amount of sharing takes place. The BBC and British broadcasters such as Channel 4 often cooperate with PBS stations, producing material that is shown on both sides of the Atlantic . Less frequently, Canadian, Australian and other international programming appears on PBS stations (such as The Red Green Show , currently distributed by syndicator Executive Program Services); public broadcasting syndicators are more likely to offer this programming to U.S.-based public television stations.

PBS is not the only distributor of public television programming to the member stations. Other distributors have emerged from the roots of companies that maintained loosely held regional public television stations in the 1960s.

Boston -based American Public Television , also formerly known as Eastern Educational Network and the American Program Service, among other names, is another major distributor of programming to U.S. non-commercial stations. The National Educational Telecommunications Association (NETA, formerly SECA) is another distributor, with properties including The Shapies and Jerry Yarnell School of Fine Art . In addition, the member stations themselves also produce a variety of local shows, some of which subsequently receive national distribution through PBS or other distributors.

Rerun programming , especially domestic programming not originally produced for public television, is generally uncommon on PBS or its member stations. The most prominent exception to this is The Lawrence Welk Show , which has aired continuously in reruns on PBS (through the Oklahoma Educational Television Authority ) almost every weekend since 1986. Reruns of programs originally produced for public television are common, especially with former PBS shows whose hosts have retired or died (for example, The Joy of Painting and Mister Rogers' Neighborhood ). Children's programming (such as Clifford the Big Red Dog and DragonflyTV , the latter of which is also syndicated on commercial television) is rerun extensively. In 2020 and 2021, PBS served as the over-the-air home to select specials from the Peanuts library , under sublicense from Apple ; [ 71 ] the deal was not renewed in 2022.

[ 72 ] PBS Kids [ edit ] Main article: PBS Kids Launched as PTV on July 11, 1994, PBS Kids is the brand for children's programs aired by PBS. PBS Kids, launched in 1999 and operated until 2005, was largely funded by satellite provider DirecTV . The original channel ceased operations on September 26, 2005, in favor of PBS Kids Sprout , a commercial digital cable and satellite television channel originally operated as a joint venture between PBS, Comcast , Sesame Workshop and Apax Partners ( NBCUniversal , which Comcast acquired in 2011, later acquired the other partners' interests in the channel in 2012). However, the original programming block still exists on PBS, filling daytime and in some cases, weekend morning schedules on its member stations; many members also carry 24-hour locally programmed children's networks featuring PBS Kids content on one of their digital subchannels. A revived version of the PBS Kids Channel was launched on January 16, 2017. As of 2019, PBS Kids is the only children's programming block on U.S. broadcast television.

PAs the children's programs it distributes are intended to educate as well as entertain its target audience, PBS and its stations have long been in compliance with educational programming guidelines set by the Federal Communications Commission in response to the enactment of the Children's Television Act of 1990 . Many member stations have historically also broadcast distance education and other instructional television programs, typically during daytime slots; though with the advent of digital television, which has allowed stations to carry these programs on digital subchannels in lieu of the main PBS feed or exclusively over online, many member stations/networks have replaced distance education content with children's and other programming.

As of February 2023, the duration of the PBS Kids block was reduced from 13 hours of daily programming including both before- and after-school programs, down to eight hours primarily in the mornings. This move was meant to cater to more general audiences in the afternoons, and as part of an ongoing move of kids programming to on-demand streaming services.

[ 73 ] As PBS is often known for doing, PBS Kids has broadcast imported series from other countries; these include British series originally broadcast by the BBC and ITV . Through American Public Television, many PBS stations also began airing the Australian series Raggs on June 4, 2007. Some of the programs broadcast as part of the service's children's lineup or through public broadcast syndication directly to its members have subsequently been syndicated to commercial television outlets (such as Ghostwriter and The Magic School Bus ).

Sports [ edit ] Many PBS member stations and networks—including Mississippi Public Broadcasting ( MHSAA ), Georgia Public Broadcasting ( GHSA ), Maine Public Broadcasting Network ( MPA ), Iowa PBS ( IGHSAU ), Nebraska Public Media ( NSAA ), and WKYU-TV ( Western Kentucky Hilltoppers )—locally broadcast high school and college sports. From the 1980s onward, the national PBS network has not typically carried sporting events, mainly because the broadcast rights to most sporting events have become more cost-prohibitive in that timeframe, especially for nonprofits with limited revenue potential; in addition, starting with the respective launches of the MountainWest Sports Network (now defunct) and Big Ten Network in 2006 and 2007 and the later launches of the Pac-12 Network and ESPN 's SEC Network and ACC Network , athletic conferences have acquired rights for all of their member university's sports programs for their cable channels, restricting their use from PBS member stations, even those associated with their own universities.

From 1976 to 1989, KQED produced a series of Bundesliga matches under the banner Soccer Made in Germany , with Toby Charles announcing. PBS also carried tennis events, as well as Ivy League football. Notable football commentators included Upton Bell , Marty Glickman , Bob Casciola , Brian Dowling , Sean McDonough and Jack Corrigan .

[ 74 ] Other sports programs included interview series such as The Way It Was and The Sporting Life .

[ 75 ] Governance [ edit ] The board of directors is responsible for governing and setting policy for PBS, consisting of 27 members: 14 professional directors (station managers), 12 general directors (outside directors), and the PBS president.

[ 76 ] All PBS Board members serve three-year terms, without pay.

[ 76 ] PBS member stations elect the 14 professional directors; the board elects the 12 general directors and appoints the PBS president and CEO; and the entire board elects its officers.

[ 77 ] Member stations [ edit ] Main article: List of PBS member stations As of March 2015 [update] , PBS maintains current memberships with 354 television stations encompassing 50 states, the District of Columbia and four U.S. possessions; [ 4 ] [ 78 ] as such, it is the only television broadcaster in the United States—commercial or non-commercial—which has station partners licensed in every U.S. state (by comparison, none of the five major commercial broadcast networks has affiliates in certain states where PBS has members, most notably New Jersey ). The service has an estimated national reach of 93.74% of all households in the United States (or 292,926,047 Americans with at least one television set).

PBS stations are commonly operated by nonprofit organizations, state agencies, local authorities (such as municipal boards of education), or universities in their city of license ; this is similar (albeit more centralized in states where a licensee owns multiple stations rebroadcasting the main PBS member) to the early model of commercial broadcasting in the U.S., in which network-affiliated stations were initially owned by companies that owned few to no other television stations elsewhere in the country. In some U.S. states, a group of PBS stations throughout the entire state may be organized into a single regional "subnetwork" (such as Alabama Public Television and Arkansas PBS ); in this model, PBS programming and other content is distributed by the originating station in the subnetwork to other full-power stations that serve as satellites as well as any low-power translators in other areas of the state. Some states may be served by such a regional network and simultaneously have PBS member stations in a certain city (such as the case with secondary member KBDI-TV in Denver , which is not related to Colorado member network Rocky Mountain PBS and its flagship station and primary Denver PBS member, KRMA-TV) that operate autonomously from the regional member network.

As opposed to the present commercial broadcasting model in which network programs are often carried exclusively on one television station in a given market, PBS may maintain more than one member station in certain markets, which may be owned by the licensee of the market's primary PBS member station or owned by a separate licensee (as a prime example, KOCE-TV , KLCS and KVCR-DT —which are all individually owned—serve as PBS stations for the Los Angeles market ; KCET served as the market's primary PBS member until it left the service in January 2011, [ 79 ] at which time it was replaced by KOCE). KCET rejoined PBS in 2019, thus giving the Los Angeles area four different member stations.

For these cases, PBS uses the Program Differentiation Plan, which divides by percentage the number of programs distributed by the service that each member can carry on their schedule; often, this assigns a larger proportion of PBS-distributed programming to the primary member station, with the secondary members being allowed to carry a lesser number of program offerings from the service's schedule. Unlike public broadcasters in most other countries, PBS cannot own any of the stations that broadcasts its programming; therefore, it is one of the few television programming bodies that does not have any owned-and-operated stations . This is partly due to the origins of the PBS stations themselves, and partly due to historical broadcast license issues.

Participating stations [ edit ] Most PBS member stations have produced at least some nationally distributed programs. Current regularly scheduled programming on the PBS national feed is produced by a smaller group of stations, including: WGBH-TV ( Arthur , NOVA , Masterpiece , Frontline , Fetch! with Ruff Ruffman , Martha Speaks , Peep and the Big Wide World , Between the Lions , Curious George , Lidia's Kitchen , Design Squad , Jamie Oliver , etc.) WNET ( Nature , PBS NewsHour Weekend , Cyberchase , Amanpour & Company , Wishbone etc.) Previously Connecticut Public Television and now WNET ( Barney & Friends , Bob the Builder , Thomas & Friends , etc.) WETA-TV ( PBS News Hour , Washington Week , A Capitol Fourth (annually) , America's Test Kitchen , This Old House , Pati's Mexican Table , BBC World News , etc.) WTTW ( Nature Cat , WordWorld , Kidsongs ) Maryland Public Television ( MotorWeek , Space Racers , Wimzie's House , Zoboomafoo , Julia Child ) KLRU ( Austin City Limits ) KCET ( Sid the Science Kid ) PBS SoCal ( Lost L.A.

) KQED ( The Cat in the Hat Knows a Lot About That!

, Yan Can Cook: Spice Kingdom ) Oregon Public Broadcasting ( History Detectives , Rick Steves' Europe (season 10)) PBS North Carolina ( The Woodwright's Shop ) South Carolina ETV ( Studio See , The Magic School Bus , A Chef's Life ) WXXI-TV ( Biz Kid$ ) WQED ( Mister Rogers' Neighborhood ) Twin Cities PBS (KTCA-TV/KTCI-TV) ( Newton's Apple , DragonflyTV , SciGirls , Hero Elementary ) KCTS-TV ( Rick Steves' Europe ) Arkansas PBS ( State of the Art ) WYES-TV ( Kevin Belton ) PBS networks [ edit ] Network Notes PBS Kids A programming block that provides children's television programs . The block was formerly called PTV Park. Launched as a 24/7 network in 1999 that was dissolved in 2005 and subsequently revived in 2017.

PBS Satellite Service A 24-hour alternate network feed that provides a mixed variety of programming selected from the main PBS service, as well as for carriage on programming tiers of satellite providers.

PBS has spun off a number of television networks, often in partnership with other media companies. PBS YOU, a distance education and how-to service operated between 2000 and 2006, and was largely succeeded by Create (a similarly formatted network owned by American Public Television). The 24-hour PBS Kids Channel has had two iterations in the age of digital television ; one which existed between 1999 and 2005 (being superseded by PBS Kids Sprout), and the current version which was launched in 2017.

World began operations in 2007 as a service operated by PBS but is now managed by American Public Television.

PBS has also restructured its satellite feed system, simplifying HD02 (PBS West) into a timeshift feed for the Pacific Time Zone , rather than a high-definition complement to its formerly primary SD feed.

PBS Kids Go!

was proposed as a replacement broadcast network for the original 1999–2005 version of the PBS Kids Channel; however, plans to launch the network were folded in 2006. Programming from the PBS Satellite Service has also been carried by certain member stations or regional member networks to fill their overnight schedules (particularly those that have transitioned to a 24-hour schedule since the late 1990s), in lieu of providing programming sourced from outside public television distributors or repeats of local programming (program promotions shown on the satellite feed advertise upcoming programs as being aired on PBS during the timeslot card normally used as a placeholder for member outlets to insert local airtime information).

Some or all of these services are available on a digital cable tier of many cable providers, on a free-to-air (FTA) satellite receiver receiving from PBS Satellite Service , as well as via subscription-based direct broadcast satellite providers. With the exception of Sprout, some of these services, including those from PBS member stations and networks, have not made contracts with Internet-distributed over-the-top MVPD services such as Sling TV and the now defunct PlayStation Vue . With the transition to over-the-air digital television broadcasts, many of the services are also often now available as standard-definition multicast channels on the digital signals of some member stations, while HD02 (PBS West) serves as a secondary HD feed. With the absence of advertising, network identification on these PBS networks was limited to use at the end of the program, which includes the standard series of bumpers from the "Be More" campaign.

Independent networks [ edit ] While not operated or controlled by PBS proper, additional public broadcasting networks are available and carried by PBS member stations. The following three are also distributed by PBS via satellite.

Channel Programming Origin Create Educational and artistic programming American Public Television World News and documentaries First Nations Experience Indigenous programming San Bernardino Community College District From 2002 to 2011, Buffalo, New York member station WNED-TV operated ThinkBright TV , a service that was carried on several stations in upstate New York. Several state networks also offer a public affairs subchannel network offering full-time coverage of state government events and legislative/judicial proceedings in the same vein as C-SPAN 's coverage of the federal government. Many PBS stations also carried MHz Worldview from the MHz Networks until 2020 when MHz Networks announced its discontinuation of the network on March 1, 2020. Since then, many stations has switched to World Channel as well as First Nations Experience .

A separate but related concept is the state network, where a group of stations across a state simulcast a single programming schedule from a central facility, which may include specialty subchannels unique to that broadcaster.

Visual identity [ edit ] PBS's second logo, the first iteration to include the "P-Head" element PBS's third logo, as used from 1984 to 2019. The logo pictured is the 2002 version.

PBS logo from 1970 to 1971, with the same colors as the NET logo from 1967 PBS logo from 1984 to 1989 PBS logo from 1989 to 1992 PBS logo from 1992 to 1996 PBS logo from 1996 to 1998 PBS Alternate logo from 1984 to 1998 PBS logo from 1998 to 2002 PBS logo from 2009 to 2019 PBS introduced its first iconographic logo in 1971, a multi-colored wordmark of the network's initials with the P designed to resemble a silhouette of a human face. The logo was designed by Ernie Smith and Herb Lubalin of the Lubalin Smith Carnase design firm.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] Lubalin's human face "P", known internally at PBS as "Everyman", but more commonly known as the "P-Head", became the basis for all subsequent PBS logos.

[ 82 ] In 1984, PBS introduced a new version of the logo, designed by Tom Geismar of Chermayeff & Geismar .

[ 83 ] Chermayeff & Geismar felt that the Lubalin-designed logo was too similar to those of the three dominant commercial networks of the time, and they sought "to develop a symbol that could stand for the more inclusive concept of 'public television ' ". They inverted Lubalin's Everyman "P" to face to the right instead of the left, and repeated the outline as a series to represent a "multitude" of people. The symbol was subsequently renamed "Everyone".

[ 82 ] The repeated outline of the face has also been interpreted to suggest a degree of multiculturalism , as well as the public service aspect of the PBS mission.

[ 84 ] The logo has been used in various forms since: from 1998 onward, the Geismar logo has been rendered in white on a circle.

[ 82 ] On November 4, 2019, in honor of the network's 50th anniversary, PBS unveiled a revamped brand identity by Lippincott , intended to be better-suited for use on digital platforms. The Geismar logo was tweaked, a new custom sans-serif typeface known as PBS Sans was commissioned for the logo and other branding elements (which replaces the slab serif typeface used in the PBS logo since 1984), and electric blue and white were adopted as corporate colors.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] The network is allowing flexibility in implementation, but is no longer allowing the logo to be displayed independently of the PBS name. Upon the launch of the new logo, some members rebranded themselves to include PBS in their name for the first time, such as Wisconsin Public Television rebranding as PBS Wisconsin .

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] PBS is paying out grants to at least 100 members to cover costs associated with the rebranding.

[ 86 ] Reception [ edit ] Critical response [ edit ] PBS has been praised by critics for its variety of programming.

[ 88 ] Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter marked PBS' airing of Downton Abbey as a turning point for the network's reputation and program variety .

[ 89 ] He also wrote, "It's PBS's time to shine" [ 90 ] and said that the network "is an endless bounty of riches...Ain't this great?" [ 89 ] Stevenonymous of BuzzFeed wrote, "PBS isn't just TV anymore." [ 91 ] David Zurawik of The Baltimore Sun wrote, "If you want a reason to believe in PBS...here it is." [ 92 ] Mekeisha Madden Toby of TheWrap wrote, "There is a lot to love...on PBS." [ 93 ] Kristen McQuinn of Book Riot wrote, "PBS is awesome in every way." [ 94 ] Caroline Framke of Variety wrote, "There's still no beating PBS." [ 88 ] Alyssa Rosenburg of The Washington Post wrote, "PBS is a unifying thread...through our cultural fabric." [ 95 ] Margaret Renkl of The New York Times wrote, "By aiming to unite...PBS might save us yet." [ 96 ] Margie Barron of Entertainment Today wrote, "PBS remains a beacon...that inspires." [ 97 ] The Marketing & Research Resources survey, said that PBS is the "#1 most trusted media 19 years in a row." [ 98 ] In 2021, the network had 14 News & Documentary Emmy Award nominations, more than any other organization.

[ 99 ] Matt Roush of TV Insider wrote, "PBS is and always has been a bright light." [ 100 ] For the PBS Arts program, Rob Owen of Pittsburgh Post-Gazette wrote, "A gift to viewers." [ 101 ] On-air fundraising [ edit ] Since 53% to 60% of public television's revenues come from private membership donations and grants , [ 102 ] most stations solicit individual donations by methods including fundraising , pledge drives or telethons , which disrupt regularly scheduled programming. This has been perceived as potentially annoying since regularly scheduled programming is often replaced with specials aimed at a wider audience (such as music specials aimed at the Baby Boomer generation and financial, health and motivational programs) to solicit new members and donations; during fundraising events, these programs are often interrupted within the broadcast by long-form segments (of six to eight minutes in length) encouraging viewers to donate to their PBS member.

[ 103 ] Underwriting spots are aired at the end of each program, which differ from traditional commercials in several ways.

[ 104 ] Each spot must be approved to meet several guidelines.

[ 105 ] The main guidelines state that underwriting spots cannot be qualitative in any way, nor can they have any call to action.

[ 106 ] Controversies [ edit ] Accusations of political/ideological bias [ edit ] A 1982 broadcast of the United States Information Agency program Let Poland be Poland about the martial law declared in Poland in 1981 was condemned by broadcasters in communist Eastern Europe, who labeled it as "provocative and anticommunist" propaganda, reflecting the regimes' opposition to criticism of their actions or ideology.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] In 1999, at least three public television stations were caught selling or trading their mailing lists with the Democratic National Committee . Under IRS regulations, nonprofit organizations are prohibited from participating in political actions. Officials from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting condemned the practice and conducted an investigation into the matter. The stations involved were in New York, Boston, and Washington.

[ 109 ] Individual programs aired by PBS have been the targets of organized campaigns by individuals and groups with opposing views, including by former United States Secretary of Education Margaret Spellings in 2005.

[ 110 ] Accusations during Tomlinson tenure [ edit ] In September 2003, Kenneth Tomlinson was chosen as chairman of the CPB board.

[ 111 ] He criticized PBS and NPR for what he alleged to be a "liberal bias".

[ 112 ] His efforts sparked complaints of political pressure.

[ 113 ] To partially balance out the perceived left-leaning PBS shows, from June 2004 to July 2005, PBS aired Tucker Carlson: Unfiltered with conservative commentator Tucker Carlson , and from September 2004 to December 2005, PBS aired The Journal Editorial Report with Paul Gigot , a conservative editor of The Wall Street Journal editorial page.

[ 114 ] In December 2004, Bill Moyers resigned as a PBS regular, citing political pressure to alter the content of his program, and saying Tomlinson had pursued a "vendetta" against him.

[ 115 ] In May 2005, two House Democrats requested the CPB inspector general investigate the complaints of political interference.

[ 116 ] The inspector general's report was issued in November 2005 and described possible political influence on personnel decisions, including e-mail correspondence between Tomlinson and the White House which indicated that Tomlinson "was strongly motivated by political considerations in filling the president/CEO position", a position filled in June 2005 by former Republican National Committee co-chair Patricia Harrison .

[ 117 ] Tomlinson resigned from the CPB board on November 3, 2005.

[ 118 ] Second Trump administration [ edit ] FCC underwriting investigation [ edit ] In January 2025, Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Chair Brendan Carr ordered an investigation of the corporate underwriting sponsorships of PBS and NPR member stations for possible violations of FCC regulations prohibiting noncommercial broadcasters from airing advertisements .

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] The following March, the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations opened an inquiry into the investigation ordered by Carr.

[ 121 ] In 1981, Congress amended the Communications Act of 1934 to authorize noncommercial station licensees to offer services and facilities in exchange for remuneration on the condition that it not interfere with their provision of public telecommunications services.

[ 122 ] [ a ] [ b ] In 1984, the FCC adopted a policy under the amendment allowing noncommercial stations to broadcast underwriting spots from for-profit entities that provided donations or underwriting.

[ 122 ] [ 128 ] While the FCC prohibited underwriting spots from including certain specific content (e.g. promotion of the contributor's products, services, or business, comparative or qualitative descriptions of products, price information, calls to action , or inducements to buy, sell, or lease products), the FCC has generally given noncommercial broadcasters deference in determining compliance with its underwriting rules, placed no specific limit on the length of the underwriting spots, and permitted the use of logos and slogans for the purpose of identifying the contributor, business location information and phone numbers, value-neutral descriptions of product or service lines , brand and trade names , and product and service listings.

[ 122 ] [ 128 ] Also, the FCC's underwriting rules and prohibition on noncommercial broadcasters receiving advertising only apply to underwriting spots that are broadcast and do not apply to the websites of noncommercial broadcasters.

[ 128 ] [ c ] The 1981 amendment to the Communications Act also established a temporary commission to identify alternative sources of funding for public broadcasting and study the potential for advertising revenue using limited demonstrations, but in its final report released in 1983, the commission found that the prospect of significant advertising revenue was limited and instead recommended that Congress continue providing the appropriation to Corporation for Public Broadcasting (CPB).

[ 122 ] In 2012, the CPB issued a report commissioned by Congress and that included market analysis conducted by Booz & Company which noted that corporate underwriting accounted for less than one-fifth of the revenue for public television and radio stations and had declined substantially due to the Great Recession .

[ 131 ] Along with the 1983 report and a 2007 Government Accountability Office report about public television specifically, [ 122 ] [ 132 ] the CPB report concluded that growth in such underwriting revenue was unlikely, that allowing public broadcasters to air advertisements would not offset a decline in federal funding while likely contributing to a decline in support from other sources, and that there was no alternative source of funding to the federal CPB appropriation that could sustain public broadcasting service at the same level.

[ 133 ] Analysis of CPB data published by the Pew Research Center in August 2023 found that underwriting revenue for NPR member stations from 2008 through 2021 was mostly flat and fell below 2009 levels in 2021 following the COVID-19 recession , while corporate funding for the PBS News Hour ranged from 17% to 23% of total revenue from 2015 through 2022.

[ 134 ] Executive Order 14290 [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Executive Order 14290 .

[ edit ] Executive Order 14290 , titled "Ending Taxpayer Subsidization of Biased Media", is an executive order signed by U.S. president Donald Trump on May 1, 2025 to end federal funding for NPR (a radio network) and PBS (a television network) by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting (CPB) and by federal agencies, alleging biased news coverage in violation of the Public Broadcasting Act of 1967 (PBA) and that public funding for news programming was "not only outdated and unnecessary but corrosive to the appearance of journalistic independence" in the current U.S. media market .

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] [ 137 ] CPB, PBS, and NPR executives issued press releases arguing that the executive order was unlawful under the PBA and that the organizations would explore how to continue providing programming while challenging the order.

[ 138 ] [ 136 ] [ 139 ] On May 27, NPR and three public radio stations sued the Trump administration for ending their federal funding, citing it as a violation of the First Amendment .

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] [ 142 ] On May 30, PBS sued the Trump administration for ending their federal funding.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] [ 145 ] Before the executive order was issued, the CPB filed a lawsuit against the Trump administration on April 28 after Trump attempted to fire three of the five members of the CPB's board of directors , [ 146 ] [ 147 ] while the CPB also filed a lawsuit against the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in March 2025 for halting their funding under the Next Generation Warning System Grant Program within the Integrated Public Alert and Warning System .

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] FEMA released the funds on April 24.

[ 151 ] [ 152 ] On June 8, District of Columbia U.S. District Court Judge Randolph Moss ruled against a preliminary injunction requested by the CPB in its lawsuit against the attempted director removals since the CPB changed its by-laws afterward under the District of Columbia Nonprofit Corporation Act to prevent any authority, including the President of the United States, from removing a director without a two-thirds vote of the other directors, which allowed for the directors to keep their positions.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] [ 155 ] On July 15, the Trump administration filed a separate lawsuit to remove the same CPB directors.

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] Rescissions Act of 2025 [ edit ] Main article: Rescissions Act of 2025 This section is an excerpt from Corporation for Public Broadcasting § Rescissions Act of 2025 .

[ edit ] On June 3, President Trump filed a request for a rescission bill that included the congressional appropriation for the CPB.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] [ 160 ] The next day, Office of Management and Budget Director Russell Vought testified before the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Financial Services and General Government on the rescission request and the administration's 2026 fiscal year budget request.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] Before the rescission request, PBS CEO Paula Kerger , NPR CEO Katherine Maher , and the CEO of Alaska Public Media testified on March 26 before the House Oversight Subcommittee on Delivering on Government Efficiency about the CPB appropriation, the journalistic standards and alleged bias of the organizations , and public broadcasting's educational programming and participation in emergency alert systems in rural areas .

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] On June 6, House Majority Leader Steve Scalise introduced a rescission bill including the CPB appropriation in the House of Representatives .

[ 165 ] The House passed the bill on June 12 along party lines by a vote of 214 to 212.

[ 171 ] On June 25, Vought testified before the Senate Appropriations Committee on the rescission bill.

[ 172 ] [ 173 ] [ 174 ] The Senate received the House bill on July 10 and it was referred to the Appropriations and Budget Committees .

[ 175 ] On July 15, the Senate passed motions to discharge the House bill from the Appropriations and Budget Committees and to proceed to debate with Vice President JD Vance casting tie-breaking votes on each motion.

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] [ 178 ] In the morning of July 17, the Senate passed the bill by a vote of 51 to 48 and with an amendment, requiring the bill to be transmitted back to the House for a second vote.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] [ 181 ] The House approved the amended bill after midnight on July 18 by a vote of 216 to 213.

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] [ 184 ] President Trump signed the bill into law on July 24.

[ 185 ] Critics of the rescission bill, such as Nevada U.S. Representative Mark Amodei and New York U.S. Representative Dan Goldman , noted that the CPB appropriation amounted to less than 0.01% (1/10000) of the U.S. federal budget .

[ 186 ] Polls conducted by YouGov from 2022 through 2025 showed PBS and NPR to be among the most trusted media institutions in the United States and that trust in PBS and NPR was growing, [ 187 ] [ 192 ] while five surveys conducted by YouGov and the Pew Research Center from February through July 2025 found consistent majorities or pluralities of Americans supported continuing federal funding for PBS and NPR.

[ 198 ] Previously, in every year from 2004 through 2021, surveys of Americans had shown PBS to have been consistently ranked as the most trusted institution in comparison to commercial broadcast and cable television , newspapers , and streaming services , and in January 2021, Americans valued tax dollars spent on PBS behind only military defense and oversight of food and drug safety .

[ 199 ] After the passage of the rescission bill, the CPB announced on August 1, 2025, that it would layoff the majority of its staff by the end of the fiscal year on September 30, with only a skeleton crew staying on board until January 2026 to distribute any remaining funds and royalties.

[ 200 ] [ 201 ] [ 202 ] Lawsuit with Pacific Arts [ edit ] In the 1990s, PBS became involved in a dispute over home video licensing rights with Pacific Arts Corporation , a multimedia company owned and operated by former Monkees guitarist Michael Nesmith .

In 1990, Pacific Arts secured a contract with PBS to distribute their back catalog of programming on VHS under the PBS Home Video banner. However, in the early 1990s, Pacific Arts and PBS went through a series of serious disagreements. Lawsuits were filed: by Nesmith and Pacific Arts against PBS for breach of contract, intentional misrepresentation, intentional concealment, negligent misrepresentation, and interference with contract; and by PBS against Nesmith and Pacific Arts for lost royalties.

[ 203 ] The lawsuits escalated in 1994 and 1995 into major litigation between the parties over these rights and payments. PBS and Nesmith and Pacific Arts vigorously prosecuted these multimillion-dollar counter-suits.

The six plaintiffs included PBS, WGBH-TV , WNET , the Ken Burns -owned American Documentaries and Radio Pioneers Film Project and the Children's Television Workshop . They sought approximately $5 million in disputed royalties, advances, guarantees and license fees for programs and the use of the PBS logo from the defendants Pacific Arts and Nesmith.

Due to the cost of the litigation, Pacific Arts was forced to cease distribution operations and suspended the use of the PBS logo on the Pacific Arts videos.

[ 203 ] Though Pacific Arts distribution system had ceased operating, the various plaintiffs were counting on capturing a personal financial guarantee Nesmith had made to PBS in the original PBS deal in 1990.

The cases went to jury trial in Federal Court in Los Angeles in February 1999. After three days of deliberation, the jury unanimously sided with Nesmith.

[ 204 ] The court awarded Pacific Arts $14,625,000 for loss of its rights library, plus $29,250,000 in punitive damages. The jury awarded $3 million to Nesmith personally, including $2 million in punitive damages for a total award to Nesmith and Pacific Arts of $48,875,000. The jury resolved the outstanding license fee issues by ordering Pacific Arts and Nesmith to pay approximately $1.2 million to American Documentaries for The Civil War , about $230,000 to WGBH-TV , and $150,000 to WNET .

[ 203 ] Following the ruling, Nesmith expressed his personal disappointment with PBS and was quoted by BBC News as stating "It's like finding your grandmother stealing your stereo. You're happy to get your stereo back, but it's sad to find out your grandmother is a thief." [ 205 ] The decision never went to an appeals court and the final amount paid to Pacific Arts and Nesmith was an undisclosed sum agreed to in an out-of-court settlement.

Warning, Alert and Response Network (WARN) [ edit ] PBS provides an alternative path for Wireless Emergency Alerts to wireless carriers through its Warning, Alert and Response Network (WARN). The alerts are transmitted through the PBS satellite network on the AMC-21 satellite to PBS stations, who then broadcast the messages over their transmitters for reception by wireless carriers at their cell sites.

[ 206 ] The WARN network is funded by a grant through National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA).

[ 206 ] See also [ edit ] Television portal United States portal American Public Media List of United States over-the-air television networks PBS America Public Radio International Public, educational, and government access (PEG) Television in the United States Similar public broadcasting services [ edit ] The following public broadcasters and channel have a similar focus on educational programming like the PBS: TVO (formerly TVOntario), Knowledge Network China Education Television Arte France 5 ARD-alpha Educational Broadcasting System Swedish Educational Broadcasting Company (UR) Notes [ edit ] ^ However, while public television stations may apply under the FCC's must-carry rules for carriage by multichannel video programming distributors (such as cable and satellite television operators), the Communications Act bars public television stations from receiving retransmission consent fees from MVPDs that commercial television stations may receive under the 1992 Cable Act .

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] ^ Also, while streaming television services often include local broadcast television channels, [ 125 ] reports issued by the Congressional Research Service in 2016 and 2020 noted that the FCC had not expanded its definition of multichannel video programming distributors to include online video distributors , and that the regulatory framework for broadcast, cable, and satellite television does not generally apply to streaming services (including must-carry requirements).

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] ^ However, any advertising revenue received by nonprofit organizations registered as 501(c)(3) organizations is still subject to unrelated business income tax under the Internal Revenue Code .

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c "CPB FAQ" .

Corporation for Public Broadcasting . January 6, 2016.

Archived from the original on July 7, 2022 . Retrieved July 14, 2022 .

^ a b "Public Broadcasting Service" .

Britannica . September 15, 2023.

^ a b "15 Years As America's Most Trusted Institution" (PDF) . PBS.

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 11, 2018 . Retrieved June 11, 2018 .

^ a b c "Network Profile: PBS" .

Station Index .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2016 . Retrieved February 4, 2016 .

^ a b "About PBS – Overview" . PBS.

Archived from the original on September 7, 2018 . Retrieved September 10, 2018 .

^ "About PBS – Leadership Team" . PBS.

Archived from the original on June 12, 2018 . Retrieved June 11, 2018 .

^ Boyer, Peter J. (January 3, 1986).

"Hartford N. Gunn Jr. is Dead; Public Broadcasting Founder" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 12, 2018 . Retrieved June 11, 2018 .

^ a b "Mission & Values" . PBS.

Archived from the original on July 18, 2022 . Retrieved July 18, 2022 .

^ "Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) – USA TV Channel" .

Mondo Times .

Archived from the original on January 18, 2024.

^ Terbo, William.

"Video Documentaries" .

Tesla Memorial Society .

Archived from the original on March 26, 2023 . Retrieved June 26, 2023 .

"Tesla, Master of Lightning", New Voyage Communications for PBS Television Network, 2000, 90 minutes.

^ "Ray Suarez" .

Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs .

Archived from the original on June 12, 2022 . Retrieved July 14, 2022 .

Suarez joined the PBS NewsHour in 1999 and was a senior correspondent for the evening news program on the PBS television network until 2013.

^ "PBS Television Broadcasts" .

Inside Peace . Archived from the original on June 28, 2022 . Retrieved July 14, 2022 .

We are pleased to announce the release of Inside Peace throughout the PBS television network in the United States.

^ "Federal Funding for Public Broadcasting" . WFYI. Archived from the original on November 11, 2021 . Retrieved October 26, 2021 .

^ "All Shows" . PBS . Retrieved June 11, 2018 .

^ "How do I find my local station in Canada?" . PBS Help . Retrieved December 28, 2024 .

^ "PBS Funding Standards" . PBS.

Archived from the original on May 20, 2018 . Retrieved May 19, 2018 .

Public television is a major participant in the great tradition of a free and independent American press. To protect public television's journalistic integrity, PBS's funding standards are premised on core principles that ensure the complete editorial independence of producers from influence by underwriters. While funding and fundraising are necessary to support the development and production of content, producers must be free from the influence of funders. This firewall is essential to maintaining the public's trust.

^ a b Cara O'Donnell, ed. (January 30, 2019).

"PBS Moves to New Crystal City HQ" . Arlington Economic Development.

Archived from the original on December 28, 2019 . Retrieved September 10, 2020 .

^ "Articles of Incorporation of Public Broadcasting Service" .

Current . January 14, 2000. Archived from the original on April 6, 2001 . Retrieved January 12, 2008 .

^ Laurence Ariel Jarvik (1997).

PBS, behind the screen .

Rocklin, California : Forum.

ISBN 0-7615-0668-3 .

^ "Public TV Faces Fund Struggles" .

The Morning Record .

Archived from the original on September 6, 2015 . Retrieved October 28, 2013 – via Google News .

^ James Day (September 16, 1969).

The Vanishing Vision: The Inside Story of Public Television . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-08659-3 .

Archived from the original on June 28, 2021 . Retrieved October 23, 2013 – via Google Books .

^ "Public broadcasting gets it together" (PDF) .

Broadcasting Magazine . August 30, 1971. p. 46 . Retrieved July 15, 2023 .

^ "NPACT hires former NBC newsman" (PDF) .

Broadcasting Magazine . September 27, 1971. p. 38 . Retrieved July 15, 2023 .

^ "Public Affairs Center and Capital's WETA to Join (Published 1972)" .

The New York Times . April 5, 1972.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved January 1, 2021 .

^ "NPACT, Washington's WETA-TV to merge".

Broadcasting Magazine . April 10, 1972. p. 42.

^ Graff, Garrett M. (2022).

Watergate: A New History (1 ed.). New York: Avid Reader Press. pp. 443-444.

ISBN 978-1-9821-3916-2 .

OCLC 1260107112 ^ "'Gavel-to-Gavel': The Watergate Scandal and Public Television", American Archive of Public Broadcasting . Retrieved November 10, 2019.

^ "The Charities Americans Like Most And Least".

The Chronicle of Philanthropy . December 13, 1996.

^ Karen S. Peterson (December 20, 1994). "Charity begins with health, Concern over diseases cited".

USA Today (Final ed.). p. 01D.

^ Laura Castaneda (December 13, 1994). "Survey helps firms choose charities".

The Dallas Morning News (Home Final ed.).

A. H. Belo Corporation . p. 1D.

^ Interview with Lavalle , September 7, 2009 ^ "PBS #1 in public trust for the sixth consecutive year, according to a national Roper survey" (Press release). PBS. February 13, 2009.

Archived from the original on July 5, 2009 . Retrieved July 14, 2009 .

^ Michael Getler (May 15, 2008).

"Caution: That Program May Not Be From PBS" . PBS.

Archived from the original on March 4, 2012 . Retrieved December 30, 2008 .

^ Bill Gorman (December 20, 2009).

"PBS Signs Up For Nielsen Ratings" .

TV by the Numbers . Archived from the original on December 22, 2009 . Retrieved March 10, 2011 .

^ Elizabeth Jensen (May 30, 2011).

"PBS Plans Promotional Breaks Within Programs" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved March 12, 2015 .

^ "PBS Launches Free Full-Length Video App for iPhone and iPod touch and Antiques Roadshow Game App" . PBS. January 7, 2011.

Archived from the original on August 19, 2016 . Retrieved July 13, 2016 .

^ Dwyer, Kate (March 28, 2016).

"How You Can Be in the Music Video for Michelle Obama's Song With Zendaya and Lea Michele" .

Teen Vogue .

Archived from the original on March 2, 2017.

^ "AOL and PBS Announce "Makers: Women Who Make America" " . PBS. February 28, 2012. Archived from the original on August 5, 2017.

^ "GMs take up PBS plan to expand web video output" .

Current . May 29, 2012.

Archived from the original on July 13, 2015 . Retrieved July 12, 2015 .

^ "Why PBS Autotuned Mr. Rogers" .

Digiday . October 23, 2012.

Archived from the original on February 1, 2016 . Retrieved February 4, 2016 .

^ Stampler, Laura (December 3, 2012).

"The 20 Most Viral Ads Of 2012" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved July 12, 2015 .

^ Sternberg, Josh (June 18, 2013).

"How PBS Won at Digital" .

Digiday .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2016 . Retrieved February 4, 2016 .

^ "Roku's PBS, PBS Kids channels go live, stream full episodes" .

CNET . May 8, 2013.

Archived from the original on June 7, 2013 . Retrieved May 8, 2013 .

^ Goldsmith, Jill (December 15, 2015).

"PBS Passport serves up on-demand content for public TV's members" .

Current .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2019.

^ Gettell, Oliver (July 1, 2016).

" 'Daniel Tiger' and more PBS Kids shows leaving Netflix, Hulu" .

Entertainment Weekly .

Archived from the original on February 29, 2020 . Retrieved April 14, 2020 .

^ "More Children's Entertainment added to DStv and GOtv with the launch of PBS KIDS in Sub-Saharan Africa" .

Namibia Daily News . May 20, 2020.

Archived from the original on September 25, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2020 .

^ "Foxtel expands family offering with two new dedicated kids channels - DreamWorks and PBS KIDS" .

TV Blackbox . June 25, 2021.

Archived from the original on June 25, 2021 . Retrieved June 25, 2021 .

^ Goldsmith, Jill (July 29, 2019).

"PBS forges deal with YouTube TV for localized live streams" .

Current .

Archived from the original on July 30, 2019 . Retrieved August 12, 2019 .

^ "Sign Proposed for Top of New PBS Headquarters in Crystal City" . ARLnow. September 9, 2020.

Archived from the original on September 14, 2020 . Retrieved September 10, 2020 .

^ Koma, Alex, ed. (January 15, 2019).

"PBS Agrees to Keep Headquarters in Crystal City, Plans to Relocate to New Building" . ARLnow.

Archived from the original on June 20, 2020 . Retrieved September 10, 2020 .

^ "PBS to launch documentary streamer via Prime Video Channels in boost to Amazon" .

Digital TV Europe . July 29, 2020.

Archived from the original on September 10, 2022 . Retrieved September 10, 2022 .

^ "Watching PBS videos on other streaming services" .

PBS Help .

Archived from the original on September 10, 2022 . Retrieved September 10, 2022 .

^ "SVOD Channels" .

PBS Distribution .

Archived from the original on September 10, 2022 . Retrieved September 10, 2022 .

^ Gurwin, Jason (September 3, 2020).

"PBS Launches Free Live Local Streaming of PBS Stations" .

The Streamable .

Archived from the original on October 22, 2021 . Retrieved December 11, 2020 .

^ Graham, Jefferson (January 15, 2020).

"Sure, PBS is now on YouTubeTV, but free streaming app a better deal" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2023 . Retrieved January 6, 2023 .

^ Dehnart, Andy (July 1, 2021).

"Julia Child TV shows are now streaming free on Pluto, Tubi, and PBS" .

reality blurred . Retrieved April 28, 2025 .

^ "PBS and WNET Group Launch FAST Channels on Plex" .

Adweek . January 19, 2023 . Retrieved December 20, 2023 .

^ Bouma, Luke (November 20, 2023).

"PBS is Launching a New Free Channel Called PBS Food On Amazon's Freevee, Plex, & The Roku Channel" .

Cord Cutters News . Retrieved December 20, 2023 .

^ Bouma, Luke (December 15, 2023).

"Plex Adds Over 20 New Free Channels This Week" .

Cord Cutters News . Retrieved December 20, 2023 .

^ Novak, Lauren (April 24, 2024).

"PBS is Introducing a New FAST Channel on Roku Called PBS Retro With All of Your Nostalgic Favorites" .

Remind . Retrieved April 25, 2024 .

^ "All Channels | Samsung TV Plus | Samsung Australia" .

Samsung au .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2024 . Retrieved April 24, 2025 .

^ "LG TV Experience" .

tv-experience.lg.com.au . Retrieved April 24, 2025 .

^ "Corporation for Public Broadcasting Addresses Operations Following Loss of Federal Funding" .

cpb.org . August 1, 2025 . Retrieved August 2, 2025 .

^ Porter, Rick (August 1, 2025).

"Corporation for Public Broadcasting Shutting Down After Federal Funding Rescission" .

The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved August 2, 2025 .

^ Scott Collins (October 8, 2010).

"Los Angeles PBS affiliate KCET exits network fold to go independent" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on April 15, 2015 . Retrieved March 12, 2015 .

^ "What's on PBS Tonight?" .

On TV Tonight . Retrieved March 31, 2025 .

^ "PBS Shows" . PBS . Retrieved March 31, 2025 .

^ Getler, Michael (March 22, 2012).

"Independent Lens Brings a Focus on PBS" . PBS.

^ "About GBH" . Retrieved March 31, 2025 .

^ Garron, Barry (September 17, 2018).

" 'Amanpour & Company' sharpens focus on timely topics, guests chosen for PBS late-night viewers" . Retrieved March 31, 2025 .

^ "PBS to Broadcast Three Peanuts Specials This Holiday Season" . PBS.

Archived from the original on October 18, 2021 . Retrieved October 18, 2021 .

^ O'Kane, Caitlin (November 17, 2022).

" "A Charlie Brown Thanksgiving" and the series' other holiday specials will not air on TV this year. Here's how to watch them for free" .

CBS News . Retrieved January 26, 2024 .

^ Wakeman, Gregory (December 22, 2022).

"PBS, stations revamp afternoon schedules to draw adults" .

Current .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2023 . Retrieved July 3, 2023 .

^ Mark.

"Penn Football Tapes 1980–1989" . Penn Quaker Basketball & Football Tapes. Archived from the original on October 4, 2002 . Retrieved March 10, 2011 .

^ Hodges, Ann (April 17, 1985).

"Jim Palmer jockeys from underwear to PBS" .

Houston Chronicle . Archived from the original on November 19, 2012 . Retrieved October 15, 2012 .

^ a b "Board of Directors" . PBS.

Archived from the original on October 24, 2015 . Retrieved October 27, 2015 .

^ "Donald A. Baer Elected Chair of PBS Board of Directors" . PBS. October 29, 2014.

Archived from the original on February 1, 2016 . Retrieved October 27, 2015 .

^ "Stations for Network - PBS" .

RabbitEars.info . Archived from the original on August 17, 2011 . Retrieved March 12, 2015 .

^ Peter Larsen (October 8, 2010).

"KOCE takes over as top PBS station after KCET cuts ties with network" .

Orange County Register .

Freedom Communications . Archived from the original on October 10, 2010 . Retrieved March 12, 2015 .

^ Dunning, Jennifer (April 4, 2004).

"Ernie Smith, 79, Jazz and Dance Authority" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2019 . Retrieved December 2, 2019 .

He worked at several advertising agencies in New York. Among them were Sudler & Hennessy and Lubalin, Smith & Carnase, where he developed a logo for PBS.

^ Sandomir, Richard (March 23, 2018).

"Lawrence K. Grossman, Head of PBS and Then NBC News, Dies at 86" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2019 . Retrieved December 2, 2019 .

^ a b c Chermayeff, Ivan; Geismar, Tom; Haviv, Sagi (2011).

Identify: Basic Principles of Identity Design in the Iconic Trademarks of Chermayeff & Geismar .

F+W . p. 68.

ISBN 978-1-440-31032-4 .

^ Heller, Steven (December 14, 2003).

"ART; A Laboratory for Sign Language" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2019 . Retrieved December 2, 2019 .

^ Gernsheimer, Jack (2008).

Designing Logos: The Process of Creating Symbols that Endure .

Allworth Press . p. 125.

ISBN 978-1-581-15649-2 .

^ Smith, Lilly (November 4, 2019).

"PBS's new brand is anything but radical—and that's the whole point" .

Fast Company .

Archived from the original on December 13, 2019 . Retrieved December 2, 2019 .

^ a b c Goldsmith, Jill (November 4, 2019).

"PBS begins rollout of electric-blue brand refresh" .

Current .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2019 . Retrieved December 3, 2019 .

^ Faw, Larissa (November 5, 2019).

"PBS Overhauls Logo For 2020" . Mediapost.

Archived from the original on November 6, 2019 . Retrieved December 2, 2019 .

^ a b Framke, Caroline (August 1, 2018).

"PBS: An Appreciation for the Vegetables of TV (Column)" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2019 . Retrieved December 16, 2019 .

^ a b Goodman, Tim (July 29, 2016).

"Tim Goodman's TCA Journal No. 3: A Love Letter to PBS" .

The Hollywood Reporter .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2019 . Retrieved December 16, 2019 .

^ Goodman, Tim (July 22, 2012).

"TCA 2012: It's PBS' Time to Shine (Analysis)" .

The Hollywood Reporter .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2019 . Retrieved December 16, 2019 .

^ Stevenonymous (August 23, 2013).

"10 Reasons Why '90s Kids Should Still Love PBS" .

BuzzFeed .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2019 . Retrieved May 25, 2022 .

^ Zurawik, David (October 28, 2014).

"Frontline offers harrowing, revealing look into ISIS tonight" .

The Baltimore Sun .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2019 . Retrieved May 25, 2022 .

^ Toby, Mekeisha Madden (September 27, 2015).

" 'Indian Summers' Review: PBS' New Period Piece is Soapy, Sexy Goodness" .

TheWrap .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2019 . Retrieved May 25, 2022 .

^ McQuinn, Kristen (August 7, 2017).

"PBS is Searching for The Great American Book" .

Book Riot .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2022 . Retrieved May 25, 2022 .

^ Rosenburg, Alyssa (October 4, 2020).

"Opinion | In 50 years of PBS programming, content for Americans of all classes and political views" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on March 26, 2023 . Retrieved May 25, 2022 .

^ Renkl, Margaret (September 27, 2020).

"Opinion | Happy Birthday, PBS. Please Save Us" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2022 . Retrieved May 25, 2022 .

^ Barron, Margie (August 4, 2020).

"PBS' stellar lineup for 50th anniversary season announced at Zoom-friendly TCA press tour" .

Entertainment Today .

Archived from the original on July 6, 2022 . Retrieved May 25, 2022 .

^ "PBS and Member Stations Named 'Most Trusted' Media Organization for 19 Consecutive Years" . PBS. March 17, 2022.

Archived from the original on September 21, 2022 . Retrieved September 21, 2022 .

^ "PBS Leads With 14 News & Documentary Emmy® Awards" . PBS. September 30, 2021 . Retrieved August 4, 2023 .

^ Roush, Matt (February 1, 2022).

"Ask Matt: More Ghosts on 'Ghosts'?" .

TV Insider .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2022 . Retrieved September 21, 2022 .

^ Owen, Rob (October 14, 2011).

"PBS still a leader in fine arts programming" .

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Retrieved May 2, 2024 .

^ "Public Broadcasting Revenue Fiscal Year 2005" (PDF) .

Corporation for Public Broadcasting . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 15, 2011 . Retrieved March 10, 2011 .

^ Getler, Michael (March 24, 2006).

"Pledging Allegiance, or March Madness?" . PBS Ombudsman.

Archived from the original on April 8, 2006 . Retrieved May 22, 2006 .

^ "Rule 5: Content Guidelines" . PBS. Archived from the original on April 14, 2014 . Retrieved April 13, 2014 .

^ "PBS Guidelines for On-Air Announcements Promoting Program-Related Goods and Services" . PBS. Archived from the original on April 14, 2014 . Retrieved April 13, 2014 .

^ "Rule 5.4: Voice-Over Copy Guidelines" . PBS. Archived from the original on September 23, 2003 . Retrieved April 13, 2014 .

^ "Let Poland Be Poland (1982, TV)" .

IMDb . January 31, 1982.

Archived from the original on February 1, 2016 . Retrieved February 4, 2016 .

^ Edward Eichler (April 25, 2008).

"US Public Diplomacy in Hungary: Past and Present" (PDF) .

Public Diplomacy Council . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 25, 2009.

^ Seelye, Katharine Q. (July 17, 1999).

"PBS Stations Shared Donor Lists With Democrats, Stirring Trouble" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 1, 2017 . Retrieved March 31, 2017 .

^ "Education chief rips PBS for gay character: Network won't distribute episode with animated 'Buster' visiting Vt" .

NBC News .

Associated Press . January 26, 2005.

Archived from the original on November 21, 2019 . Retrieved November 10, 2019 .

^ Labaton, Stephen (November 4, 2005).

"Broadcasting Ex-Chairman Is Removed From Board (Published 2005)" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2021 . Retrieved January 8, 2021 .

^ Farhi, Paul (July 1, 2005).

"CPB Liberal Bias Study Flawed, Critics Say" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2021 . Retrieved January 8, 2021 .

^ Labaton, Stephen; Weisman, Steven R. (November 5, 2005).

"Spending Inquiry For Top Official On Broadcasting" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2009.

^ "PBS: Back to bias basics" .

The Washington Times .

News World Communications . May 4, 2007.

Archived from the original on April 14, 2011 . Retrieved December 30, 2009 .

^ Farhi, Paul (April 22, 2005).

"PBS Scrutiny Raises Political Antennas" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on June 22, 2018 . Retrieved September 7, 2017 .

^ de Moraes, Lisa (May 13, 2005).

"CPB's Inspector General to Pursue Probe of Chairman" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2021 . Retrieved January 8, 2021 .

^ "CNN - Report: Politics may have influenced former public broadcasting chief" .

CNN . November 15, 2005.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved January 8, 2021 .

^ Folkenflik, David (November 3, 2005).

"Tomlinson Resigns from CPB Ahead of Report" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2021 . Retrieved January 8, 2021 .

^ Reilly, Liam (January 30, 2025).

"Trump's FCC is investigating NPR and PBS stations over sponsorships" . CNN . Retrieved May 3, 2025 .

^ Mastrangelo, Dominick (January 30, 2025).

"FCC chair launches investigation into NPR, PBS" .

The Hill . Nexstar Media Group . Retrieved May 3, 2025 .

^ Manfredi, Lucas (March 14, 2025).

"Senator Richard Blumenthal Slams FCC's 'Unprecedented, Intrusive' Investigations Into Paramount-Skydance, Comcast, NPR and PBS" .

TheWrap . The Wrap News Inc . Retrieved June 21, 2025 .

^ a b c d e GAO 2004 , pp. 90–97.

^ FCC 2011 , p. 317.

^ Booz 2012 , pp. 33–35, 92–95.

^ Saril, Sarah; Brown, Lillian (June 3, 2025).

"The best live TV streaming services in 2025" .

Business Insider . Axel Springer SE . Retrieved July 29, 2025 .

^ Scherer, Dana A. (April 20, 2016).

What's on Television? The Intersection of Communications and Copyright Policies (PDF) (Report). Congressional Research Service. p. 27 . Retrieved July 30, 2025 .

^ Cho, Clare Y. (September 25, 2020).

Competition Among Video Streaming Services (PDF) (Report). Congressional Research Service. pp.

12– 14 . Retrieved July 29, 2025 .

^ a b c FCC 2011 , pp. 315–316.

^ FCC 2011 , pp. 328–332.

^ Evans Jr., Lawrance L. (2023).

LOCAL JOURNALISM: Innovative Business Approaches and Targeted Policies May Help Local News Media Adapt to Digital Transformation (PDF) (Report). Government Accountability Office. pp.

31– 32, 44– 45 . Retrieved December 15, 2024 .

^ Booz 2012 , pp. 1–5, 16–21.

^ GAO 2007 , pp. 36, 41–44.

^ Booz 2012 , pp. 1–5, 16–21, 26–33, 56–84.

^ "Public Broadcasting Fact Sheet" . Pew Research Center. August 1, 2023 . Retrieved May 8, 2025 .

^ Mascaro, Lisa (May 2, 2025).

"Trump signs executive order directing federal funding cuts to PBS and NPR" .

Associated Press News . Washington.

Archived from the original on May 2, 2025 . Retrieved May 2, 2025 .

^ a b Smith, Patrick; Grumbach, Gary (May 2, 2025).

"Trump signs executive order to stop federal funding for NPR and PBS" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2025 . Retrieved May 2, 2025 .

^ Kerr, Dara; Campbell, Lucy; Chao-Fong, Léonie; and Ambrose, Tom (May 3, 2025).

"Trump order targeting law firm struck down; supreme court asked to allow Musk's Doge access to social security data – as it happened" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on May 3, 2025 . Retrieved May 2, 2025 .

^ Benn Jr., Juan (May 2, 2025).

"Public media executives push back against Trump targeting NPR and PBS: 'Blatantly unlawful' " .

Politico .

Axel Springer SE .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2025 . Retrieved May 2, 2025 .

^ Stelter, Brian; Voytek, Clay (May 2, 2025).

"President Trump signs order seeking to end federal funding for NPR and PBS" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2025 . Retrieved May 2, 2025 .

^ Breuninger, Kevin (May 27, 2025).

"NPR sues Trump over executive order cutting federal funding" .

NBC News . Retrieved May 27, 2025 .

^ Gedeon, Joseph (May 27, 2025).

"NPR sues Trump administration over funding cuts it says violate first amendment" .

The Guardian . Retrieved May 27, 2025 .

^ "NATIONAL PUBLIC RADIO, INC. v. TRUMP (1:25-cv-01674)" .

Court Listener . May 27, 2025 . Retrieved May 27, 2025 .

^ Mullin, Benjamin (May 30, 2025).

"PBS Sues Trump Over Order to Cut Funding" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved May 30, 2025 .

^ Breuninger, Kevin; Rizzo, Lillian (May 30, 2025).

"PBS sues Trump over executive order to cut funding" . CNBC . Retrieved May 31, 2025 .

^ "PUBLIC BROADCASTING SERVICE v. DONALD J. TRUMP (1:25-cv-01722)" .

CourtListener . May 30, 2025 . Retrieved May 30, 2025 .

^ Shepardson, David (April 29, 2025).

"Corporation for Public Broadcasting sues to block Trump from firing 3 board members" .

Reuters .

Thomson Reuters . Retrieved May 2, 2025 .

^ Case docket for Corporation for Public Broadcasting v. Trump , 1:25-cv-01305, (D.D.C.) at CourtListener ^ Kunzelman, Michael (March 13, 2025).

"FEMA sued over hold on funds for upgrading nation's emergency alert system" . Associated Press . Retrieved July 28, 2025 .

^ CRS 2025 , pp. 6–7.

^ Case docket for Corporation for Public Broadcasting v. Federal Emergency Management Agency , 1:25-cv-00740, (D.D.C.) at CourtListener ^ Bojórquez, Kim (April 25, 2025).

"FEMA releases funds for public radio emergency alert upgrades" .

Axios . Cox Enterprises . Retrieved July 28, 2025 .

^ CRS 2025 , p. 7.

^ Fortinsky, Sarah (June 8, 2025).

"Judge declines to block Trump's Corporation for Public Broadcasting firings but allows board members to stay" .

The Hill . Nexstar Media Group . Retrieved June 9, 2025 .

^ Stempel, Jonathan (June 9, 2025).

"Corporation for Public Broadcasting can keep board members despite judge's ruling" .

Reuters . Thomson Reuters . Retrieved June 9, 2025 .

^ Johnson, Ted (June 8, 2025).

"Judge Denies Corporation For Public Broadcasting's Motion In Trump Case, But Ruling Still Allows For Three Board Members To Remain — Update" .

Deadline Hollywood . Penske Media Corporation . Retrieved June 10, 2025 .

^ Wolfe, Jan (July 15, 2025).

"Trump administration sues to oust Corporation for Public Broadcasting board members" .

Reuters . Thomson Reuters . Retrieved July 28, 2025 .

^ Case docket for United States v. Ross , 1:25-cv-02261, (D.D.C.) at CourtListener ^ Stelter, Brian; Reilly, Liam (June 3, 2025).

"Trump asked Congress to claw back funding for PBS and NPR. What now?" . CNN . Retrieved June 8, 2025 .

^ "House of Representatives" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

171 (94). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office : H2402. June 3, 2025 . Retrieved June 29, 2025 .

^ "Senate" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

171 (94). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office: S3203. June 3, 2025 . Retrieved July 6, 2025 .

^ Folley, Aris (June 5, 2025).

"Vought grilled over DOGE, spending cuts in House hearing" .

The Hill . Nexstar Media Group . Retrieved June 29, 2025 .

^ "White House Budget Director Testifies on 2026 Budget Request" . C-SPAN. June 4, 2025 . Retrieved June 29, 2025 .

^ Zahn, Max; Ibssa, Lalee (March 26, 2025).

"Republicans accuse NPR, PBS of bias at House hearing; Democrats rebuke it as a partisan attack" . ABC News . Retrieved June 14, 2025 .

^ "NPR and PBS Executives Testify Before House DOGE Subcommittee" .

U.S. House of Representatives . C-SPAN. March 26, 2025.

Serial No. 119–14 (PDF) . Retrieved June 14, 2025 .

^ "House of Representatives" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

171 (97). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office: H2532. June 6, 2025 . Retrieved July 6, 2025 .

^ Freking, Kevin (June 12, 2025).

"House approves Trump's request to cut funding for NPR, PBS and foreign aid" . Associated Press . Retrieved June 12, 2025 .

^ Walsh, Deirdre (June 12, 2025).

"House narrowly passes bill to claw back $1.1 billion from public media" .

All Things Considered (Interview). Interviewed by Mary Louise Kelly. NPR . Retrieved June 13, 2025 .

^ "House Session, Part 2" . C-SPAN. June 12, 2025 . Retrieved June 13, 2025 .

^ "House of Representatives" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

171 (101). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office: H2796 – H2808 . June 12, 2025 . Retrieved June 14, 2025 .

^ "Roll Call – Bill Number: H.R. 4" .

Clerk of the United States House of Representatives . Retrieved June 13, 2025 .

^ [ 166 ] [ 167 ] [ 168 ] [ 169 ] [ 170 ] ^ Freking, Kevin (June 25, 2025).

"Senators challenge Trump's proposed cuts to foreign aid and public media in contentious hearing" . Associated Press . Retrieved June 29, 2025 .

^ Williams, Michael (June 25, 2025).

"White House's DOGE spending cuts request runs into criticism, questions from some Senate Republicans" . CNN . Retrieved June 29, 2025 .

^ "White House Budget Director Testifies on Rescissions Proposal" . C-SPAN. June 25, 2025 . Retrieved June 29, 2025 .

^ "Senate" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

171 (119). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office: S4313. July 10, 2025 . Retrieved July 11, 2025 .

^ Yilek, Caitlin; Hubbard, Kaia (July 15, 2025).

"Senate advances Trump's request to cancel billions in foreign aid, NPR and PBS funding" . CBS News . Retrieved July 16, 2025 .

^ "Senate Session, Part 2" . C-SPAN. July 15, 2025 . Retrieved July 16, 2025 .

^ "Senate" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

171 (121). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office: S4358 – S4365 . July 15, 2025 . Retrieved July 16, 2025 .

^ Freking, Kevin; Jalonick, Mary Clare (July 17, 2025).

"Senate passes $9 billion in spending cuts to public broadcasting, foreign aid requested by Trump" . Associated Press . Retrieved July 17, 2025 .

^ "Senate Session" . C-SPAN. July 16, 2025 . Retrieved July 20, 2025 .

^ "Senate" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

171 (122). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office: S4413 – S4414 . July 16, 2025 . Retrieved July 20, 2025 .

^ Tully-McManus, Katherine; Scholtes, Jennifer (July 18, 2025).

"House passes public media, foreign aid clawbacks after Epstein scramble" .

Politico . Axel Springer SE . Retrieved July 18, 2025 .

^ "House Session, Part 2" . C-SPAN. July 17, 2025 . Retrieved July 20, 2025 .

^ "House of Representatives" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

171 (123). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Publishing Office: H3460 – H3461 . July 17, 2025 . Retrieved July 20, 2025 .

^ Freking, Kevin (July 24, 2025).

"Trump signs bill to cancel $9 billion in foreign aid, public broadcasting funding" . Associated Press . Retrieved July 24, 2025 .

^ Folley, Aris (June 9, 2025).

"Republican urges Trump to reconsider proposed broadcasting cuts" .

The Hill . Nexstar Media Group . Retrieved June 11, 2025 .

^ Johnson, Ted (June 9, 2025).

"Why There Is So Much Worry In Public Media That Donald Trump Will Win Fight To Defund NPR, PBS And Local Stations" .

Yahoo News . Penske Media Corporation. Deadline Hollywood . Retrieved June 11, 2025 .

^ Sanders, Linley (April 5, 2022).

"Trust in Media 2022: Where Americans get their news and who they trust for information" . YouGov . Retrieved June 12, 2025 .

^ Sanders, Linley (May 8, 2023).

"Trust in Media 2023: What news outlets do Americans trust most for information?" . YouGov . Retrieved June 12, 2025 .

^ Orth, Taylor; Bialik, Carl (May 30, 2024).

"Trust in Media 2024: Which news sources Americans trust — and which they think lean left or right" . YouGov . Retrieved June 12, 2025 .

^ Orth, Taylor; Bialik, Carl (May 30, 2025).

"Trust in Media 2025: Which news sources Americans use and trust" . YouGov . Retrieved June 12, 2025 .

^ [ 188 ] [ 189 ] [ 190 ] [ 191 ] ^ "YouGov Survey: Policy Support" (PDF) . YouGov. February 14, 2025 . Retrieved June 15, 2025 .

^ Lipka, Michael; Matsa, Katerina Eva (March 26, 2025).

"Americans more likely to support than oppose continuing federal funding for NPR and PBS" . Pew Research Center . Retrieved June 12, 2025 .

^ "YouGov Survey: Policy Support" (PDF) . YouGov. April 25, 2025 . Retrieved June 15, 2025 .

^ " The Economist /YouGov Poll" (PDF) . YouGov. June 24, 2025 . Retrieved June 29, 2025 .

^ Montgomery, David; Orth, Taylor (July 22, 2025).

"Comparing disapproval of Trump and Biden, Ukraine aid, Jeffrey Epstein, and PBS: July 18 - 21, 2025 Economist/YouGov Poll" . YouGov . Retrieved July 23, 2025 .

^ [ 193 ] [ 194 ] [ 195 ] [ 196 ] [ 197 ] ^ "PBS and Member Stations Voted 'Most Trusted' Institution for 18 Consecutive Years" . PBS. February 2, 2021.

Archived from the original on March 16, 2021 . Retrieved March 23, 2021 .

^ Porter, Rick (August 1, 2025).

"Corporation for Public Broadcasting Shutting Down After Federal Funding Rescission" .

The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved August 1, 2025 .

^ "Corporation for Public Broadcasting Addresses Operations Following Loss of Federal Funding" . Corporation for Public Broadcasting . Retrieved August 1, 2025 .

^ npr.org: Corporation for Public Broadcasting says it's shutting down ^ a b c Behrens, Steve (February 8, 1999).

"Nesmith wins $47 million in video suit against PBS" .

Current . Archived from the original on August 18, 2016 . Retrieved May 30, 2016 .

^ Mifflin, Lawrie (February 3, 1999).

"Jury Rules That PBS Must Pay Video Distributor $47 Million" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 30, 2016 . Retrieved May 30, 2016 .

^ "Hey, hey, it's a Monkee victory" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on April 9, 2016 . Retrieved May 30, 2016 .

^ a b "WARN" . PBS.

Archived from the original on October 15, 2013 . Retrieved October 12, 2013 .

Works cited [ edit ] White, Howard A. (1994).

"Fine Tuning the Federal Government's Role in Public Broadcasting" .

The Federal Communications Law Journal .

46 (3).

Federal Communications Bar Association : 491– 519.

Zansberg, Steven D. (1994). " 'Objectivity and Balance' in Public Broadcasting: Unwise, Unworkable, and Unconstitutional".

Yale Law & Policy Review .

12 (1).

Yale Law School : 184– 230.

hdl : 20.500.13051/16773 .

JSTOR 40239420 .

Goldstein, Mark L.; Finedore, John (2004).

TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Issues Related to Federal Funding for Public Television by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting (PDF) (Report). General Accounting Office . Retrieved December 15, 2024 .

Goldstein, Mark L. (2007).

TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Issues Related to the Structure and Funding of Public Television (PDF) (Report). Government Accountability Office . Retrieved December 15, 2024 .

Phillips, Jonathan M. (2007).

"Freedom by Design: Objective Analysis and the Constitutional Status of Public Broadcasting" .

University of Pennsylvania Law Review .

155 (4).

University of Pennsylvania Law School : 991– 1020.

JSTOR 40041331 . Retrieved June 20, 2025 .

The Information Needs of Communities: The Changing Media Landscape In a Broadband Age (PDF) (Report). Federal Communications Commission. 2011 . Retrieved May 2, 2025 .

Alternative Sources of Funding for Public Broadcasting Stations (PDF) (Report). Corporation for Public Broadcasting. 2012 . Retrieved December 15, 2024 .

McLoughlin, Glenn J.; Gomez, Lena A. (July 3, 2017).

The Corporation for Public Broadcasting: Federal Funding and Issues (PDF) (Report). Congressional Research Service . Retrieved June 11, 2025 .

Humphreys, Brian E. (May 23, 2025).

Public Broadcasting: Background Information and Current Issues for Congress (PDF) (Report). Congressional Research Service . Retrieved June 4, 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bullert, B.J. (1997).

Public Television: Politics and the Battle over Documentary Film . Rutgers University Press.

ISBN 978-0-813-52470-2 .

Dornfeld, Barry (1998).

Producing Public Television, Producing Public Culture . Princeton University Press.

Engelman, Ralph (1996).

Public Radio and Television in America: A Political History . Sage Publications.

Ledbetter, James (1998).

Made Possible by: The Death of Public Broadcasting in the United States . Verso.

ISBN 978-1-859-84029-0 .

Pachelbel, Johann (1932).

UPI Television Network logo . Art Scott.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to PBS (United States) .

Official website PBS "Red Book" (presentation guidelines for PBS programming) Current , the newspaper about public TV and radio in the United States Designing Healthy Communities by PBS PBS Editorial Standards and Practices "Articles of Incorporation of Public Broadcasting Service" .

Current .

American University School of Communication . November 3, 1969 . Retrieved January 15, 2025 .

v t e PBS Documentaries Independent Lens ( episodes ) (since August 9, 1999) PBS Short Film Festival (since 2012) POV ( episodes ) (since July 5, 1988) Drama Masterpiece (since January 10, 1971) Music and fine arts American Masters ( episodes ) (since June 22, 1986) Art:21 (since 2001) Austin City Limits ( performers ) (since January 3, 1976) Bluegrass Underground (since 2011) Craft in America (since 2007) Great Performances ( episodes ) (since November 4, 1972) Next at the Kennedy Center (since 2023) History American Experience ( episodes ) (since October 4, 1988) Antiques Roadshow (since January 9, 1997) Finding Your Roots ( episodes ) (since March 25, 2012) Secrets of the Dead (since May 15, 2000) News and public affairs Amanpour & Company (since September 10, 2018) BBC World News America (since June 3, 2019 from American Public Television ) Firing Line ( episodes ) (April 4, 1966 – December 26, 1999; since June 22, 2018) Frontline ( episodes ) (since January 17, 1983) PBS News Hour (since October 20, 1975) To the Contrary with Bonnie Erbé (since April 3, 1992) Washington Week (since February 23, 1967) Personalities Samantha Brown Ken Burns Ric Burns Amy Holmes Bill Moyers Hari Sreenivasan Judy Woodruff How-to and special interest MotorWeek (since October 15, 1981) This Old House ( episodes ) (since January 1, 1979) Science and nature Nature ( episodes ) (since October 10, 1982) Nova ( episodes ) (since March 3, 1974) Networks Create PBS PBS America (UK) PBS Digital Studios PBS Kids PBS YOU 1 World Channel Major stations Boston WGBH WGBX Chicago WTTW Dallas KERA Houston KUHT Los Angeles KCET KLCS KOCE Maryland MPT Miami–Ft. Lauderdale–West Palm Beach WLRN WPBT WXEL New Jersey NJ PBS New York WLIW WNET Philadelphia–Wilmington–Lehigh Valley WHYY WLVT Pittsburgh WQED San Francisco/Watsonville/San Jose KQED/KQET KQEH Tampa–St. Petersburg WEDQ WEDU Washington, D.C.

WETA WHUT Former BBC OS (January 1, 2020 – March 30, 2023) A Chef's Life (September 7, 2013 – October 22, 2018) Need to Know (May 7, 2010 – June 28, 2013) We'll Meet Again with Ann Curry (January 23, 2018 – January 8, 2019) Related Public broadcasting in the United States Corporation for Public Broadcasting America's Public Television Stations List of PBS member stations List of programs broadcast by PBS PBS Distribution PBS Satellite Service Executive Order 14290 1 Defunct network 2 Distributed by American Public Television (APT) v t e Lyndon B. Johnson 36th President of the United States (1963–1969) 37th Vice President of the United States (1961–1963) U.S. Senator from Texas (1949–1961) U.S. Representative for TX-10 (1937–1949) Presidency Timeline Inaugurations first second Let Us Continue Great Society ( Model Cities Program ) Architectural Barriers Act Child Nutrition Act Clean Air Act Civil Rights Act of 1964 Coinage Act of 1965 Department of Housing and Urban Development Department of Transportation Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 Head Start Program Job Corps Elementary and Secondary Education Act Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Civil Rights Act of 1968 Fair Housing Act Truth in Lending Act Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1968 Food Stamp Act of 1964 Glassboro Summit Gun Control Act of 1968 Higher Education Act of 1965 Upward Bound TRIO Teacher Corps Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 Johnson Doctrine Dominican Republic occupation Medicare Medicaid Meritorious Service Medal National Endowment for the Arts National Endowment for the Humanities Executive Order 11246 Executive Order 11375 Older Americans Act Operation CHAOS Outer Space Treaty Public Broadcasting Act of 1967 Foreign policy Vietnam War Gulf of Tonkin Resolution " Credibility gap " VISTA 24th Amendment Voting Rights Act of 1965 War on poverty White House Conference on Civil Rights Cannabis policy White House preservation State of the Union Address 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 Cabinet Judicial appointments Supreme Court Thurgood Marshall Supreme Court nomination controversies Johnson desk Presidential transition of Richard Nixon Executive Orders Presidential Proclamations Life Early years and career Operation Texas Texas Broadcasting Company Johnson Amendment Box 13 scandal Bashir Ahmad Charles E. Marsh Alice Marsh Legacy and memorials Bibliography Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum Lyndon B. Johnson National Grassland Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center Lyndon Baines Johnson Day Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs Memorial Grove on the Potomac U.S. Postage stamp USS Lyndon B. Johnson Black Jack (state funeral riderless horse) Elections United States House of Representatives 1937 (special) 1938 1940 1942 1944 1946 United States Senate 1941 (special) 1948 1954 1960 Democratic Party presidential primaries 1960 1964 campaign 1968 withdrawal Democratic National Conventions 1956 1960 1964 Presidential elections 1960 transition 1964 Public image Lyndon B. Johnson in popular culture Daisy advertisement Johnson cult The Years of Lyndon Johnson Master of the Senate LBJ (1991 television film) Path to War (2002 film) All the Way ( play , film ) Selma (2014 film) LBJ (2017 film) Family Claudia "Lady Bird" Taylor Johnson (wife) Lynda Bird Johnson Robb (daughter) Luci Baines Johnson (daughter) Samuel Ealy Johnson Jr.

(father) Sam Houston Johnson (brother) Samuel Ealy Johnson Sr.

(grandfather) Joseph Wilson Baines (grandfather) George Washington Baines (great-grandfather) Chuck Robb (son-in-law) ← John F. Kennedy Richard Nixon → ← Richard Nixon Hubert Humphrey → Category v t e Public broadcasting in the United States Carnegie Commission on Educational Television Public Broadcasting Act of 1967 Executive Order 14290 Corporation for Public Broadcasting Rescissions Act of 2025 Current Radio syndicators American Public Media NPR Pacifica Public Radio Exchange Terrestrial television American PTV Create World PBS Kids FNX America's Public Television Stations Cable and satellite Classic Arts Showcase Free Speech TV PBS Satellite Service SCOLA Streaming media NASA+ PBS Digital Studios Statewide networks Radio Alaska Colorado Connecticut Georgia Hawaii Iowa Maine Minnesota Mississippi Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire North Dakota Oregon Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Utah Vermont West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Television Alabama Alaska Arkansas Colorado Connecticut Georgia Hawaii Idaho Iowa Kentucky KET2 Louisiana Maine Maryland Mississippi Montana Nebraska New Hampshire New Jersey North Carolina North Dakota Oklahoma Oregon Puerto Rico Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Utah Vermont West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Regional networks Radio Alabama Boise State Central Michigan Univ.

Chicagoland High Plains Indiana Interlochen (Northern Michigan) Jefferson (Southern Oregon/Northern California) Michigan Radio Montana New England New Jersey North Carolina North Country Northeast (Albany) Northern (Illinois) Northwest Radio IQ Red River Yellowstone Public Television East Tennessee PBS Milwaukee PBS Network Knowledge Ozarks PTV Pioneer PBS Sistema TV Smoky Hills PBS Southern Oregon PBS WCMU Public Media WIPR-TV Local non-commercial independents School-owned KRSU-TV KUEN WBEC-TV WDSC-TV WEFS WILC-CD WPDS-LD WTVI Community-operated KPJK WLAE-TV WLMF-LD WNYE-TV Defunct AlaskaOne Association of Public Radio Stations Better Public Broadcasting Association PPTN DoD News Channel Educational Television Stations K07UF K35DG-D Link TV MHz Networks MHz WorldView NASA TV National Association of Educational Broadcasters National Educational Television National Educational Radio Network NJN Public Radio International W06BD W07BP-D Archives American Archive of Public Broadcasting National Public Broadcasting Archives PBCore v t e Broadcast television networks in the United States v t e Current English-language broadcast television networks in the United States Major ABC CBS The CW The CW Plus Fox MyNetworkTV NBC Public PBS Satellite Service Kids Classic Arts Showcase Create First Nations Experience World Channel Specialty Domestic news Newsmax2 Real America's Voice YTA TV International news CaribVision Deutsche Welle France 24 NHK World Weather Fox Weather WeatherNation Sports beIN Sports Xtra Rev'n Minority Black Bounce TV Dabl TheGrio Soul of the South 365BLK Asian Asia Vision Diya TV NTD VIETV Korean Arirang TV Arirang Radio KBS America MBC SBS Reality and lifestyle Defy Fave TV Localish Merit TV The Nest Nosey Quest Music CA Music The Country Network Heartland LATV Legal & true crime Court TV Law & Crime Network NBC American Crimes Oxygen True Crime Network Classic Ace TV Cozi TV Get MeTV MeTV+ MeTV Toons Retro TV Films Movies!

NOST Comedy Antenna TV Rewind TV Catchy Comedy Laff Roar Westerns Grit Outlaw Drama & action Action Charge!

Comet H&I Start TV Ion Ion Mystery Ion Plus Niche & genre Buzzr Family Channel Story TV Religious CBN News Cornerstone Daystar RadiantTV SonLife TBN Inspire Positiv TCT Home shopping HSN Jewelry TV OnTV4U QVC Shop LC v t e Defunct English-language broadcast television networks in the United States Major commercial DuMont UPN The WB Pax TV PTEN OPT NTA Film Network ON/United Paramount Television Network Minor commercial America One AIN Channel America Cheddar ci Circle i Classic Reruns TV Digi-TV Hughes JUCE TV Light TV Mizlou Mutual Television Network N1 NATV i NBC LX Home Omni PBJ Plum TV qubo SFM Holiday Star Smile TrueReal Theater TV This TV Tuff TV Twist UATV VTV The Works Public NET MHz Worldview i ResearchChannel Specialty News ABC News Now i All News Channel DoD News Local AccuWeather Channel NBC Wx+/NBC+ Newsmax TV ci Newsy/Scripps News i TouchVision Sports American Sports Network Stadium i SportsGrid i Sportsman c TVS Universal Sports Home shopping America's Store Gems TV Gun TV Ion Shop Shop at Home ValueVision / ShopNBC / evine / ShopHQ Music Bohemia Visual Music i The Box MTV2 c Tr3s c Retro Jams TheCoolTV The Tube c - Now cable-only, i - Now internet-only v t e Spanish-language broadcast television networks in the United States Major domestic Estrella TV Telemundo Univision UniMas Minor domestic América TeVé Nuestra Visión Novelisima LATV Mega TV TeleXitos Visión Latina Major imported FORO Canal 6/Multimedios Milenio Televisión Mexicanal Canal Once Canal 22 Telemax Teleritmo Religious Almavision Canal de La Fe 3ABN Latino Enlace Esperanza TV ESNE EWTN en Español Tele Vida Abundante Specialty Cine Mexicano Tele N MiCasa Network Mira TV ¡Sorpresa!

TeLe-Romántica Defunct América CV Azteca América Hispanic Television Network Inmigrante TV LAT TV MundoMax Soi TV Tr3s TuVisión VasalloVision v t e Religious broadcast television networks in the United States TBN Networks TBN TBN Inspire Positiv Enlace (Spanish language) Salsa TBN Francophone (French language) English Al Karma TV Adventist Review TV Amazing Facts TV BYU TV CatholicTV CFN CBN CTN Cornerstone Daystar EICB TV EWTN FBC GEB GLC GOD Hope IQRA TV It Is Written TV LLBN SBN 3ABN 3ABN Dare to Dream Network 3ABN International (with 3ABN Australia) 3ABN Kids Network 3ABN Praise Him Music Network 3ABN Proclaim! Network PTL RadiantTV SafeTV TLN) TCT UBN The Walk TV Word WHT Spanish Aliento Vision Almavisión Aviva TV CTNi Daystar Español Esperanza TV ESNE Familia TV Fe-TV HCCN Iglesia JEMIR Red AdVenir Tele Vida Abundante 3ABN Latino Network Tvida Vision Visión Latina French 3ABN Français Network Defunct The Inspiration Network JUCE TV Kids & Teens TV Sky Angel Smile Worship v t e Additional resources on North American television North America List of local television stations in North America DTV transition North American TV mini-template Canada Canadian networks List of Canadian television networks List of Canadian television channels List of Canadian specialty channels Local Canadian TV stations List of United States stations available in Canada 2001 Vancouver TV realignment 2007 Canada broadcast TV realignment Mexico Mexican networks Local Mexican TV stations United States American networks List of American cable and satellite networks List of American over-the-air networks Local American TV stations (W) Local American TV stations (K) Spanish-language TV networks 1989 South Florida television affiliation switch 1994–1996 U.S. TV realignment 2006 U.S. TV realignment List of Canadian television stations available in the United States v t e Digital television in North America Terrestrial Digital broadcasting ATSC tuners Digital subchannels Virtual channels Distributed transmission system Datacasting Guide Plus National Datacast UpdateLogic Metropolitan Television Alliance Grand Alliance Digital switchover All-Channel Receiver Act SAFER Act Digital channel election Set-top boxes Digital television adapter U.S. Converter Box Coupon Program legislation Analog passthrough DVD recorders Digital video recorders Digital standards ATSC standards ATSC ATSC-M/H 8VSB A-VSB E-VSB PSIP PMCP full list Standard-definition TV 480i 576i Enhanced-definition TV 480p 576p High-definition TV 720p 1080i 1080p Ultra high-definition TV 2160p Serial digital interface Smart antennas CEA-909 Digital networks Digital multicast television network see Template:American broadcast television Template:Canadian television networks National deployment List by country Canada Mexico United States HDTV transition wireless spectrum auction Cable Digital cable Digital-cable-ready TV QAM tuners Interactive-digital-cable-ready TV OpenCable Application Platform Encryption Must-carry Subscription TV AllVid CableCARD Downloadable Conditional Access System Tru2way Satellite TV DVB-S Dish Network GlobeCast World TV Free-to-air receiver Bell Satellite TV / Telus Satellite TV Dish México DigiCipher 2 4DTV Shaw Direct Claro Puerto Rico Digital Satellite Service / DVB-S2 DirecTV Vrio / Sky Brazil Sky Mexico IPTV U-verse TV Bell Fibe TV FibreOP Telus Optik TV Technical issues 14:9 aspect ratio Active Format Description Broadcast flag Channel protection ratios HDTV blur Hierarchical modulation Pirate decryption Standards conversion Video on demand v t e Video on demand services Digital library Streaming media Video on demand Free or ad-supported 3ABN+ 7plus 9Now 10 ABC iview Abema Amazon miniTV MX Player Angel Studios Arte Boutique BBC iPlayer Bilibili Binge (Bangladeshi streaming service) Bioscope Bongo BD Brollie CBC Gem Channel 4 CONtv CSpace CTV Movies / Throwback CW Seed ERTFLIX Facebook Watch Fandango at Home 5 France·tv Globoplay Free Haystack News Hoopla Ici TOU.TV ITVX iWant Joyn Kanopy Lemino Libreflix Local Now meWATCH Mediaset Infinity (Italy) Mediaset Infinity (Spain) MX Player NASA+ Ora TV PBS PBS Kids PictureBox Films Plex Pluto TV Pop Player PPTV RaiPlay RTÉ Player RTP Play RCTI+ The Roku Channel RTVE Play Red Bull TV Revry SBS On Demand Shahid Shout! Factory TV Sling Freestream Snapchat Spuul STV Player SVT Play Stirr Telemundo TF1+ ThreeNow Toffee Toon Goggles tonton Tubi TVer Tvigle TVNZ+ tvyo S4C Clic U Vevo Viddsee Vidio Viki Virgin Media Play Vision+ Viva One ViX Voddler VMX Xfinity Streampix XITE Xumo YouTube Kids YuppTV Subscription -based Abema Premium Acorn TV Aha Alchemiya Allblk ALTBalaji Amazon Prime Video AMC+ Ameba TV ANT1+ Apple TV+ APTN Lumi Atresplayer BBC Select Beacon Bentkey BET+ Binge (Australian streaming service) Binge (Bangladeshi streaming service) Bioscope BritBox Bongo BD Brown Sugar Canal+ Chorki Club illico C More Play Crave Criterion Channel Crunchyroll Curiosity Stream DailyWire+ Discovery+ Disney+ Hotstar Star d-anime Store DMM TV DocPlay Dropout Eros Now ETV Win Fandor Floatplane Filmin Fox Nation Fox One Foxtel Now France Channel GagaOOLala Gaia Globoplay + live channels Telecine Great American Pure Flix Hayu Hidive History Vault Hulu Hulu Japan Iflix iQIYI Lemino Premium HBO Max Infinity+ (Italy) Infinity+ (Spain) MGM+ Irokotv ITVX Premium iWant Kocowa Mango TV Means TV meWATCH Prime Mola Motor Trend Mubi Nebula Neon Netflix Night Flight Plus Now Oneplay OSN+ OutTVGO Pantaya Paramount+ PBS Passport Peacock RTL+ Shahid VIP Showmax Shudder SkyShowtime Sling TV SonyLIV Sony Pictures Core Spacetoon Go Stan Starz STV Player+ SundanceNow Sun NXT TAPP TV Telasa The Roku Channel TIMvision Toffee Toku TV 2 Play TVING U-Next Paravi Upstream Viaplay VidAngel Videoland Vidio Premier Vision+ Premium Viu Viva One ViX ViX Premium VMX Voyo VVVVID Wondrium WeTV WOW Presents Plus XITE Yippee TV Youku YouTube Premium ZEE5 Rental or purchase Amazon Prime Video Apple TV DLsite Fandango at Home FandangoNOW Google Play Google TV Huawei Video iTunes Store Microsoft Movies & TV Nintendo eShop Rakuten TV Sky Store Sony Pictures Core The Great Courses YouTube Movies & Shows Sports All Japan Pro Wrestling TV B/R Live beIN Sports Connect Big Japan Pro Wrestling Core DAZN Eleven Sports ESPN+ Eurosport Player Fanseat Fanatiz FloSports FuboTV Honor Club Kayo Sports Laola1 MLB.tv MLS Season Pass NBA League Pass NBL TV New Japan Pro-Wrestling World NFL Game Pass Premier Football OneSoccer Sky Sport Now Sportsnet Now Stan Sport T Sports TSN Direct TNA+ Triller TV NWA All Access UFC Fight Pass WatchAFL WatchNRL Wrestle Universe WWE Network TV Everywhere ABC AMC Premiere Bally Sports app CBS Cinemax On Demand CNN TV app DisneyNow Foxtel Go Freeform FXNOW Canais Globo HGTV NBC Redbox Free Live TV Sky Go Sky Q Spark Sport The CW TVB Anywhere Watch TBS Ziggo Go Discontinued 123Movies Amazon Freevee AnimeLab Blim TV BluTV CNN+ Crackle DC Universe Disney Deluxe dittoTV Dplay DramaFever FOXNOW Funimation FX+ Global Wrestling Network go90 GolfTV HBO Go HBO Now Hillsong Channel Now Hitchhike TV HOOQ Lightbox NBC Sports Gold Noggin On Demand PlayStation Video Popcornflix Presto Quibi Quickflix Redbox Redbox Instant Salto Seeso Shomi Sky On Demand Sky Select Struum Star+ Veoh Vessel Viewster Voot VRV VyRT Wakanim WatchESPN Yahoo! Screen Related Australia Canada New Zealand v t e Primetime Emmy Governors Award 1970s William S. Paley (1978) Walter Cronkite (1979) 1980s Johnny Carson (1980) Elton Rule (1981) Hallmark Cards, Inc.

(1982) Sylvester L. "Pat" Weaver (1983) Bob Hope (1984) Alistair Cooke (1985) Red Skelton (1986) Grant Tinker (1987) William Hanna & Joseph Barbera (1988) Lucille Ball (1989) 1990s Leonard Goldenson (1990) Masterpiece Theatre (1991) Ted Turner (1992) No Award (1993) No Award (1994) PBS (1995) USA 's Erase the Hate Campaign / Turner's Native American Initiative (1996) ABC 's March Against Drugs Campaign / Comic Relief USA / Jac Venza (1997) National Geographic Channel / Great Books Literacy Project (1998) MTV 's "Fight for Your Rights: Take a Stand Against Violence" / Save Our History (1999) 2000s A&E 's The Biography Project for Schools / The Teen Files / VH1 Save the Music Foundation (2000) CNN / Showtime (2001) ABC , CBS , Fox , and NBC for America: A Tribute to Heroes (2002) Lifetime Network 's "Stop the Violence Against Women" initiative (2003) Viacom Inc.

(2004) Jerry Lewis (2005) MTVu Campaign for Darfur (2006) Idol Gives Back / The Addiction Project (2007) Planet Earth (2008) Sheila Nevins and her HBO documentary unit (2009) 2010s Norman Brokaw / Ad Council (2010) John Walsh (2011) It Gets Better Project (co-founders Dan Savage and Terry Miller) (2012) June Foray (2013) Marion Dougherty (2014) A+E Networks (2015) American Idol (2016) ITVS (2017) Star Trek (2018) No Award (2019) 2020s Tyler Perry and The Perry Foundation (2020) Debbie Allen (2021) Geena Davis Institute on Gender in Media (2022) GLAAD (2023) Greg Berlanti (2024) v t e Webby Awards Nominee , 1997 award in the category TV winner , 1998 award in the category TV Awards ceremonies 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 List of winners Related navigational templates Sports television in the United States American broadcast television World Radio Network Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States France BnF data Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef MusicBrainz label SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐7nt24
Cached time: 20250818015954
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.626 seconds
Real time usage: 2.947 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16096/1000000
Revision size: 113999/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 811146/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13249/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 819702/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.710/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12121094/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2425.850      1 -total
 50.72% 1230.385      2 Template:Reflist
 19.90%  482.671     82 Template:Cite_web
 19.49%  472.858     80 Template:Cite_news
  9.28%  225.215      2 Template:Excerpt
  7.13%  172.983      2 Template:Infobox
  7.13%  172.916      1 Template:Infobox_television_channel
  5.90%  143.059     21 Template:Navbox
  4.66%  112.926     16 Template:Sfn
  3.40%   82.541      1 Template:PBSTV Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:stable-pcache:29697498:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818015954 and revision id 1306388129. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=PBS&oldid=1306388129 " Categories : 1969 establishments in the United States Commercial-free television networks Companies based in Virginia Corporation for Public Broadcasting Crystal City, Virginia Educational and instructional television channels English-language television stations in the United States Mass media companies established in 1969 Peabody Award winners PBS Public television in the United States Publicly funded English language broadcasters Television channels and stations established in 1969 Television networks in the United States Webby Award winners YouTube channels launched in 2006 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use mdy dates from April 2025 Use American English from February 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox television channel Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2015 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with excerpts Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 13:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents PBS 48 languages Add topic

