Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Philosophy of mathematics 2.1.1 Cauchy and uniform convergence 2.2 Research programmes 2.3 Pseudoscience 2.3.1 Darwin's theory 2.4 Rational reconstructions of the history of science 3 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 3.1 Feyerabend 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Imre Lakatos 51 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Magyar Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hungarian philosopher of mathematics and science (1922–1974) For other people with the same name, see Lakatos (disambiguation) .

The native form of this personal name is Lakatos Imre . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

Imre Lakatos Lakatos, c. 1960s Born ( 1922-11-09 ) 9 November 1922 Debrecen , Kingdom of Hungary Died 2 February 1974 (1974-02-02) (aged 51) London, England Education Education University of Debrecen (PhD, 1948) Moscow State University University of Cambridge (PhD, 1961) Thesis Essays in the Logic of Mathematical Discovery (1961) Doctoral advisor R. B. Braithwaite Other advisors Sofya Yanovskaya Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy [ 1 ] Historical turn [ 1 ] Fallibilism Mathematical quasi-empiricism Historiographical internalism [ 2 ] Institutions London School of Economics Doctoral students Donald A. Gillies Spiro Latsis John Worrall Main interests Philosophy of mathematics , philosophy of science , history of science , epistemology , politics Notable ideas Method of proofs and refutations, methodology of scientific research programmes, methodology of historiographical research programmes, [ 4 ] positive vs. negative heuristics, progressive vs. degenerative research programmes, rational reconstruction , mathematical quasi-empiricism , criticism of logical positivism and formalism , sophisticated falsificationism , [ 5 ] Research program Imre Lakatos ( UK : / ˈ l æ k ə t ɒ s / , [ 6 ] US : /- t oʊ s / ; Hungarian : Lakatos Imre [ˈlɒkɒtoʃ ˈimrɛ] ; 9 November 1922 – 2 February 1974) was a Hungarian philosopher of mathematics and science , known for his thesis of the fallibility of mathematics and its "methodology of proofs and refutations" in its pre-axiomatic stages of development, and also for introducing the concept of the " research programme " in his methodology of scientific research programmes.

Life [ edit ] Lakatos was born Imre (Avrum) Lipsitz to a Jewish family in Debrecen , Hungary , in 1922. He received a degree in mathematics, physics , and philosophy from the University of Debrecen in 1944. In March 1944, the Germans invaded Hungary , and Lakatos, along with Éva Révész, his then-girlfriend and subsequent wife, formed a Marxist resistance group. In May of that year, the group was joined by Éva Izsák, a 19-year-old Jewish antifascist activist. Lakatos, considering that there was a risk that she would be captured and forced to betray them, decided that her duty to the group was to commit suicide. Subsequently, a member of the group took her to Debrecen and gave her cyanide .

[ 7 ] During the occupation, Lakatos avoided Nazi persecution of Jews by changing his surname to Molnár.

[ 8 ] His mother and grandmother were murdered in Auschwitz . He changed his surname once again to Lakatos (Locksmith) in honor of Géza Lakatos .

After the war, from 1947, he worked as a senior official in the Hungarian Ministry of Education. He also continued his education with a PhD at Debrecen University, awarded in 1948 and also attended György Lukács 's weekly Wednesday afternoon private seminars. He also studied at the Moscow State University under the supervision of Sofya Yanovskaya in 1949. When he returned, however, he found himself on the losing side of internal arguments within the Hungarian communist party and was imprisoned on charges of revisionism from 1950 to 1953. More of Lakatos's activities in Hungary after World War II have recently become known. In fact, Lakatos was a hardline Stalinist and, despite his young age, had an important role between 1945 and 1950 (his own arrest and jailing) in building up the Communist rule, especially in cultural life and academia, in Hungary.

[ 9 ] After his release, Lakatos returned to academic life, doing mathematical research and translating George Pólya 's How to Solve It into Hungarian. Still nominally a communist, his political views had shifted markedly, and he was involved with at least one dissident student group in the lead-up to the 1956 Hungarian Revolution .

After the Soviet Union invaded Hungary in November 1956, Lakatos fled to Vienna and later reached England. He lived there for the rest of his life, however, he never achieved British citizenship.

[ 10 ] He received a PhD in philosophy in 1961 from the University of Cambridge ; his doctoral thesis was entitled Essays in the Logic of Mathematical Discovery , and his doctoral advisor was R. B. Braithwaite . The book Proofs and Refutations: The Logic of Mathematical Discovery , published after his death, is based on this work.

In 1960, he was appointed to a position in the London School of Economics (LSE), where he wrote on the philosophy of mathematics and the philosophy of science . The LSE philosophy of science department at that time included Karl Popper , Joseph Agassi and J. O. Wisdom .

[ 11 ] It was Agassi who first introduced Lakatos to Popper under the rubric of his applying a fallibilist methodology of conjectures and refutations to mathematics in his Cambridge PhD thesis.

With co-editor Alan Musgrave , he edited the often cited Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge , the Proceedings of the International Colloquium in the Philosophy of Science, London, 1965. Published in 1970, the 1965 Colloquium included well-known speakers delivering papers in response to Thomas Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions .

In January 1971, he became editor of the British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , which J. O. Wisdom had built up before departing in 1965, and he continued as editor until his death in 1974, [ 12 ] after which it was then edited jointly for many years by his LSE colleagues John W. N. Watkins and John Worrall , Lakatos's ex-research assistant.

Lakatos and his colleague Spiro Latsis organized an international conference in Greece in 1975, and went ahead despite his death. It was devoted entirely to historical case studies in Lakatos's methodology of research programmes in the physical sciences and economics. These case studies in such as Einstein's relativity programme, Fresnel 's wave theory of light and neoclassical economics , were published by Cambridge University Press in two separate volumes in 1976, one devoted to physical sciences and Lakatos's general programme for rewriting the history of science, with a concluding critique by his great friend Paul Feyerabend , and the other devoted to economics.

[ 13 ] He remained at LSE until his sudden death in 1974 of a heart attack [ 14 ] at the age of 51. The Lakatos Award was set up by the school in his memory. His last lectures along with parts of his correspondence with Paul Feyerabend have been published in For and Against Method .

[ 15 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Philosophy of mathematics [ edit ] Main article: Proofs and Refutations Lakatos's philosophy of mathematics was inspired by both Hegel 's and Marx 's dialectic , by Karl Popper 's theory of knowledge, and by the work of mathematician George Pólya .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The 1976 book Proofs and Refutations is based on the first three chapters of his 1961 four-chapter doctoral thesis Essays in the Logic of Mathematical Discovery . But its first chapter is Lakatos's own revision of its chapter 1 that was first published as Proofs and Refutations in four parts in 1963–64 in the British Journal for the Philosophy of Science . It is largely taken up by a fictional dialogue set in a mathematics class. The students are attempting to prove the formula for the Euler characteristic in algebraic topology , which is a theorem about the properties of polyhedra , namely that for all polyhedra the number of their vertices V minus the number of their edges E plus the number of their faces F is 2 ( V − E + F = 2 ). The dialogue is meant to represent the actual series of attempted proofs that mathematicians historically offered for the conjecture , only to be repeatedly refuted by counterexamples . Often, the students paraphrase famous mathematicians such as Cauchy , as noted in Lakatos's extensive footnotes.

Lakatos termed the polyhedral counterexamples to Euler's formula monsters and distinguished three ways of handling these objects: Firstly, monster-barring , by which means the theorem in question could not be applied to such objects. Secondly, monster-adjustment , whereby by making a re-appraisal of the monster it could be made to obey the proposed theorem. Thirdly, exception handling , a further distinct process. These distinct strategies have been taken up in qualitative physics, where the terminology of monsters has been applied to apparent counterexamples, and the techniques of monster-barring and monster-adjustment recognized as approaches to the refinement of the analysis of a physical issue.

[ 18 ] What Lakatos tried to establish was that no theorem of informal mathematics is final or perfect. This means that we should not think that a theorem is ultimately true, only that no counterexample has yet been found. Once a counterexample is found, we adjust the theorem, possibly extending the domain of its validity. This is a continuous way our knowledge accumulates, through the logic and process of proofs and refutations. (If axioms are given for a branch of mathematics, however, Lakatos claimed that proofs from those axioms were tautological , i.e.

logically true .) [ 19 ] Lakatos proposed an account of mathematical knowledge based on the idea of heuristics . In Proofs and Refutations the concept of "heuristic" was not well developed, although Lakatos gave several basic rules for finding proofs and counterexamples to conjectures. He thought that mathematical " thought experiments " are a valid way to discover mathematical conjectures and proofs, and sometimes called his philosophy "quasi- empiricism ".

However, he also conceived of the mathematical community as carrying on a kind of dialectic to decide which mathematical proofs are valid and which are not. Therefore, he fundamentally disagreed with the " formalist " conception of proof that prevailed in Frege 's and Russell 's logicism , which defines proof simply in terms of formal validity.

On its first publication as an article in the British Journal for the Philosophy of Science in 1963–64, Proofs and Refutations became highly influential on new work in the philosophy of mathematics, although few agreed with Lakatos's strong disapproval of formal proof. Before his death, he had been planning to return to the philosophy of mathematics and apply his theory of research programmes to it. Lakatos, Worrall and Zahar use Poincaré (1893) [ 20 ] to answer one of the major problems perceived by critics, namely that the pattern of mathematical research depicted in Proofs and Refutations does not faithfully represent most of the actual activity of contemporary mathematicians.

[ 21 ] Cauchy and uniform convergence [ edit ] In a 1966 text Cauchy and the continuum , Lakatos re-examines the history of the calculus, with special regard to Augustin-Louis Cauchy and the concept of uniform convergence, in the light of non-standard analysis . Lakatos is concerned that historians of mathematics should not judge the evolution of mathematics in terms of currently fashionable theories. As an illustration, he examines Cauchy's proof that the sum of a series of continuous functions is itself continuous. Lakatos is critical of those who would see Cauchy's proof, with its failure to make explicit a suitable convergence hypothesis, merely as an inadequate approach to Weierstrassian analysis. Lakatos sees in such an approach a failure to realize that Cauchy's concept of the continuum differed from currently dominant views.

Research programmes [ edit ] Lakatos's second major contribution to the philosophy of science was his model of the "research programme", [ 22 ] which he formulated in an attempt to resolve the perceived conflict between Popper's falsificationism and the revolutionary structure of science described by Kuhn . Popper's standard of falsificationism was widely taken to imply that a theory should be abandoned as soon as any evidence appears to challenge it, while Kuhn's descriptions of scientific activity were taken to imply that science is most fruitful during periods in which popular, or "normal", theories are supported despite known anomalies. Lakatos's model of the research programme aims to combine Popper's adherence to empirical validity with Kuhn's appreciation for conventional consistency.

A Lakatosian research programme [ 23 ] is based on a hard core of theoretical assumptions that cannot be abandoned or altered without abandoning the programme altogether. More modest and specific theories that are formulated in order to explain evidence that threatens the "hard core" are termed auxiliary hypotheses . Auxiliary hypotheses are considered expendable by the adherents of the research programme—they may be altered or abandoned as empirical discoveries require in order to "protect" the "hard core". Whereas Popper was generally read as hostile toward such ad hoc theoretical amendments, Lakatos argued that they can be progressive , i.e. productive, when they enhance the programme's explanatory and/or predictive power, and that they are at least permissible until some better system of theories is devised and the research programme is replaced entirely. The difference between a progressive and a degenerative research programme lies, for Lakatos, in whether the recent changes to its auxiliary hypotheses have achieved this greater explanatory/predictive power or whether they have been made simply out of the necessity of offering some response in the face of new and troublesome evidence. A degenerative research programme indicates that a new and more progressive system of theories should be sought to replace the currently prevailing one, but until such a system of theories can be conceived of and agreed upon, abandonment of the current one would only further weaken our explanatory power and would therefore be unacceptable for Lakatos. Lakatos's primary example of a research programme that had been successful in its time and then progressively replaced is that founded by Isaac Newton , with his three laws of motion forming the "hard core".

The Lakatosian research programme deliberately provides a framework within which research can be conducted on the basis of "first principles" (the "hard core"), which are shared by those involved in the research programme and accepted for the purpose of that research without further proof or debate. In this regard, it is similar to Kuhn's notion of a paradigm. Lakatos sought to replace Kuhn's paradigm, guided by an irrational "psychology of discovery", with a research programme no less coherent or consistent, yet guided by Popper's objectively valid logic of discovery .

Lakatos was following Pierre Duhem 's idea that one can always protect a cherished theory (or part of one) from hostile evidence by redirecting the criticism toward other theories or parts thereof. (See Confirmation holism and Duhem–Quine thesis ). This aspect of falsification had been acknowledged by Popper.

Popper 's theory, falsificationism, proposed that scientists put forward theories and that nature "shouts NO" in the form of an inconsistent observation. According to Popper, it is irrational for scientists to maintain their theories in the face of nature's rejection, as Kuhn had described them doing. For Lakatos, however, "It is not that we propose a theory and Nature may shout NO; rather, we propose a maze of theories, and nature may shout INCONSISTENT".

[ 24 ] The continued adherence to a programme's "hard core", augmented with adaptable auxiliary hypotheses, reflects Lakatos's less strict standard of falsificationism.

Lakatos saw himself as merely extending Popper's ideas, which changed over time and were interpreted by many in conflicting ways. In his 1968 article "Criticism and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes", [ 25 ] Lakatos contrasted Popper0 , the "naive falsificationist" who demanded unconditional rejection of any theory in the face of any anomaly (an interpretation Lakatos saw as erroneous but that he nevertheless referred to often); Popper1 , the more nuanced and conservatively interpreted philosopher; and Popper2 , the "sophisticated methodological falsificationist" that Lakatos claims is the logical extension of the correctly interpreted ideas of Popper1 (and who is therefore essentially Lakatos himself). It is, therefore, very difficult to determine which ideas and arguments concerning the research programme should be credited to whom.

While Lakatos dubbed his theory "sophisticated methodological falsificationism", it is not "methodological" in the strict sense of asserting universal methodological rules by which all scientific research must abide. Rather, it is methodological only in that theories are only abandoned according to a methodical progression from worse theories to better theories—a stipulation overlooked by what Lakatos terms "dogmatic falsificationism". Methodological assertions in the strict sense, pertaining to which methods are valid and which are invalid, are themselves contained within the research programmes that choose to adhere to them, and should be judged according to whether the research programmes that adhere to them prove progressive or degenerative. Lakatos divided these "methodological rules" within a research programme into its "negative heuristics", i.e., what research methods and approaches to avoid, and its "positive heuristics", i.e., what research methods and approaches to prefer. While the "negative heuristic" protects the hard core, the "positive heuristic" directs the modification of the hard core and auxiliary hypotheses in a general direction.

[ 26 ] Lakatos claimed that not all changes of the auxiliary hypotheses of a research programme (which he calls "problem shifts") are equally productive or acceptable. He took the view that these "problem shifts" should be evaluated not just by their ability to defend the "hard core" by explaining apparent anomalies, but also by their ability to produce new facts, in the form of predictions or additional explanations.

[ 27 ] Adjustments that accomplish nothing more than the maintenance of the "hard core" mark the research programme as degenerative.

Lakatos's model provides for the possibility of a research programme that is not only continued in the presence of troublesome anomalies but that remains progressive despite them. For Lakatos, it is essentially necessary to continue on with a theory that we basically know cannot be completely true, and it is even possible to make scientific progress in doing so, as long as we remain receptive to a better research programme that may eventually be conceived of. In this sense, it is, for Lakatos, an acknowledged misnomer to refer to "falsification" or "refutation", when it is not the truth or falsity of a theory that is solely determining whether we consider it "falsified" but also the availability of a less false theory. A theory cannot be rightfully "falsified", according to Lakatos, until it is superseded by a better (i.e. more progressive) research programme. This is what he says is happening in the historical periods Kuhn describes as revolutions and what makes them rational as opposed to mere leaps of faith or periods of deranged social psychology, as Kuhn argued.

Pseudoscience [ edit ] According to the demarcation criterion of pseudoscience proposed by Lakatos, a theory is pseudoscientific if it fails to make any novel predictions of previously unknown phenomena or its predictions were mostly falsified, in contrast with scientific theories, which predict novel fact(s).

[ 28 ] Progressive scientific theories are those that have their novel facts confirmed, and degenerate scientific theories, which can degenerate so much that they become pseudo-science, are those whose predictions of novel facts are refuted. As he put it: "A given fact is explained scientifically only if a new fact is predicted with it ... The idea of growth and the concept of empirical character are soldered into one." See pages 34–35 of The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes , 1978.

Lakatos's own key examples of pseudoscience were Ptolemaic astronomy, Immanuel Velikovsky 's planetary cosmogony, Freudian psychoanalysis , 20th-century Soviet Marxism , [ 29 ] Lysenko's biology , Niels Bohr 's quantum mechanics post-1924, astrology , psychiatry , and neoclassical economics .

Darwin's theory [ edit ] In his 1973 Scientific Method Lecture 1 [ 30 ] at the London School of Economics, he also claimed that "nobody to date has yet found a demarcation criterion according to which Darwin can be described as scientific".

Almost 20 years after Lakatos's 1973 challenge to the scientificity of Darwin , in her 1991 The Ant and the Peacock , LSE lecturer and ex-colleague of Lakatos, Helena Cronin , attempted to establish that Darwinian theory was empirically scientific in respect of at least being supported by evidence of likeness in the diversity of life forms in the world, explained by descent with modification. She wrote that our usual idea of corroboration as requiring the successful prediction of novel facts ... Darwinian theory was not strong on temporally novel predictions. ... however familiar the evidence and whatever role it played in the construction of the theory, it still confirms the theory.

[ 31 ] Rational reconstructions of the history of science [ edit ] In his 1970 article "History of Science and Its Rational Reconstructions" [ 4 ] Lakatos proposed a dialectical historiographical meta-method for evaluating different theories of scientific method, namely by means of their comparative success in explaining the actual history of science and scientific revolutions on the one hand, whilst on the other providing a historiographical framework for rationally reconstructing the history of science as anything more than merely inconsequential rambling. The article started with his now renowned dictum "Philosophy of science without history of science is empty; history of science without philosophy of science is blind".

However, neither Lakatos himself nor his collaborators ever completed the first part of this dictum by showing that in any scientific revolution the great majority of the relevant scientific community converted just when Lakatos's criterion – one programme successfully predicting some novel facts whilst its competitor degenerated – was satisfied. Indeed, for the historical case studies in his 1968 article "Criticism and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes" [ 25 ] he had openly admitted as much, commenting: "In this paper it is not my purpose to go on seriously to the second stage of comparing rational reconstructions with actual history for any lack of historicity." Criticism [ edit ] Feyerabend [ edit ] Paul Feyerabend argued that Lakatos's methodology was not a methodology at all, but merely "words that sound like the elements of a methodology".

[ 32 ] He argued that Lakatos's methodology was no different in practice from epistemological anarchism , Feyerabend's own position. He wrote in Science in a Free Society (after Lakatos's death) that: Lakatos realized and admitted that the existing standards of rationality, standards of logic included, were too restrictive and would have hindered science had they been applied with determination. He therefore permitted the scientist to violate them (he admits that science is not "rational" in the sense of these standards). However, he demanded that research programmes show certain features in the long run — they must be progressive... I have argued that this demand no longer restricts scientific practice. Any development agrees with it.

[ 33 ] Lakatos and Feyerabend planned to produce a joint work in which Lakatos would develop a rationalist description of science, and Feyerabend would attack it. The correspondence between Lakatos and Feyerabend, where the two discussed the project, has since been reproduced, with commentary, by Matteo Motterlini.

[ 34 ] See also [ edit ] Scientific community metaphor , an approach to programming influenced by Lakatos's work on research programmes List of Soviet and Eastern Bloc defectors Lakatos Award set up in memory of him Alexander Tarasov-Rodionov , author of "Shokolad" which was formative of Lakatos's early political thinking Notes [ edit ] ^ a b E. Reck (ed.), The Historical Turn in Analytic Philosophy , Springer, 2016: ch. 4.2.

^ Kostas Gavroglu, Yorgos Goudaroulis, P. Nicolacopoulos (eds.), Imre Lakatos and Theories of Scientific Change , Springer, 2012, p. 211.

^ András Máté (2006).

"Árpád Szabó and Imre Lakatos, Or the relation between history and philosophy of mathematics" (PDF) .

Perspectives on Science .

14 (3): 282– 301.

doi : 10.1162/posc.2006.14.3.282 .

S2CID 53941387 .

^ a b Lakatos, Imre (1970).

"History of Science and Its Rational Reconstructions" .

PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association .

1970 : 91– 136.

doi : 10.1086/psaprocbienmeetp.1970.495757 .

JSTOR 495757 .

S2CID 145197122 .

^ K. Gavroglu, Y. Goudaroulis, P. Nicolacopoulos (eds.), Imre Lakatos and Theories of Scientific Change , Springer, 2012, p. 61.

^ Philosophy of Science: Popper and Lakatos , lecture on the philosophy of science of Karl Popper and Imre Lakatos, delivered to master's students at the University of Sussex in November 2014.

^ "Imre Lakatos" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 2021.

^ Brendan Larvor (2013).

Lakatos: An Introduction . Routledge. p. 3.

ISBN 9781134765140 .

He assumed the name 'Molnár Tibor' during the time in the resistance group ^ Bandy 2010.

[ page needed ] ^ György Kampis, L. Kvasz, Michael Stöltzner (eds.), Appraising Lakatos: Mathematics, Methodology, and the Man , Springer, 2013, p. 296.

^ Scheffler, Israel (2007), Gallery of Scholars: A Philosopher's Recollections , Philosophy and education, vol. 13, Springer, p. 42, ISBN 9781402027109 .

^ See Lakatos's 5 Jan 1971 letter to Paul Feyerabend pp. 233–234 in Motterlini's 1999 For and Against Method .

^ These were respectively Method and Appraisal in the Physical Sciences: The Critical Background to Modern Science 1800–1905 by Colin Howson (ed.) and Method and Appraisal in Economics by Spiro J. Latsis (ed.).

^ Donald A. Gillies (September 1996).

"Review. Matteo Motterlini (ed). Imre Lakatos. Paul K. Feyerabend.

Sull'orlo della scienza: pro e contro il metodo . (On the threshold of Science: for and against method)" .

The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science .

47 (3).

JSTOR 687992 .

^ Feyerabend, Paul; Lakatos, Imre (1999). Motterlini, Matteo (ed.).

For and Against Method: Including Lakatos's Lectures on Scientific Method and the Lakatos-Feyerabend Correspondence . Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

doi : 10.7208/9780226467030 (inactive 12 July 2025).

ISBN 9780226467030 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Larvor, Brendan (1 April 1999).

"Lakatos's Mathematical Hegelianism" .

The Owl of Minerva .

31 (1): 23– 44.

doi : 10.5840/owl199931119 .

^ Motterlini, Matteo (2002), Kampis, George; Kvasz, Ladislav; Stöltzner, Michael (eds.), "Professor Lakatos Between the Hegelian Devil and the Popperian Deep Blue Sea" , Appraising Lakatos: Mathematics, Methodology, and the Man , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

23– 52, doi : 10.1007/978-94-017-0769-5_3 , ISBN 978-94-017-0769-5 , retrieved 29 June 2025 ^ "Lakatosian Monsters" . Retrieved 18 January 2015 .

^ See, for instance, Lakatos's A renaissance of empiricism in the recent philosophy of mathematics , section 2, in which he defines a Euclidean system to be one consisting of all logical deductions from an initial set of axioms and writes that "a Euclidean system may be claimed to be true".

^ Poincaré, H. (1893). "Sur la Généralisation d'un Théorème d'Euler relatif aux Polyèdres", Comptes Rendus des Séances de l'Académie des Sciences , 117 p. 144, as cited in Lakatos, Worrall and Zahar, p. 162.

^ Lakatos, Worrall and Zahar (1976), Proofs and Refutations ISBN 0-521-21078-X , pp. 106–126, note that Poincaré's formal proof (1899) "Complèment à l'Analysis Situs", Rediconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo , 13 , pp. 285–343, rewrites Euler's conjecture into a tautology of vector algebra.

^ Lakatos, Imre. (1970). "Falsification and the methodology of scientific research programmes". In: Lakatos, Musgrave eds. (1970), pp. 91–195.

^ Bruce J. Caldwell (1991) " The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes: Criticisms and Conjectures " in G. K. Shaw ed. (1991) Economics, Culture, and Education: Essays in Honor of Mark Blaug . Aldershot: Elgar, 1991, pp. 95–107.

^ Lakatos, Musgrave eds. (1970), p. 130.

^ a b Lakatos, Imre. (1968). "Criticism and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes".

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 69 (1):149–186 (1968).

^ Great readings in clinical science: essential selections for mental health professionals . Lilienfeld, Scott O., 1960–, O'Donohue, William T. Boston: Pearson. 2012.

ISBN 9780205698035 .

OCLC 720560483 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Theoretical progressiveness is if the new theory has more empirical content than the old. Empirical progressiveness is if some of this content is corroborated. (Lakatos ed., 1970, p. 118).

^ See/hear Lakatos's 1973 Open University BBC Radio talk Science and Pseudoscience .

^ Lakatos notably only condemned specifically Soviet Marxism as pseudoscientific, as opposed to Marxism in general. In fact, at the very end of his last LSE lectures on Scientific Method in 1973, he finished by posing the question of whether Trotsky 's theoretical development of Marxism was scientific, and commented that "Nobody has ever undertaken a critical history of Marxism with the aid of better methodological and historiographical instruments. Nobody has ever tried to find an answer to questions like: were Trotsky's unorthodox predictions simply patching up a badly degenerating programme, or did they represent a creative development of Marx's programme? To answer similar questions, we would really need a detailed analysis which takes years of work. So I simply do not know the answer, even if I am very interested in it." [Motterlini 1999, p. 109] However, in his 1976 On the Critique of Scientific Reason Feyerabend claimed that Vladimir Lenin 's development of Marxism in his auxiliary theory of colonial exploitation had been "Lakatos-scientific" because it was "accompanied by a wealth of novel predictions (the arrival and structure of monopolies being one of them)". And he continued by claiming that both Rosa Luxemburg's and Trotsky's developments of Marxism were close to what Lakatos regarded as scientific: "And whoever has read Rosa Luxemburg's reply to Bernstein's criticism of Marx or Trotsky's account of why the Russian Revolution took place in a backward country (cf. also Lenin [1968], vol. 19, pp. 99ff.) will see that Marxists are pretty close to what Lakatos would like any upstanding rationalist to do ..." [See footnote 9 of p. 315 of Howson (ed.) 1976].

^ Published in For and Against Method: Imre Lakatos and Paul Feyerabend by Matteo Motterlini (ed.), University of Chicago Press, 1999.

^ Cronin, H., The Ant and the Peacock: Altruism and Sexual Selection from Darwin to Today , Cambridge University Press, 1993. pp.

31–32 .

^ See Paul Feyerabend.

"How to Defend Society Against Science" .

The Galilean Library . Archived from the original on 7 April 2008.

^ Paul Feyerabend (1978).

Science in a Free Society . London: NLB.

ISBN 0-86091-008-3 .

^ Motterlini, M. (1999).

For and Against Method . Chicago: UCP.

ISBN 9780226467757 .

References [ edit ] Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Cronin, Helena (1991) The Ant and the Peacock Cambridge University Press Howson, Colin, Ed.

Method and Appraisal in the Physical Sciences: The Critical Background to Modern Science 1800–1905 Cambridge University Press 1976 ISBN 0-521-21110-7 Kampis, Kvaz & Stoltzner (eds.) Appraising Lakatos: Mathematics, Methodology and the Man , Vienna Circle Institute Library, Kluwer 2002 ISBN 1-4020-0226-2 Lakatos, Musgrave ed. (1970).

Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-07826-1 Lakatos (1976).

Proofs and Refutations . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-29038-4 Lakatos (1978).

The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes: Philosophical Papers Volume 1 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Lakatos (1978).

Mathematics, Science and Epistemology: Philosophical Papers Volume 2 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521217695 Lakatos, I.: Cauchy and the continuum: the significance of nonstandard analysis for the history and philosophy of mathematics. Math. Intelligencer 1 (1978), no. 3, 151–161 (paper originally presented in 1966).

Lakatos, I., and Feyerabend P., For and against Method: including Lakatos's Lectures on Scientific Method and the Lakatos-Feyerabend Correspondence , ed. by Matteo Motterlini, Chicago University Press, (451 pp), 1999, ISBN 0-226-46774-0 Latsis, Spiro J.

Ed.

Method and Appraisal in Economics Cambridge University Press 1976 ISBN 0-521-21076-3 Popper, K R, (1972), Objective knowledge: an evolutionary approach , Oxford (Clarendon Press) 1972 ( bibliographic summary, no text ).

Maxwell, Nicholas (2017) Karl Popper, Science and Enlightenment , UCL Press, London. Free online.

Zahar, Elie (1973) "Why Einstein's programme superseded Lorentz's", British Journal for the Philosophy of Science Zahar, Elie (1988) Einstein's Revolution: A Study in Heuristic , Open Court 1988 Further reading [ edit ] Alex Bandy (2010).

Chocolate and Chess. Unlocking Lakatos . Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó.

ISBN 978-963-05-8819-5 Reuben Hersh (2006).

18 Unconventional Essays on the Nature of Mathematics . Springer.

ISBN 978-0-387-29831-3 Brendan Larvor (1998).

Lakatos: An Introduction . London: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-14276-8 Jancis Long (1998). "Lakatos in Hungary", Philosophy of the Social Sciences 28 , pp. 244–311.

John Kadvany (2001).

Imre Lakatos and the Guises of Reason . Durham and London: Duke University Press.

ISBN 0-8223-2659-0 ; author's web site: johnkadvany.com .

Teun Koetsier (1991).

Lakatos' Philosophy of Mathematics: A Historical Approach. Amsterdam etc.: North Holland.

ISBN 0-444-88944-2 Szabó, Árpád The Beginnings of Greek Mathematics (Tr Ungar) Reidel & Akadémiai Kiadó, Budapest 1978 ISBN 963-05-1416-8 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Imre Lakatos .

Musgrave, Alan; Pigden, Charles.

"Imre Lakatos" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Science and Pseudoscience (Transcript and audio recording) – Lakatos's 1973 Open University BBC Radio talk on the subject Lakatos's profile page at the London School of Economics (with audio recordings and references to further resources) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Imre Lakatos" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Lakatos's Hungarian intellectual background The Autumn 2006 MIT Press journal Perspectives on Science devoted to articles on this topic, with article abstracts.

Official Russian page Archives Imre Lakatos's papers are held at the London School of Economics. His personal library at the Wayback Machine (archived January 5, 2008) is also held at the School.

v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet Artists ULAN People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wvmkh
Cached time: 20250817045409
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.774 seconds
Real time usage: 0.988 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4946/1000000
Revision size: 41940/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 156854/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10876/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 126056/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.513/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 29536786/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  840.420      1 -total
 25.70%  215.989      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 21.77%  182.966      1 Template:Reflist
 12.01%  100.898      7 Template:Navbox
 10.87%   91.378      1 Template:Langx
 10.17%   85.503      1 Template:Philosophy_of_science
  9.63%   80.891      4 Template:Cite_journal
  7.40%   62.152      1 Template:Short_description
  6.03%   50.710      2 Template:Infobox
  5.54%   46.555      1 Template:Birth_date Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:38455:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045409 and revision id 1305065805. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Imre_Lakatos&oldid=1305065805 " Categories : 1922 births 1974 deaths 20th-century Hungarian male writers 20th-century Hungarian philosophers Academics of the London School of Economics Critical rationalists Hungarian communists Hungarian defectors Hungarian Jews 20th-century Hungarian mathematicians Hungarian refugees Jewish philosophers Jewish refugees Moscow State University alumni Philosophers of mathematics Philosophers of science Stateless people University of Debrecen alumni Hungarian expatriates in the Soviet Union Hungarian emigrants to the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2016 CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Articles containing Hungarian-language text Pages with Hungarian IPA Articles containing Latin-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 21:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Imre Lakatos 51 languages Add topic

