Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Date definitions 2 Etymology 3 Associations Toggle Associations subsection 3.1 Harvest 3.2 Melancholia 3.3 Halloween 3.4 Other associations 4 Tourism 5 Views of autumn 6 Allegories of autumn in art 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Autumn 178 languages Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Armãneashti অসমীয়া Asturianu Atikamekw Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Dolnoserbski डोटेली Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî Хальмг 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული کٲشُر Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Ikirundi Kiswahili Коми Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Лакку ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Мокшень မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Перем коми Picard Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Võro Walon 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia One of Earth's four temperate seasons This article is about the temperate season. For other uses, see Autumn (disambiguation) .

"Fall" redirects here. For other uses, see Fall (disambiguation) .

The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Autumn (fall) Temperate season Leaves often turn orange and fall from trees in autumn.

Northern temperate zone Astronomical season 22 September – 21 December Meteorological season 1 September – 30 November Solar (Celtic) season 1 August – 31 October Southern temperate zone Astronomical season 20 March – 21 June Meteorological season 1 March – 31 May Solar (Celtic) season 1 February – 30 April Summer Spring Autumn Winter Part of a series on Weather Temperate and polar seasons Winter Spring Summer Autumn Tropical seasons Dry season Harmattan Wet season Storms Cloud Cumulonimbus cloud Arcus cloud Downburst Microburst Heat burst Derecho Lightning Volcanic lightning Thunderstorm Air-mass thunderstorm Thundersnow Dry thunderstorm Mesocyclone Supercell Tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Dust devil Fire whirl Anticyclone Cyclone Polar low Extratropical cyclone European windstorm Nor'easter Subtropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Atlantic hurricane Typhoon Storm surge Dust storm Simoom Haboob Monsoon Amihan Gale Sirocco Firestorm Winter storm Ice storm Blizzard Ground blizzard Snow squall Precipitation Drizzle Freezing Graupel Hail Megacryometeor Ice pellets Diamond dust Rain Freezing Cloudburst Snow Rain and snow mixed Snow grains Snow roller Slush Topics Air pollution Atmosphere Chemistry Convection Physics River Climate Cloud Physics Fog Mist Season Cold wave Heat wave Jet stream Meteorology Severe weather List Extreme Severe weather terminology Canada Japan United States Weather forecasting Weather modification Glossaries Meteorology Climate change Tornado terms Tropical cyclone terms Weather portal v t e Autumn , also known as fall (in US and Canada) or harvesttime , [ 1 ] is one of the four temperate seasons on Earth . Outside the tropics, autumn marks the transition from summer to winter , in September ( Northern Hemisphere ) or March ( Southern Hemisphere ). Autumn is the season when the duration of daylight becomes noticeably shorter and the temperature cools considerably. Day length decreases and night length increases as the season progresses until the winter solstice in December (Northern Hemisphere) and June (Southern Hemisphere). One of its main features in temperate climates is the striking change in colour of the leaves of deciduous trees as they prepare to shed .

Date definitions [ edit ] Some cultures regard the autumnal equinox as "mid-autumn", while others with a longer temperature lag treat the equinox as the start of autumn.

[ 2 ] In the English-speaking world of high latitude countries, autumn traditionally began with Lammas Day and ended around Hallowe'en , the approximate mid-points between midsummer , the autumnal equinox, and midwinter . Meteorologists (and Australia [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and most of the temperate countries in the southern hemisphere) [ 5 ] [ 6 ] use a definition based on Gregorian calendar months, with autumn being September, October, and November in the northern hemisphere, [ 7 ] and March, April, and May in the southern hemisphere.

In the higher latitude countries in the Northern Hemisphere, autumn traditionally starts with the September equinox (21 to 24 September) [ 8 ] and ends with the winter solstice (21 or 22 December).

[ 9 ] Popular culture in the United States associates Labor Day, the first Monday in September, as the end of summer and the start of autumn. Certain summer traditions, such as wearing white, are discouraged after that date.

[ 10 ] As daytime and nighttime temperatures decrease, trees change colour and then shed their leaves.

[ 11 ] Persians celebrate the beginning of the autumn on Mehregan .

Under the traditional East Asian solar term system, autumn starts on or around 8 August and ends on or about 7 November. In Ireland, the autumn months according to the national meteorological service, Met Éireann , are September , October , and November .

[ 12 ] However, according to the Irish Calendar , which is based on ancient Gaelic traditions, autumn lasts throughout the months of August, September, and October, or possibly a few days later, depending on tradition. In the Irish language , September is known as Meán Fómhair ("middle of autumn") and October as Deireadh Fómhair ("end of autumn").

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Late Roman Republic scholar Marcus Terentius Varro defined autumn as lasting from the third day before the Ides of Sextilis (11 August) to the fifth day before the Ides of November (9 November).

[ 15 ] Etymology [ edit ] Autumnal scene with yellow, orange, and red leaves Leaves falling from the trees during autumn in the forest Sound of leaves on trees and fallen on the ground Problems playing this file? See media help .

The word autumn ( / ˈ ɔː t ə m / ⓘ ) is derived from Latin autumnus , archaic auctumnus , possibly from the ancient Etruscan root autu- and has within it connotations of the passing of the year.

[ 16 ] Alternative etymologies include Proto-Indo-European : * h₃ewǵ- , lit.

'cold') or * h₂sows- ('dry').

[ 17 ] After the Greek era, the word continued to be used as the Old French word autompne ( automne in modern French ) or autumpne in Middle English, [ 18 ] and was later normalised to the original Latin. In the Medieval period, there are rare examples of its use as early as the 12th century, but by the 16th century, it was in common use.

Before the 16th century, harvest was the term usually used to refer to the season, as it is common in other West Germanic languages to this day ( cf.

Dutch herfst , German Herbst , and Scots hairst ). However, as more people gradually moved from working the land to living in towns, the word harvest lost its reference to the time of year and came to refer only to the actual activity of reaping, and autumn , as well as fall , began to replace it as a reference to the season.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ better source needed ] The alternative word fall for the season traces its origins to old Germanic languages . The exact derivation is unclear, with the Old English fiæll or feallan and the Old Norse fall all being possible candidates. However, these words all have the meaning "to fall from a height" and are clearly derived either from a common root or from each other. The term came to denote the season in 16th-century England , a contraction of Middle English expressions like " fall of the leaf " and "fall of the year". Compare the origin of spring from "spring of the leaf" and "spring of the year".

[ 21 ] During the 17th century, English settlers began emigrating to the new North American colonies , and took the English language with them. While the term fall gradually became nearly obsolete in Britain, it became the more common term in North America.

[ 22 ] The name backend , a once common name for the season in Northern England , has today been largely replaced by the name autumn .

[ 23 ] Associations [ edit ] Harvest [ edit ] Association with the transition from warm to cold weather, and its related status as the season of the primary harvest , has dominated its themes and popular images. In Western cultures, personifications of autumn are usually pretty, well-fed females adorned with fruits, vegetables and grains that ripen at this time. Many cultures feature autumnal harvest festivals , often the most important on their calendars.

Still-extant echoes of these celebrations are found in the autumn Thanksgiving holiday of the United States and Canada, and the Jewish Sukkot holiday with its roots as a full-moon harvest festival of "tabernacles" (living in outdoor huts around the time of harvest). There are also the many festivals celebrated by indigenous peoples of the Americas tied to the harvest of ripe foods gathered in the wild, the Chinese Mid-Autumn or Moon festival , and many others. The predominant mood of these autumnal celebrations is a gladness for the fruits of the earth mixed with a certain melancholy linked to the imminent arrival of harsh weather.

This view is presented in English poet John Keats ' poem To Autumn , where he describes the season as a time of bounteous fecundity, a time of "mellow fruitfulness".

In North America, while most foods are harvested during the autumn, foods usually associated with the season include pumpkins (which are integral parts of both Thanksgiving and Halloween ) and apples, which are used to make the seasonal beverage apple cider .

Melancholia [ edit ] "Jesień" (Autumn) Józef Chełmoński picture of 1875 presenting a typical view of autumn in the Polish 19th-century countryside Autumn, especially in poetry, has often been associated with melancholia . The possibilities and opportunities of summer are gone, and the chill of winter is on the horizon. Skies turn grey, the amount of usable daylight drops rapidly, and many people turn inward, both physically and mentally.

[ 24 ] It has been referred to as an unhealthy season.

[ 25 ] Similar examples may be found in Irish poet W.B. Yeats ' poem The Wild Swans at Coole where the maturing season that the poet observes symbolically represents his own ageing self. Like the natural world that he observes, he too has reached his prime and now must look forward to the inevitability of old age and death. French poet Paul Verlaine 's " Chanson d'automne " ("Autumn Song") is likewise characterised by strong, painful feelings of sorrow.

Keats ' To Autumn , written in September 1819, echoes this sense of melancholic reflection but also emphasises the lush abundance of the season. The song " Autumn Leaves ", based on the French song "Les Feuilles mortes", uses the melancholic atmosphere of the season and the end of summer as a metaphor for the mood of being separated from a loved one.

[ 26 ] Halloween [ edit ] The annual Greenwich Village Halloween Parade in Lower Manhattan is the world's largest Halloween parade, with millions of spectators annually, and has its roots in New York City's queer community .

Autumn is associated with Halloween (influenced by Samhain , a Celtic autumn festival), [ 27 ] and with it a widespread marketing campaign that promotes it. The Celtic people also used this time to celebrate the harvest with a time of feasting. At the same time though, it was a celebration of death as well. Crops were harvested, livestock were butchered, and Winter was coming.

[ 28 ] Halloween, 31 October, is in autumn in the northern hemisphere. Television, film, book, costume, home decoration, and confectionery businesses use this time of year to promote products closely associated with such a holiday, with promotions going from late August or early September to 31 October, since their themes rapidly lose strength once the holiday ends, and advertising starts concentrating on Christmas.

In the southern hemisphere Halloween takes place in Spring.

Other associations [ edit ] Autumn colouration at the Kalevanpuisto park in Pori , Finland.

In some parts of the northern hemisphere, autumn has a strong association with the end of summer holiday and the start of a new school year , particularly for children in primary and secondary education. " Back to School " advertising and preparations usually occurs in the weeks leading to the beginning of autumn.

Thanksgiving Day is a national holiday celebrated in Canada, in the United States, in some of the Caribbean islands and in Liberia. Thanksgiving is celebrated on the second Monday of October in Canada, on the fourth Thursday of November in the United States (where it is commonly regarded as the start of the Christmas and holiday season ), and around the same part of the year in other places. Similarly named festival holidays occur in Germany and Japan.

Television stations and networks, particularly in North America, traditionally begin their regular seasons in their autumn, with new series and new episodes of existing series debuting mostly during late September or early October (series that debut outside the autumn season are usually known as mid-season replacements ). A sweeps period takes place in November to measure Nielsen Ratings .

American football is played almost exclusively in the autumn months; at the high school level , seasons run from late August through early November, with some playoff games and holiday rivalry contests being played as late as Thanksgiving.  In many American states, the championship games take place in early December.

College football 's regular season runs from September through November, while the main professional circuit, the National Football League , plays from September through to early January.

Summer sports, such as association football (in Northern America, East Asia and South Africa), Canadian football , stock car racing , tennis, golf, cricket , and professional baseball, wrap up their seasons in early to late autumn; Major League Baseball 's championship World Series is popularly known as the "Fall Classic".

[ 29 ] (Amateur baseball is usually finished by August.) Likewise, professional winter sports, such as ice hockey and basketball, and most leagues of association football in Europe, are in the early stages of their seasons during autumn; American college basketball and college ice hockey play teams outside their athletic conferences during the late autumn before their in-conference schedules begin in winter.

The Christian religious holidays of All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day are observed in autumn in the Northern hemisphere. Easter falls in autumn in the southern hemisphere.

The secular celebration of International Workers' Day also falls in autumn in the southern hemisphere.

Since 1997, Autumn has been one of the top 100 names for girls in the United States.

[ 30 ] In Indian mythology, autumn is considered to be the preferred season for the goddess of learning Saraswati , who is also known by the name of "goddess of autumn" (Sharada).

In Asian mysticism, Autumn is associated with the element of metal , and subsequently with the colour white, the White Tiger of the West , and death and mourning.

Tourism [ edit ] Reflection of autumnal colors on Eden Lake , Vermont , U.S.

See also: Leaf peeping Although colour change in leaves occurs wherever deciduous trees are found, coloured autumn foliage is noted in various regions of the world: most of North America, Eastern Asia (including China, Korea, and Japan), Europe, southeast, south, and part of the midwest of Brazil, [ 31 ] [ 32 ] the forest of Patagonia , eastern Australia and New Zealand's South Island .

Eastern Canada and New England are famous for their autumnal foliage, [ 33 ] [ 34 ] and this attracts major tourism (worth billions of US dollars) for the regions.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Views of autumn [ edit ] Autumn foliage in Vermont , US Maple leaves changing colour by a creek.

Pumpkin pie is commonly served on and around Thanksgiving in North America All Saints' Day at a cemetery in Sanok , Poland—flowers and lit candles are placed to honour the memory of deceased relatives.

Falling autumn leaves in Kanagawa , Japan Harvest straw bales in a field of Schleswig-Holstein , Germany Halloween pumpkins Autumn in Sedniv , Ukraine Autumn colours in Arrowtown , New Zealand Autumn seen in a park in Madrid , Spain Allegories of autumn in art [ edit ] Autumn , by Giuseppe Collignon Autumn , by Pierre Le Gros the Elder Autumn (1573), by Giuseppe Arcimboldo Autumn (1896), by Art Nouveau artist Alphonse Mucha Autumn (1871), by Currier & Ives This 1905 print by Maxfield Frederick Parrish illustrated John Keats ' poem To Autumn See also [ edit ] Autumn in New England Diwali References [ edit ] ^ "Fall Definition & Meaning" .

dictionary.com .

Archived from the original on 6 March 2023.

^ "NOAA's National Weather Service – Glossary" . Crh.noaa.gov. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012 . Retrieved 6 August 2010 .

^ "Climate Glossary – Seasons" .

www.bom.gov.au .

Bureau of Meteorology , Australia.

^ "Solstices and equinoxes: the reasons for the seasons" .

Bureau of Meteorology . 21 June 2018 . Retrieved 16 January 2020 .

^ Deguara, Brittney (27 May 2019).

"When does winter officially start in New Zealand?" .

Stuff . Retrieved 4 October 2020 .

^ "New Zealand Weather and Climate, New Zealand Weather, Temperatures and Climate in New Zealand" . Tourism.net.nz . Retrieved 6 August 2010 .

^ "Understanding Weather – Autumn Forecasting" . BBC Weather Centre. Archived from the original on 4 September 2010 . Retrieved 6 August 2010 .

^ Kanalley, Craig (22 September 2010).

"First Day Of Fall 2010: Autumn Equinox Photos" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on 24 September 2010 . Retrieved 22 September 2010 .

^ "The First Day of Winter: Winter Solstice 2018" .

Old Farmer's Almanac .

^ Laura FitzPatrick (8 September 2009).

"Why We Can't Wear White After Labor Day" .

Time . Retrieved 25 February 2011 .

^ Arnold, Kathy (11 October 2010).

"Travel" .

Fall in North America: autumn colour in New England and beyond . Retrieved 15 October 2015 .

^ "The Weather of Autumn 2007 (September, October & November summary)" (PDF) .

Met Éireann – The Irish Meteorological Service Online . 3 December 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 December 2010 . Retrieved 10 October 2012 .

^ O'Connell, Hugh.

"Summer, it's literally not what it used to be" .

The Daily Edge .

^ "Autumn in Ireland – Everest Language School" . 10 October 2016.

^ Varro . "4 Concerning the Agricultural Seasons".

Res Rusticae (Country Matters) . Vol. Book 1 – via Wikisource .

^ Breyer, Gertraud (1993).

Etruskisches Sprachgut im Lateinischen unter Ausschluss des spezifisch onomastischen Bereiches (in German). Peeters Publishers. pp.

412– 413.

ISBN 90-6831-335-5 .

^ Tucker, T.G., Etymological Dictionary of Latin, Ares Publishers, 1976 (reprint of 1931 edition).

^ Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd Edition, entry at automn .

^ Harper, Douglas.

"harvest" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Harper, Douglas.

"autumn" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Little, William et al.: The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary , Oxford at the Clarendon Press, 1959 edition reprinted with corrections. The phrase "fall of the leaf" was first found in print in 1545 (volume I, page 670), and the usage of "fall" in this sense is noted as "Now rare in [British] English literary use." The phrase "spring of the year" first appeared in print in 1530 (volume II, p. 1983).

^ "Is It 'Autumn' or 'Fall'?" .

Merriam Webster . Retrieved 23 September 2019 .

^ "Revealed: How London accents have killed off local dialects across England" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 27 May 2016 .

^ Cyclical Regenerative Time – (c) Autumn (from 'Symbolism of Place', symbolism.org website) ^ D'Alembert, Jean Le Rond (2013) [1751]. Holtrop, Ellen (ed.).

"Autumn" .

The Encyclopedia of Diderot & d'Alembert Collaborative Translation Project . Michigan Publishing . Retrieved 31 March 2015 .

^ "The Original "Autumn Leaves" " . 19 September 2017 . Retrieved 8 September 2018 .

^ "Halloween" .

Encarta . Microsoft. Archived from the original on 28 October 2009 . Retrieved 20 June 2007 .

^ "Halloween and the Autumn season | Arlington Heights Museum – News" .

www.ahmuseum.org . Retrieved 13 September 2021 .

^ Enders, Eric (2007).

The Fall Classic: The Definitive History of the World Series . Sterling Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-1-4027-4770-0 .

^ Popular Baby Names , Social Security Online.

^ "Lugares para curtir o outono no Brasil que você precisa conhecer" .

Guiche Virtual (in Brazilian Portuguese). 21 April 2018 . Retrieved 5 November 2020 .

^ Turismo, iG (18 March 2020).

"8 destinos nacionais para você visitar durante o outono – Destinos Nacionais – iG" .

Turismo (in Brazilian Portuguese) . Retrieved 5 November 2020 .

^ "Nova Scotia Capitalizes on Fall Tourism | Government of Nova Scotia" . Gov.ns.ca. 21 September 1999 . Retrieved 6 March 2010 .

^ Ross, Ben (14 September 2002).

"The Complete Guide to Leaf-Peeping & Advice, Travel" .

The Independent . London . Retrieved 6 March 2010 .

^ Shir Haberman.

"Leaf peepers storm N.H., Maine" . SeacoastOnline.com. Archived from the original on 14 September 2010 . Retrieved 6 March 2010 .

^ "Record New England Rains Make Foliage 'a Dud,' Hurt Tourism" . Bloomberg L.P. 4 November 2005 . Retrieved 6 March 2010 .

External links [ edit ] Autumn at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata v t e Seasons Temperate seasons Spring Summer Autumn Winter Weather portal Tropical seasons Wet season Dry season Specific Cyclone season Fog season Harmattan (West Africa) Monsoon season Mud / breakup / minoskamin bezdorizhzhia / rasputitsa Rainy season Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐kkzmh
Cached time: 20250817043741
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.790 seconds
Real time usage: 1.024 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3503/1000000
Revision size: 26316/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 108758/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2976/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 158580/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.525/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21016898/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  902.934      1 -total
 27.71%  250.178      1 Template:Reflist
 17.89%  161.541     21 Template:Cite_web
 11.67%  105.341     12 Template:Lang
  9.01%   81.338      1 Template:Weather
  8.83%   79.729      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.27%   74.628      2 Template:Infobox
  6.47%   58.433      1 Template:Listen_image
  5.78%   52.156      1 Template:Short_description
  5.67%   51.174      1 Template:Sister_project_links Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3049:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043741 and revision id 1305275540. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Autumn&oldid=1305275540 " Categories : Autumn Etymologies Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1: long volume value CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Articles with limited geographic scope from May 2021 United States-centric Use British English from November 2023 Use dmy dates from October 2020 Articles containing Irish-language text Articles with hAudio microformats Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Proto-Indo-European-language text Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Middle English (1100-1500)-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Scots-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2020 Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Articles containing Old Norse-language text Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 03:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Autumn 178 languages Add topic

