Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Construction 2 Comparison to other bow types Toggle Comparison to other bow types subsection 2.1 Technical advantages 2.2 Technical disadvantages 2.3 Circumstantial advantages 2.4 Circumstantial disadvantages 3 Specifications 4 Arrows 5 See also Toggle See also subsection 5.1 Construction techniques 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 General and cited references 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Compound bow 18 languages Català Deutsch Eesti Español Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский ไทย Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of bow for archery This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( April 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Compound bow" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Compound bow Type Bow and Arrow Archer Erika Jones shooting a compound bow at the 2013 Archery World Cup . The bow has the axle attaching the limb to cam mounted at the edge of the cam as opposed to the center.

In modern archery , a compound bow is a bow that uses a levering system, usually of cables and pulleys , to bend the limbs.

[ 1 ] The compound bow was first developed in 1966 by Holless Wilbur Allen in North Kansas City, Missouri , and a US patent was granted in 1969.

[ 2 ] Compound bows are widely used in target practice and hunting .

Compound bows are typically constructed of man-made materials such as fiberglass and carbon fiber, while traditional bows and warbows usually are entirely or partially made of wood or bamboo.

The pulley/cam system grants the user a mechanical advantage , and so the limbs of a compound bow are much stiffer than those of a recurve bow or longbow . This rigidity makes the compound bow more energy-efficient than traditional bows, as less energy is dissipated in limb movement. The higher-rigidity, more advanced construction also improves accuracy by reducing the bow's sensitivity to changes in temperature and humidity. In literature of the early 20th century, before the invention of compound bows, composite bows were described as "compound".

[ 3 ] Construction [ edit ] A bow's central mount for other components (limbs, sights, stabilizers and quivers) is called the riser. Risers are designed to be as rigid as possible. The central riser of a compound bow is usually made of aluminum , magnesium alloy, or carbon fiber and many are made of 7075 aluminum alloy .

Limbs are made of fiberglass-based composite materials , or occasionally wood, and able to withstand high tensile and compressive forces. The limbs store the kinetic energy of the bow – no energy is stored in the pulleys and cables. Draw weights of adult compound bows range is between 40 and 80 pounds (18 and 36 kg), which can create arrow speeds of 250 to 370 feet per second (76 to 113 m/s).

In the most common configuration, there is a cam or wheel at the end of each limb. The shape of the cam may vary somewhat between different bow designs. There are several different concepts of using the cams to store energy in the limbs, and these all fall under a category called bow eccentrics . The four most common types of bow eccentrics are Single Cam, Hybrid Cam, Dual Cam and Binary Cam .

[ 4 ] However, there are also other less common designs, like the Quad Cam and Hinged. Cams are often described using their "let-off" rating. As a cam is rotated, the force required to hold the bow in position reaches a peak and then decreases as the bow approaches maximum extension (a position known as "the wall"). The percent-difference between the maximum force encountered during the draw and the force required to hold the bow in full extension is the "let-off". This value is commonly between 65% and 80% of the peak weight for recently designed compound bows, although some older compound bows provided a let-off of only 50% and some recent designs achieve let-offs in excess of 90%.

[ 5 ] As the string is drawn the cam turns and imparts force to compress the limb. Initially, the archer has the 'short' side of the cam, with the leverage being a mechanical disadvantage. High energy input is therefore required. When near full draw is reached, the cam has turned to its full extent, the archer has gained mechanical advantage, and the least amount of force needs to be applied to the string to keep the limbs bent. This is known as "let off". The lower holding weight enables the archer to maintain the bow fully drawn and take more time to aim. This let-off enables the archer to accurately shoot a compound bow with a much higher peak draw weight than other bows (see below).

However, there are some youth-oriented compound bows with low draw weights that have no let-off and have a maximum draw length deliberately set farther than the majority of young shooters would reach.  This effectively makes the bow function very similar to a recurve, with the draw length determined by the shooter's preferred anchor point. This removes the necessity to adjust the bow draw length or use a different bow for different shooters (or to change bows as the shooter gets older). An example of this type of bow is the Genesis, which is standard equipment in the U.S.

National Archery in the Schools Program .

Compound bow strings and cables are normally made of high-modulus polyethylene and are designed to have great tensile strength and minimal stretchability, so that the bow transfers its energy to the arrow as efficiently and durably as possible. In earlier models of compound bows, the cables were often made of plastic-coated steel.

Comparison to other bow types [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Compound bow" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Technical advantages [ edit ] Albina Loginova at women's individual compound 3rd place, 2013 FITA Archery World Cup , Paris, France The function of the cam systems (known as the 'eccentrics') is to maximize the energy storage throughout the draw cycle and provide let-off at the end of the cycle (less holding weight at full draw).  A traditional recurve bow has a very linear draw weight curve - meaning that as the bow is drawn back, the draw force becomes heavier with each inch of draw (and most difficult at full draw).  Therefore, little energy is stored in the first half of the draw, and much more energy at the end where the draw weight is heaviest.  The compound bow operates with a different weight profile, reaching its peak weight within the first few inches of the draw, and remaining more flat and constant until the end of the cycle where the cams "let-off" and allow a reduced holding weight.  This manipulation of the peak weight throughout the draw (accomplished by the elliptical shape of the cams that change leverage and mechanical advantage) is why compound bows store more energy and shoot faster than an equivalent peak weight recurve bow or longbow .

The design of the cams directly controls the acceleration of the arrow. What is termed a "soft cam" will accelerate the arrow more gently than a "harder" cam. Novice archers will typically shoot a soft cam whereas a more advanced archer may choose to use a harder cam to gain speed. Bows can be had with a variety of cams, in a full spectrum from soft to hard.

Some pulley systems use a single cam at the bottom of the bow and a round idler wheel at the top of the bow instead of two identical cams. This design eliminates the need for a separate control cable and instead uses a single long string that begins at the cam on the bottom of the bow, travels over the wheel on top, and back to the bottom cam. A separate buss cable then connects the bottom cam to the top limb.

When a compound bow is drawn, the limbs are pulled in toward each other by the cables, unlike a longbow or recurve where the limbs flex in the direction of the bow string.  This difference allows modern compounds to have limbs that are closer to horizontal instead of angled.  The horizontal, or "parallel" limb configuration minimizes the recoil and vibration felt by the shooter when the arrow is released, as the forces going upward at the top limb and downward at the bottom limb cancel each other out.

The pulley system will usually include some rubber-covered blocks that act as draw-stops. These provide a solid "wall" that the archer can draw against. These draw stops can be adjusted to suit the archer's optimum draw-length, which helps the archer achieve a consistent anchor point and a consistent amount of force imparted to the arrow on every shot, further increasing accuracy.

[ 6 ] Technical disadvantages [ edit ] The relatively larger number of moving parts requires additional maintenance and creates more potential points of failure.

Dry firing is more likely to damage or destroy a compound bow due to the greater amount of energy stored and released.

Unlike traditional bows, draw length and let-off adjustments as well as string or cable replacements often require a bow press, a specialized tool used for compressing the limbs to take tension off the cables and string.

Drawing a compound bow with just the fingers increases the likelihood of torquing the bowstring, which could derail it from the cams. The use of a mechanical release-aid is often required to avoid this.

Usually heavier than recurves and longbows.

Circumstantial advantages [ edit ] Compound archers often use a mechanical release aid to hold and release the string. This attaches to the bowstring near the point where the arrow attaches, the nocking point, and permits the archer to release the string with a squeeze of a trigger or a slight increase of tension. The use of a release aid gives a more consistent release than the use of fingers on the string as it minimises the arrow oscillation which is inevitable when the bowstring is released directly from the fingers.

In tournaments, competition rules for compound archers allow bows with a sighting system, consisting of a " peep sight " held within the bowstring that acts as a back sight, however front sights attached to the riser are allowable in other classes.

[ 7 ] Some front sights are magnifying and/or adjustable for targets at different distances.  Some sights have multiple "pins" set up for targets at different distances.

In archery tournaments governed by World Archery , compound archers are permitted to use bow sights that incorporate magnifying lenses or prisms. These "magnified sights" enhance the archer's ability to aim by enlarging the target face, providing a clearer view of the scoring zones. Additionally, such sights may include features like windage and elevation adjustments and leveling devices to aid in precise aiming. However, all components must be non-electric and non-electronic to comply with equipment regulations.

[ 8 ] Circumstantial disadvantages [ edit ] The relatively low holding weight of a compound bow compared to a recurve bow makes the compound more sensitive to certain shooting form faults when the archer is at full draw. In particular, it's easier for the archer to torque (twist) the bow around the vertical axis, leading to left-right errors, and also a plucked or snatched release can have more effect.

Specifications [ edit ] AMO (Archery Manufacturers and merchants Organization, the former name of the body now known as the Archery Trade Association) standard draw length is the distance from the string at full draw to the lowest point on the grip plus 1.75 inches (4.4 cm).

[ 9 ] Because the draw force may increase more or less rapidly, and again drop off more or less rapidly when approaching peak draw, bows of the same peak draw force can store different amounts of energy. Norbert Mullaney has defined the ratio of stored energy to peak draw force (S.E./P.D.F.). This is usually around one foot-pound per pound-force (3 joules per kilogram-force ) but can reach 1.4 ft⋅lb/lbf (4.2 J/kgf).

The efficiency of bows also varies. Normally between 70 and 85% of the stored energy is transferred to the arrow. This stored energy is referred to as potential energy . When transferred to the arrow it is referred to as kinetic energy . The product of S.E./P.D.F. and efficiency can be called the power factor.

[ citation needed ] There are two measurement standards of this quantity – ATA and IBO speed. ATA is defined as the initial velocity of a 350-grain (23-gram) arrow when shot from a bow with a peak draw weight of 70 ± 0.2 lbf (311.38 ± 0.89 N) and draw length of 30 ± 0.25 in (76.20 ± 0.64 cm). IBO speed is defined as the initial velocity of an arrow with a weight of 5 grains (0.32 g) per pound of draw weight. While many manufacturers measure IBO speeds using a draw weight of 70 lbf (310 N) and draw length of 30 in (76 cm), the IBO standard allows a draw weight of as high as 80 ± 2 lbf (355.9 ± 8.9 N), and does not specify a draw length.

[ 10 ] The average IBO speed for the majority of compound bows on the market hovers around 310–320 feet per second.

[ 11 ] Brace height is the distance from the pivot point of the grip to the string at rest.  Typically a shorter brace height will result in an increased power stroke, but comes at the price of a bow that's less forgiving to shooter error and having harsher string slap.

Further information on the youth compound bow: Hoyt Ruckus Arrows [ edit ] See also: Arrow Arrows used with compound bows do not differ significantly from those used with recurve bows, being typically either aluminum alloy, carbon fiber , or a composite of the two materials. Wooden arrows are not commonly used on compound bows because of their fragility.  Most arrows in use today are of the carbon fiber variety.  An important distinction arrow-wise between recurve bows and compound bows is that of arrow spine.  Compound bows and target recurve bows with fully center-shot cutaway risers tend to be very forgiving in regard to spine selection. Modern compound bows are typically equipped with substantially stiffer arrows than an equivalent draw-length and draw-weight recurve bow would be.  Another advantage of the center-shot riser is that the arrow need not bend around the riser (nearly as much or at all) during the shot.  Fine-tuning may be accomplished by adjustment of the arrow rest, or nock point on the string, rather than by changing arrow-length and tip weight.

Manufacturers produce arrow shafts with different weights, different spines (stiffness), and different lengths in the same model of shaft to accommodate different draw weights and lengths, matched to archers' different styles, preferences and physical attributes.

Arrow stiffness (spine) is an important parameter in finding arrows that will shoot accurately from any particular bow (see Archer's paradox ), the spine varying with both the construction and length of the arrow.

Another important consideration is that the IBO (International Bowhunting Organization) recommends at least 5 grains per pound (0.71 grams per kilogram) of draw weight as a safety buffer. This means a bow that draws 60 pounds (27 kg) would need at least a 300-grain (19-gram) finished-with-tip arrow. Shooting arrows lighter than this guideline risks damage to the bow similar to that caused by dry-firing, which can in turn cause injury to the archer or anyone standing nearby. Shooting arrows that are too light also voids most manufacturer warranties.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Bow shape Bow (weapon) Binary cam Crossbow English longbow Flatbow Horse archer Yumi Construction techniques [ edit ] Cable-backed bow Composite bow Laminated bow Self bow References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Paterson, W. F. (1984).

Encyclopaedia of Archery . St. Martin's Press.

p. 39 .

^ US3486495A , Allen, Holless W., "Archery bow with draw force multiplying attachments", issued 1969-12-30 ^ "Tutankhamun: Anatomy of an Excavation" . The notes were made in the 1920s and describe composite bows as "compound"; the modern compound bow did not exist at this time.

^ "Compound Bow Cam Technology Explained - Hunter's Friend Archery" .

www.huntersfriend.com . Retrieved 2016-04-22 .

^ "Compound Bow Brace Height and Cam Specs - Hunter's Friend Archery" .

www.huntersfriend.com . Retrieved 2016-04-22 .

^ "Video Tutorial: 2016 PSE Draw Length Adjustment" .

betteroutdoors.net . Archived from the original on 7 April 2018 . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ "Rules World Archery - see Chapter 11" .

betteroutdoors.net . Retrieved 8 April 2018 .

^ "Rulebook | World Archery" .

www.worldarchery.sport . Retrieved 2025-05-30 .

^ "AMO Standards" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-04-02 . Retrieved 2015-03-08 .

^ "What is IBO speed?" .

Archery Country Blog . October 18, 2019 . Retrieved November 17, 2023 .

^ Kenny, Tim (2023-08-27).

"How Far Can a Compound Bow Shoot? - Bow to Hunt" .

Bow To Hunt . Retrieved 2023-08-28 .

^ "AMO Standards" (PDF) .

Texas Archery . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-09-06.

General and cited references [ edit ] The Traditional Bowyers Bible Volume 1 . The Lyons Press. 1992.

ISBN 1-58574-085-3 .

The Traditional Bowyers Bible Volume 2 . The Lyons Press. 1992.

ISBN 1-58574-086-1 .

The Traditional Bowyers Bible Volume 3 . The Lyons Press. 1994.

ISBN 1-58574-087-X .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Compound bows .

"The Compound Bow: Twenty-five Years After Allen's Patent of December 1969" ( Archived 2011-07-23 at the Wayback Machine )—Extensive article.

Photos of compound bows from the 1970s How does a compound bow work v t e Archery History Chinese Japanese Turkish History of crossbows Modern competitive archery World Archery Federation World Archery Rankings Topics Archer's paradox Mounted archery Ballista elephant Yabusame Run archery Bows ( yumi ) Bow shape Arbalest Austroasiatic crossbow Cable-backed bow Composite bow Compound bow Crossbow English longbow Flatbow Gakgung Holmegaard bow Laminated bow Longbow Mongol bow Recurve bow Self bow Takedown bow Welsh bow Equipment Arrow Ya Arrowhead Bowstring Bracer Cresting machine Finger tab Fletching Flu-flu arrow Release aid Quarrel Quiver Target Thumb ring Activities Bowfishing Bowhunting Bowyer Clout archery Field archery Popinjay Target archery Competitions Olympics Youth World Championships Youth Para World Cup Paralympics Universiade World University Archery Championships Military World Games Continental Africa Americas Asia Europe Naadam Category Glossary Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐br9vb
Cached time: 20250818072606
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.459 seconds
Real time usage: 0.567 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2845/1000000
Revision size: 19872/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 83446/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10661/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 63797/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.298/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9160977/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  498.132      1 -total
 24.54%  122.250      1 Template:Reflist
 15.62%   77.792      9 Template:Cite_web
 14.38%   71.639      1 Template:Archery
 14.02%   69.830      1 Template:Navbox
 12.13%   60.405      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 10.59%   52.736      1 Template:Short_description
  8.99%   44.767      3 Template:Ambox
  8.66%   43.117      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.31%   41.384      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:84228:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818072606 and revision id 1300589608. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Compound_bow&oldid=1300589608 " Category : Bows (archery) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from April 2017 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from May 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles needing additional references from January 2017 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 06:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Compound bow 18 languages Add topic

