Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation types Toggle Formation types subsection 1.1 Upwedging in subduction zones 1.2 Compressional telescoping onto Atlantic-type continental margins 1.3 Gravity sliding onto Atlantic-type continental margins 1.4 Transformation of a spreading ridge to a subduction zone 1.5 Interference of a spreading ridge and a subduction zone 1.6 Rear-arc basin 1.7 Continental collision 2 Examples 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Obduction 20 languages Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Eesti Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî Lietuvių Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overthrusting of oceanic lithosphere onto continental lithosphere at a convergent plate boundary Not to be confused with Abduction .

This article is about the geological process. For the video game, see Obduction (video game) . For the medical procedure, see autopsy .

Obduction is a geological process whereby denser oceanic crust (and even upper mantle ) is scraped off a descending ocean plate at a convergent plate boundary and thrust on top of an adjacent plate.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] When oceanic and continental plates converge, normally the denser oceanic crust sinks under the continental crust in the process of subduction .

[ 3 ] Obduction, which is less common, normally occurs in plate collisions at orogenic belts (some of the material from the subducting oceanic plate is emplaced onto the continental plate) [ 4 ] or back-arc basins (regions where the edge of a continent is pulled away from the rest of the continent due to the stress of plate collision).

[ 5 ] Obduction of oceanic lithosphere produces a characteristic set of rock types called an ophiolite . This assemblage consists of deep-marine sedimentary rock ( chert , limestone , clastic sediments), volcanic rocks ( pillow lavas , volcanic glass , volcanic ash , sheeted dykes and gabbros ) and peridotite (mantle rock).

[ 6 ] John McPhee describes ophiolite formation by obduction as "where ocean crust slides into a trench and goes under a continent, [and] a part of the crust—i.e., an ophiolite—is shaved off the top and ends up on the lip of the continent." [ 7 ] Obduction can occur where a fragment of continental crust is caught in a subduction zone with resulting overthrusting of oceanic mafic and ultramafic rocks from the mantle onto the continental crust. Obduction often occurs where a small tectonic plate is caught between two larger plates, with the crust (both island arc and oceanic) welding onto an adjacent continent as a new terrane . When two continental plates collide, obduction of the oceanic crust between them is often a part of the resulting orogeny .

[ citation needed ] Formation types [ edit ] Upwedging in subduction zones [ edit ] This process is operative beneath and behind the inner walls of oceanic trenches (subduction zone) where slices of oceanic crust and mantle are ripped from the upper part of the descending plate and wedged and packed in high pressure assemblages against the leading edge of the other plate.

[ 8 ] Weakening and cracking of oceanic crust and upper mantle is likely to occur in the tensional regime. This results in the incorporation of ophiolite slabs into the overriding plate.

[ 8 ] Progressive packing of ophiolite slices and arc fragments against the leading edge of a continent may continue over a long period of time and lead to a form of continental accretion .

Compressional telescoping onto Atlantic-type continental margins [ edit ] The simplest form of this type of obduction may follow from the development of a subduction zone near the continental margin. Above and behind the subduction zone, a welt of oceanic crust and mantle rides up over the descending plate. The ocean, intervening between the continental margin and the subduction zone is progressively swallowed until the continental margin arrives at the subduction zone and a giant wedge or slice ( nappe ) of oceanic crust and mantle is pushed across the continental margin.

[ citation needed ] Because the buoyancy of the relatively light continental crust is likely to prohibit its extensive subduction, a flip in subduction polarity will occur yielding an ophiolite sheet lying above a descending plate.

[ citation needed ] If however, a large tract of ocean intervenes between the continental margin the subduction zone, a fully developed arc and back-arc basin may eventually arrive and collide with the continental margin. Further convergence may lead to overthrusting of the volcanic arc assemblage and may be followed by flipping of the subduction polarity . According to the rock assemblage as well as the complexly deformed ophiolite basement and arc intrusions, the Coastal Complex of western Newfoundland may well have been formed by this mechanism.

[ 8 ] Gravity sliding onto Atlantic-type continental margins [ edit ] This concept involves the progressive uplift of an actively spreading oceanic ridge, the detachment of slices from the upper part of the lithosphere, and the subsequent gravity sliding of these slices onto the continental margin as ophiolites. This concept was advocated by Reinhardt [ 9 ] for the emplacement of the Semail Ophiolite complex in Oman and argued by Church [ 10 ] and Church and Stevens [ 11 ] for the emplacement of the Bay of Islands sheet in western Newfoundland. This concept has subsequently been replaced by hypotheses that advocate subduction of the continental margin beneath oceanic lithosphere.

Transformation of a spreading ridge to a subduction zone [ edit ] Many ophiolite complexes were emplaced as thin, hot obducted sheets of oceanic lithosphere shortly after their generation by plate accretion.

[ 4 ] The change from a spreading plate boundary to a subduction plate boundary may result from rapid rearrangement of relative plate motion. A transform fault may also become a subduction zone, with the side with the higher, hotter, thinner lithosphere riding over the lower, colder lithosphere. This mechanism would lead to obduction of ophiolite complex if it occurred near a continental margin.

[ 8 ] Interference of a spreading ridge and a subduction zone [ edit ] In the situation where a spreading ridge approaches a subduction zone, the ridge collides with the subduction zone, at which time there will develop a complex interaction of subduction-related tectonic sedimentary rock and spreading-related tectonic igneous activity. The left-over ridge may either subduct or ride upward across the trench onto arc trench gap and arc terranes as a hot ophiolite slice.

[ 8 ] A potential example is the progressive diminution of the Farallon plate off California. Ophiolite obduction would not be expected as the two plates share a dextral transform boundary. However, the major collision of the Kula / Pacific plate with the Alaskan/Aleutian resulted in the initiation of subduction of the Pacific plate beneath Alaska, with no sign of either obduction or indeed any major manifestation of a ridge being "swallowed".

[ 8 ] Rear-arc basin [ edit ] Dewey and Bird [ 12 ] suggest that a common form of ophiolite obduction is related to the closure of rear-arc marginal basins and that, during such closure by subduction, slices of oceanic crust and mantle may be expelled onto adjacent continental forelands and emplaced as ophiolite sheets. In the high heat-flow region of a volcanic arc and rear-arc basin the lithosphere is particularly thin.

This thin lithosphere may preferentially fail along gently dipping thrust surface if a compressional stress is applied to the region. Under these circumstances, a thin sheet of lithosphere may become detached and begin to ride over adjacent lithosphere to finally become emplaced as a thin ophiolite sheet on the adjacent continental foreland.

[ 8 ] This mechanism is a form of plate convergence where a thin, hot layer of oceanic lithosphere is obducted over cooler and thicker lithosphere.

Continental collision [ edit ] As an ocean is progressively trapped in between two colliding continental lithospheres, the rising wedges of oceanic crust and mantle rise are caught between the continental plates and detach and begin to move up the advancing continental rise. Continued convergence may lead to the overthrusting of the arc-trench gap and eventually overthrusting of the metamorphic plutonic and volcanic rocks of the volcanic arc.

Following total subduction of an oceanic tract, continuing convergence may lead to a further sequence of intra-continental mechanisms of crustal shortening. This mechanism is thought to be responsible for the various ocean basins of the Mediterranean region. The Alpide belt is believed to register a complex history of plate interactions during the general convergence of the Eurasian and African plates.

[ 8 ] Examples [ edit ] There are few continental plates being obducted under an oceanic plate known today, but in the past it appears to have happened a number of times. Thus there are examples of oceanic crustal rocks and deeper mantle rocks that have been obducted and are now exposed at the surface, worldwide.

New Caledonia is one example of recent obduction. The Klamath Mountains of northern California contain several obducted oceanic slabs, most famously the Coast Range Ophiolite . Obducted fragments also are found, for example, in the Hajar Mountains of Oman, [ 9 ] the Troodos Mountains of Cyprus , Newfoundland , [ 12 ] New Zealand , the Alps of Europe, the Shetland islands of Unst and Fetlar, Leka island in Norway, and the Blue Ridge Ophiolite in the Appalachian Mountains of eastern North America.

See also [ edit ] List of tectonic plate interactions – Movements of Earth's lithosphere References [ edit ] ^ "Obduction" .

^ "Plate Tectonics > Glossary > M – R" .

^ Edwards, Sarah J.; Schellart, Wouter P.; Duarte, Joao C. (2015).

"Geodynamic models of continental subduction and obduction of overriding plate forearc oceanic lithosphere on top of continental crust" .

Tectonics .

34 (7): 1494– 1515.

Bibcode : 2015Tecto..34.1494E .

doi : 10.1002/2015TC003884 .

S2CID 129467525 . Archived from the original on 2021-09-28 . Retrieved 2021-09-28 .

^ a b Dewey, J. F., 1975. The role of ophiolite obduction in the evolution of the Appalachian/Caledonian orogenic belt. In: N. Bogdanov (editor), Ophiolites in the Earth's Crust. Acad. Sci. U.S.S.R. (in press) ^ Scliffke, Nicholas; van Hunen, Jeroen; Gueydan, Frédéric; Magni, Valentina; Allen, Mark B. (2021-08-12).

"Curved orogenic belts, back-arc basins, and obduction as consequences of collision at irregular continental margins" .

Geology .

49 (12): 1436– 1440.

Bibcode : 2021Geo....49.1436S .

doi : 10.1130/G48919.1 .

S2CID 238718200 .

^ Robinson, Paul T.; Malpas, John; Dilek, Yildirim; Zhou, Mei-fu (2008).

"The significance of sheeted dike complexes in ophiolites" (PDF) .

GSA Today .

18 (11): 4– 10.

Bibcode : 2008GSAT...18k...4R .

doi : 10.1130/GSATG22A.1 .

^ McPhee, John (1998).

Annals of the Former World . New York: Farmer, Strauss, and Giroux. p. 505.

^ a b c d e f g h Dewey, J. F., 1976. Ophiolite Obduction. Tectonophysics, v. 31, p.93-120.

^ a b Reinhardt, B.M., 1969. On the genesis and emplacement of ophiolites in the Oman Mountains geosyncline. Schweiz. Mineral. Petrog. Mitt., 49:1-30 ^ Church, W. R., 1972. Ophiolite: its definition, origin as oceanic crust, and mode of emplacement in orogenic belts, with special reference to the Appalachians. Dep. Energy, Mines Resourc. Can., Publ., 42:71-85.

^ Church, W.R., and Stevens, R.K., 1971. Early Paleozoic ophiolite complexes of the Newfoundland Appalachians as mantle-oceanic crust sequences. J. Geophys. Res., 76:1460-1466.

^ a b Dewey, J. F. and Bird, J.M., 1971. Origin and emplacement of the ophiolite suite: Appalachian ophiolites in Newfoundland. J. Geophys. Res., 76:3179-3206.

v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Obduction&oldid=1305866219 " Categories : Plate tectonics Geological processes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2014 This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 14:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Obduction 20 languages Add topic

