Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hegel 2 Marx 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Aufheben 16 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Македонски 日本語 Português Русский Slovenčina 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Aufhebung ) German word For the album by The Brian Jonestown Massacre, see Aufheben (album) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Aufheben" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Aufheben ( [ˈʔaʊ̯fˌheːbm̩, -bən] ⓘ ) or Aufhebung ( [ˈaʊ̯fˌheːbʊŋ] ⓘ ) is a German word with several seemingly contradictory meanings, including "to lift up", "to abolish", "cancel" or "suspend", or "to sublate".

[ 1 ] The term has also been defined as "abolish", "preserve", and "transcend". In philosophy , aufheben is used by Hegel in his exposition of dialectics , and in this sense is translated mainly as "sublate".

[ 2 ] Hegel [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section may be too long and excessively detailed.

Please consider summarising the material.

( February 2025 ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Hegel , the term Aufhebung has the apparently contradictory implications of both preserving and changing, and eventually advancement (the German verb aufheben means "to cancel", "to keep" and "to pick up"). The tension between these senses suits what Hegel is trying to talk about. In sublation, a term or concept is both preserved and changed through its dialectical interplay with another term or concept. Sublation is the motor by which the dialectic functions.

Sublation can be seen at work at the most basic level of Hegel's system of logic. The two concepts Being and Nothing are each both preserved and changed through sublation in the concept Becoming . Similarly, in the Science of Logic ( Doctrine of Being ) determinateness , or quality , and magnitude , or quantity , are each both preserved and sublated in the concept measure .

Hegel's philosophy of history stresses the importance of negative (the antithesis) in history—negative includes wars, etc., but not only. His conception of historical progress follows a dialectic spiral, in which the thesis is opposed by the antithesis, itself sublated by the next thesis. Hegel stated that aufheben is uniquely exempt from the historical process in that it is supposed to be true for all time and never changes or develops further as in das absolute Wissen (" absolute knowledge "). The next thesis both abolishes and preserves the original thesis and the antithesis, an apparent contradiction which leads to difficulties in interpreting this concept (and to translate aufheben ). In Hegel's logic self-contradiction is legitimate and necessary.

For Hegel, history (like logic) proceeds in every small way through sublation. For example, the Oriental, Greek and Roman Empires (in which the individual is ignored or annihilated, then recognized, and finally suppressed by the States) are preserved and destroyed in the First French Empire , which, for Hegel, placed the individual in harmony with the State. At the level of social history, sublation can be seen at work in the master-slave dialectic .

[ 3 ] [ clarification needed ] Hegel approaches the history of philosophy in the same way, arguing that important philosophical ideas of the past are not rejected but rather preserved and changed as philosophy develops. One can always find another thing in reflective philosophy upon which some absolute ground relies. With Fichte 's ultimate ground, the "I" or " ego ", for example, one can immediately see the reliance upon the "non-I", which allows Fichte to distinguish what he means by the "I". Reflection is circular, as Fichte unapologetically acknowledged.

However, reflective thought is to be avoided due to its circularity . It leads to covering the same problems and ground ever and anon for each philosophical generation. It is a philosophia perennis . Instead, Hegel calls on speculative thought : two contradictory elements are held together, uplifted and sublated without completely destroying one another. Speculative thought seeks to avoid the abstract idealism inherent in reflective thought and allows one to think in concrete or absolute idealism ' s terms about how things work, both in the present, real world and in history.

Reflexivity is, per contra -- per the pro- or positive aspects of mutual reciprocity -- undoubtedly the 'brighter' or more constructive side of Hegelian dialectics and therefore not circular (in any logically pernicious sense so 'to be avoided'). It is an informative circle rather than a logically vicious one; reentry into which undoubtedly adds depth, subtlety, richness, and nuance to personal identity via our inherent sociality of dialectical interactions one with another.

Here we have 'informed' access to consciousness's (already) reflective origins in and among the 'with' of 'unto others'; the more positive aspects of Hegel's dialectical reciprocity; that which stands in sharp contradistinction to the juxtapositionality of master/slave relations.

Reflexivity can be informative; allowing us to re-enter the circle of consciousness in order to 'see' or become more aware, so realize and even possibly transform what makes consciousness so. Hegel's 'dialectic of consciousness' is logically no different from the 'art' of presuppositional thinking Wittgenstein attempted to bring to 'English analytic philosophy', calling attention to what is already presupposed in being a mind, having a language, sharing a culture, being in a world, etc.

On this 'foundational supposition, Aufheben is better described as 'a simultaneous breaking-down and redirecting of the energetic life-forces'; that which carries us beyond mere sublimation unto sublation. In this regard, Aufheben has, or rather carries, transcendental overtones no other word does. Never any simple 'No'; always a teleological 'perhaps'.

Marx [ edit ] See also: Historical materialism Marx adopts the concept of sublation from Hegel to describe the historical development of material conditions, however, reinterprets it through a materialist framework . While Hegel understood sublation as the self-realization of Geist (often translated as "mind" or "spirit") and as an ideal, universal spirit manifesting through history, Marx inverted this approach (as he explicitly says in Capital ), grounding dialectical development in concrete, socio-economic contradictions, particularly those between classes . Although Marx acknowledged a “rational kernel” in Hegel’s dialectics , he rejected the notion that Geist could account for historical change in the materialist sense, arguing instead that it mystified real social relations by abstracting them from their class-based foundations. Thus, for Marx, historical development reflects the movement of material contradictions, not the ideal agency of spirit, and cannot be reduced to the unfolding of a universal mind.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Look up aufheben in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Sublimation Thesis, antithesis, synthesis References [ edit ] ^ "LEO Dictionary" . Retrieved 21 February 2013 .

^ Froeb, Kai.

"Sublation" .

Archived from the original on 6 July 2011 . Retrieved 27 June 2011 .

^ Hegel, Georg (1978).

The Difference Between the Fichtean and Schellingian Systems of Philosophy . New York: Ridgeview Pub Co.

ISBN 978-0917930126 .

^ Lukacs, G. (1977). The Young Hegel: Studies in the Relations between Dialectics and Economics. MIT Press.

^ Uchida, H., & Carver, T. (2016). Marx’s “Grundrisse” and Hegel’s “Logic.” Routledge.

^ Heinrich, M. (2012). An introduction to the three volumes of Karl Marx’s Capital. NYU Press.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐9ppml
Cached time: 20250814231559
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.395 seconds
Real time usage: 0.523 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1268/1000000
Revision size: 8597/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 52002/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9908/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 26247/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.277/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17140385/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  487.503      1 -total
 21.43%  104.455     10 Template:Lang
 19.12%   93.231      1 Template:Reflist
 15.33%   74.716      4 Template:Ambox
 15.15%   73.841      2 Template:Cite_web
 14.97%   73.002      1 Template:Short_description
 12.52%   61.018      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 11.58%   56.463      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.62%   42.000      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.04%   24.584      2 Template:IPA Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3007244:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814231559 and revision id 1305599547. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aufheben&oldid=1305599547 " Categories : Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel Concepts in the philosophy of history Dialectic Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Wikipedia articles that are too technical from February 2025 All articles that are too technical Articles containing overly long summaries Wikipedia articles with style issues from February 2025 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2009 Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 01:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aufheben 16 languages Add topic

