Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Influences 2 Components Toggle Components subsection 2.1 Anti-revisionism 2.2 Use of violence 2.3 Instrumentalization of education 2.4 Cult of personality 2.5 Radical anti-capitalism 2.6 Class executions 2.7 Permanent cultural revolution 3 Reactions inside Shining Path 4 See also 5 Notes and references Toggle the table of contents Gonzalo Thought 5 languages Cymraeg Español Français Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Peruvian communist ideology Abimael Guzmán, depicted as "The Fourth Sword of Marxism" Part of a series on Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous revolution theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Deng Xiaoping Theory Naxalism People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Salim Rubaya Ali Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill George Jackson İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965—1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black Power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Maoist Communist Party of China Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National Democracy Movement Naxalite Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Gonzalo Thought ( Spanish : Pensamiento Gonzalo ), also known as Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought and Gonzaloism , [ 1 ] is an ideological doctrine developed by Peruvian revolutionary Abimael Guzmán (also known as Chairman Gonzalo) as an interpretation of Peruvian reality based on Marxism–Leninism–Maoism .

Anti-revisionist in nature, Gonzalo Thought was the ideological basis of the Communist Party of Peru—Shining Path (PCP-SL) and the trigger for the Peruvian Civil War of 1980–2000 .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The ideology is based on the synthesized philosophies of Karl Marx , Vladimir Lenin , Mao Zedong , and José Carlos Mariátegui . The term "Gonzalo Thought" comes from the alias used by Abimael Guzmán, "Chairman Gonzalo", who was considered by his followers to be the "Fourth Sword of Marxism", a direct successor to Marx, Lenin, and Mao.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] Although initially raised from the Peruvian reality through a Marxist analysis, Gonzalo Thought expanded to culture, society and language outside Peru and formed the ideological basis of revolutionary groups abroad.

[ 5 ] Its adherents put it into practice on their way to implement the People's Republic of New Democracy through the doctrine of " protracted people's war ", often entailing terrorist actions and guerilla warfare.

After the capture of Abimael Guzmán in 1992, various currents claimed to maintain Gonzalo Thought (among them Sendero Rojo or the MOVADEF [ 6 ] [ 7 ] ) while other Sendero leaders, such as Comrade José (Víctor Quispe Palomino), renounced Gonzalo Thought altogether and adopted other ideological lines or simply turned to drug trafficking .

[ 8 ] Guzmán first began speaking of "Gonzalo Thought" as the party's guiding ideology in the late 1980s.

[ 9 ] Influences [ edit ] The figures who inspired Abimael Guzmán were Marx, Engels , Lenin, Stalin , Mao and José Carlos Mariátegui , as well as the academic Efraín Morote Best (folklorist and father of the senderista Osmán Morote Barrionuevo ), who was rector at the National University of San Cristóbal de Huamanga (UNSCH) in Ayacucho .

[ 5 ] [ 10 ] Gonzalo Thought was first called " Guiding Thought of Comrade Gonzalo ", then " Guiding Thought of President Gonzalo " and, after the celebration of the First Congress of the Shining Path (between 1988 and 1989), it would become "Gonzalo Thought".

[ 11 ] The bases of Gonzalo Thought are: Marxism , from which he interprets the class struggle and the dictatorship of the proletariat as realities of the world. Therefore, the revolution in a certain place had to be part of the proletarian world revolution , to which it had to belong and support.

[ 12 ] In addition to the belief in the inevitability of the evolutionary transition that would take human societies from capitalism to communism .

[ 13 ] Leninism , from which he adopted the idea that the revolution would be possible through the work of a party constituted as a "war machine", made up of a vanguard of "cadres" that would in turn be the most advanced expression of the world proletariat, destined to establish the dictatorship of the proletariat.

[ 13 ] In addition, imperialism is described as a new stage of capitalism.

[ 12 ] Maoism , which mainly included the experience of the Chinese Communist Revolution and the concept of people's war, to which Guzmán granted the category of principle of universal validity, along with Mao's theory of contradictions , according to which the struggle of opposites would be generalized at all levels of matter, society and thought.

[ 13 ] Finally, Gonzalo Thought unites all of the above and applies it to the Peruvian reality as a development elaborated by Guzmán from the thought of Mariátegui (Mariátegui's thought being considered a "political expression of the Peruvian working class").

[ 13 ] Gonzalo Thought was accepted by Guzmán's followers as an official ideology, as it would be "the only scientific one", a superior way of appreciating reality.

[ 13 ] Components [ edit ] Anti-revisionism [ edit ] Gonzalo Thought adheres to the anti-revisionist line of Marxism, considering revisionists as: A cancer, a cancer that has to be ruthlessly swept away, otherwise we will not be able to advance in the revolution; and remember what Lenin said, synthetically, we must forge in two issues, forge in revolutionary violence and forge in the implacable struggle against opportunism, against revisionism.

[ 14 ] In this way, ideological purity and complete adherence to what was considered the correct line within Marxism was encouraged.

[ 15 ] Use of violence [ edit ] Gonzalo Thought calls for the use of violence through the "people's war" and the " blood quota ." [ 1 ] For Guzmán: Regarding violence, we start from a principle established by Chairman Mao Tse Tung: violence is a universal law without any exception, I mean revolutionary violence; This violence is what allows us to resolve the fundamental contradictions with an army and through the people's war. It is a substantive question of Marxism because without revolutionary violence one class cannot be replaced by another, an old order cannot be overthrown to create a new one, a new order led by the proletariat through communist parties.

[ 16 ] Violence, as a manifestation of class struggle , was seen as a fundamental step to overthrow the old, enabling the emergence of an overcoming stage of capitalism: communism.

[ 17 ] Instrumentalization of education [ edit ] Within Gonzalo Thought, education has the role of recruitment, propaganda and indoctrination of the masses. In this way, the control of university spaces is considered important to train university students in Gonzalo Thought so that they can transmit Guzmán's postulates to the masses.

[ 18 ] Cult of personality [ edit ] The cult of personality around Abimael Guzmán was promoted by the Shining Path, reaching the level of fanaticism.

[ 1 ] Described as a "messianic leader", the capture of Guzman directly led to the Shining Path's collapse.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Upon his death a national debate ensued that led to the cremation of his remains.

[ 21 ] Radical anti-capitalism [ edit ] Gonzalo Thought categorized all types of private property or commerce as capitalist , going so far as murdering cattle and destroying hydroelectric plants; the justification was that all of these were capitalist instruments. This action was compared to British Luddism of the 19th century. Furthermore, highland peasants were prohibited from buying or selling, for the very fact that it was considered capitalist.

[ 1 ] Class executions [ edit ] Anyone who was related to or was identified as part of the "bourgeois state", or a collaborator with it, deserved execution, which is why cruelty in murders was encouraged to achieve the obedience of the masses.

[ 1 ] Permanent cultural revolution [ edit ] Inspired by Mao's Cultural Revolution (which sought to eliminate the remains of what were considered capitalist and traditional elements of Chinese society), Gonzalo Thought promoted a permanent "cultural revolution" that would eliminate representatives of the previous society, "changing souls" and preventing the return of capitalism.

[ 22 ] Reactions inside Shining Path [ edit ] Despite the cult of personality around Guzmán, the introduction of Gonzalo Thought encountered some opposition at the party's first National Congress in 1988.

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communism in Peru Notes and references [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f "Qué es el maoísmo, la ideología en la que se inspiró Abimael Guzmán y por la que desencadenó en Perú una guerra sangrienta" .

BBC News Mundo (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2024-02-12 .

^ adminpucp (2012-01-19).

" "El pensamiento Gonzalo no es una idea democrática" " .

IDEHPUCP (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2024-02-12 .

^ "Preguntas frecuentes – Terrorismo Nunca Más" .

www.congreso.gob.pe . Retrieved 2024-02-12 .

^ Galway, Matthew (2021-09-28).

"The Final Sheathing of La Cuarta Espada" .

Made in China Journal . Retrieved 2024-02-12 .

^ a b Shakespeare, Nicholas (2019-05-30).

"The thoughts of Chairman Gonzalo" .

The Spectator . Retrieved 2024-02-12 .

^ Aznárez, Juan Jesús (1994-09-24).

"De Sendero Luminoso a Sendero Rojo" .

El País (in Spanish).

ISSN 1134-6582 . Retrieved 2024-02-12 .

^ Moncada, Andrea (September 13, 2021).

"An Unlikely Gift to Peru's President" .

Americas Quarterly . Retrieved 2024-02-12 .

^ swissinfo.ch, S. W. I. (2023-07-05).

"Justicia de Perú emite orden de captura contra los hermanos Palomino, líderes de Sendero" .

SWI swissinfo.ch (in European Spanish) . Retrieved 2024-02-12 .

^ La Serna, Miguel, and Orin Starn (2023). Beyond the Gonzalo Mystique: Challenges to Abimael Guzmán’s Leadership inside Peru’s Shining Path, 1982–1992. Latin American Research Review 58, 743–761. https:// doi.org/10.1017/lar.2023.25. Page 751. "During his attention-grabbing 'Interview of the Century' of the same year, Guzmán lauded the congress as a 'victorious feat,' proclaiming that it had 'established the basis of party unity' predicated on, among other things, his newly articulated 'Gonzalo Thought.' Until then, Guzmán had referred to the application of Maoism to Peruvian conditions as guiding thought." ^ Guzman, Abimael; Yparraguirre Revoredo, Elena (2014).

Memorias desde Némesis (PDF) (in Spanish). pp.

20– 21.

^ Roque, Victor Manuel Pimentel; Sandoval, Oscar Mogollón (2023-05-31).

"El planteado"Recodo" de la Organización Terrorista Sendero Luminoso" .

Ciencia Latina Revista Científica Multidisciplinar (in Spanish).

7 (3): 230– 253.

doi : 10.37811/cl_rcm.v7i3.6178 .

ISSN 2707-2215 .

^ a b Montesinos Torres, Vladimiro (2009).

Sin sendero: alerta temprana. 1 (1 ed.). Lima, Perú: Ezer Ed.

ISBN 978-612-45646-0-4 .

^ a b c d e Ramirez, Ivan; Nureña, César (2012).

El Pensamiento Gonzalo: La violencia hecha dogma político (PDF) .

^ "Retomemos a Mariátegui y reconstituyamos su partido" .

www.pagina-libre.org . Retrieved 2024-02-13 .

^ "El oscuro futuro de Perú a causa de Sendero Luminoso | Alvaro Vargas Llosa" .

El Instituto Independiente . Retrieved 2024-02-13 .

^ Valencia Cárdenas, Valencia (1992).

Los crímenes de sendero luminoso en Ayacucho [ Crimes of the Shining Path in Ayacucho ] (in Spanish). Lima. p. 14.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Portocarrero, Gonzalo (2012).

"Razones de sangre" .

Fondo Editorial PUCP (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2024-02-13 .

^ Sucedió en el Perú (TV Perú) – Terrorismo en el Perú – Parte I – 19/06/2017 , 19 September 2017 , retrieved 2024-02-13 .

^ Collyns, Dan (2021-09-17).

"Peruvians split on how to handle Shining Path leader's remains" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2024-02-15 .

^ "The Rise and Fall of Shining Path" .

COHA . 2008-05-06 . Retrieved 2024-02-15 .

^ Alarcón, Daniel (2021-09-19).

"Peru Processes the Death of Abimael Guzmán" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 2024-02-15 .

^ Musto, Marcello (2018-12-30).

"Maoísmo en los Andes: La historia de Abimael Guzmán, líder de Sendero Luminoso" .

www.sinpermiso.info (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2024-02-15 .

^ La Serna, Miguel, and Orin Starn (2023). Beyond the Gonzalo Mystique: Challenges to Abimael Guzmán’s Leadership inside Peru’s Shining Path, 1982–1992. Latin American Research Review 58, 743–761. https:// doi.org/10.1017/lar.2023.25". Pages 753-754. "Others disputed Guzmán’s intellectual superiority. In particular, they questioned the viability of Gonzalo Thought. One opinion circulated among the Shining Trenches of Combat, the committee representing Shining Path prisoners, that Gonzalo Thought was ‘just one more thought.’ One anonymous member of Socorro Popular (Popular Aid), the committee responsible for providing legal services to party members accused of terrorism, reportedly professed, ‘I don’t see the value of Gonzalo thought.’ At least one committee reported the view that Gonzalo Thought was simply ‘the ideological fusion of mlm [Marxism-Leninism-Maoism],’ iimplying that it lacked ideological innovation.59 Others concluded that a better approach would be to decouple classical Marxism-Leninism- Maoism and Gonzalo Thought. A parenthetical note in the congressional minutes elaborated further on this point: ‘some say this is because Chairman Gonzalo, the leadership, are being questioned, others say it’s because the leadership is being questioned and others because it runs contrary to Maoism.’" v t e Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-imperialism Anti-fascism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type economic planning Commanding heights of the economy Developed socialism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Labour aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism Partiinost' People's democracy People's democratic revolution Popular front Proletarian internationalism Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Theory of the productive forces Third Period Wars of national liberation State forms People's democratic state National democratic state Socialist state State of socialist orientation Socialist state of the whole people Class system Dictatorship of the proletariat People's democratic dictatorship Political system Party Central committee General Secretary of the Communist Party Politburo Secretariat Vanguardism State Permanent organ of the supreme state organ of power Special committees of the supreme state organ of power Supreme executive and administrative organ Supreme state organ of power Leading role of the party Transmission belt Unified power Unified state apparatus Hybrid Civilian control of the military Collective leadership Cult of personality Democratic centralism Variants Cuban ( Fidelismo Guevarism ) Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche ( Songun Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism Kimjongunism ) Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism ( Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Naxalism Prachanda Path Mao-spontex Islamic Maoism Pantherism ( Intercommunalism ) New Synthesis Mulelism ) Kaysone Phomvihane Thought National Pol Potism African ( Sankarism Machelism Nkrumaism ) Socialism with Chinese characteristics ( Dengism Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Xi Jinping Thought ) Stalinism ( Neo-Stalinism ) People's Multiparty Democracy American ( Bill of Rights socialism Browderism Marcyism New Communism ) Dubčekism Zachariadism Brezhnevism Taistoism Titoism ( Đilasism Rankovićism ) People Joseph Stalin Mao Zedong John Maclean James Connolly Ernst Thälmann Khorloogiin Choibalsan Ehmetjan Qasim José Díaz Maurice Thorez Palmiro Togliatti Dolores Ibárruri Harry Pollitt Rajani Palme Dutt Ho Chi Minh Võ Nguyên Giáp Earl Browder Nikita Khrushchev Walter Ulbricht Josip Broz Tito Mátyás Rákosi Lazar Kaganovich Georgi Dimitrov Bolesław Bierut Willie Gallacher Valko Chervenkov Klement Gottwald Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Enver Hoxha Kaysone Phomvihane Khalid Bakdash Leonid Brezhnev Deng Xiaoping Pol Pot Nikos Zachariadis Che Guevara Fidel Castro Agostinho Neto Mengistu Haile Mariam Kim Il Sung Chin Peng Sanzō Nosaka Nicolae Ceaușescu Gustáv Husák János Kádár Maurice Bishop Erich Honecker Władysław Gomułka Samora Machel Thomas Sankara Mathieu Kérékou Siad Barre Nur Muhammad Taraki Alfonso Cano Pushpa Kamal Dahal Rohana Wijeweera Abimael Guzmán Gus Hall Gennady Zyuganov Xi Jinping Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism Dialectical and Historical Materialism The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Britain's Road to Socialism Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR A Critique of Soviet Economics Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism Guerrilla Warfare History Soviet Union ( 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 ) Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Communist Revolution China ( 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present ) Tito–Stalin split Korean War De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Albanian–Soviet split Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black Power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency New People's Army rebellion Maoist insurgency in Turkey Sino-Albanian split Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Revolutions of 1989 By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia ( Democratic Kampuchea People's Republic of Kampuchea ) China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia ( Czechia Slovakia ) East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia Soviet Union ( Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan ) Vietnam Yemen Yugoslavia ( Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia ) Organizations Albanian Party of Labour Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Brazil Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of India (Marxist) Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Philippines Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam Communist Party of Malaya Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Shining Path ( Militarized Communist Party of Peru ) Workers' Party of Korea Portuguese Communist Party Related topics Bolshevism Leninism Trotskyism See also All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism ( Mass killings ) Cold War Crimes against humanity under Marxist–Leninist regimes ( Mass killings ) Criticism of Marxist–Leninist party rule MAGA Communism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism New class Post-Marxism–Leninism Red fascism Red Scare ( Second ) Second World State capitalism State socialism State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Socialism portal Communism portal v t e Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous Revolution Theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Salmin Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965–1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Peruvian Revolution Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Peru – Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Proletarian Party of East Bengal Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People – Communist League Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National communism National Democracy Movement Naxalism Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gonzalo_Thought&oldid=1305442716 " Categories : Eponymous political ideologies Shining Path Types of socialism Marxist schools of thought Totalitarian ideologies Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 02:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gonzalo Thought 5 languages Add topic

