Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Academics 3 Campuses 4 Grading System 5 Institutes and Graduate Schools Toggle Institutes and Graduate Schools subsection 5.1 Institute for the Study of Muslim Civilisations 5.2 Institute for Educational Development - Pakistan and Tanzania, East Africa.

5.3 Graduate School of Media and Communications 6 Notable people Toggle Notable people subsection 6.1 Alumni 6.2 Faculty 7 Awards and Accolades 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Aga Khan University 16 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Español فارسی Hausa हिन्दी Kiswahili مصرى ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو سنڌي Svenska اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 24°53′34″N 67°04′29″E ﻿ / ﻿ 24.8928°N 67.0747°E ﻿ / 24.8928; 67.0747 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia University in Karachi, Pakistan, with campuses in various countries Aga Khan University Seal of AKU Other name AKU Type Private research university Established 1983 ; 42 years ago ( 1983 ) Chancellor His Highness the Aga Khan President Sulaiman Shahabuddin Provost Tania Bubela Students 3,196 [alumni: 17,219; employees: 15,275] [ 1 ] Campus Karachi , Pakistan Nairobi , Kenya Dar es Salaam , Tanzania Kampala , Uganda London , United Kingdom Language Mostly English Colours Affiliations HEC PMC CAP JCI Mascot The AKU Leopard [ 2 ] Website www .aku .edu Aga Khan University is a private research university based in Karachi , Pakistan . It is a non-profit institution and an agency of the Aga Khan Development Network . It was founded in 1983 as Pakistan's first private university. Starting in 2000, the university expanded to Kenya , Tanzania , Uganda , the United Kingdom and Afghanistan .

AKU began life as a health-sciences university. It is among the largest private health-care providers in Pakistan and East Africa. AKU hospitals were the first in those regions accredited by U.S.-based Joint Commission International.

More recently, the university has initiated programmes in teacher education, the study of Muslim civilisations, journalism, early childhood development and public policy. In the near future, the university plans to launch an undergraduate liberal-arts programme to educate future leaders in a wide range of fields and establish additional graduate professional schools.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Founded in 1983 by Prince Aga Khan IV , Aga Khan University (AKU) stands as one of the agencies within the Aga Khan Development Network .

[ 4 ] In 1964, plans for the construction of the Aga Khan Hospital and Medical College were announced by the Chancellor. Subsequently, in 1980, the contract for the main complex of Aga Khan University Hospital and Medical College was signed in London.

A significant milestone occurred in 1983 when the Charter of the university was presented to the Chancellor by the former President of Pakistan, establishing it as the first private international university in Pakistan. That same year marked the graduation of the first class from the university's School of Nursing. The inauguration of Aga Khan University Hospital in Karachi followed in 1985.

The university's medical college witnessed its first batch of graduates in 1989. In 1994, the Institute for Educational Development in Karachi was inaugurated. The year 2001 saw the launch of the Advanced Nursing Studies Programme in Uganda, while in 2002, the Institute for the Study of Muslim Civilisations was established in London.

Continuing its expansion, Aga Khan Hospital in Nairobi was upgraded to Aga Khan University Hospital in 2005. The following year, in 2006, the Institute for Educational Development in East Africa was inaugurated, alongside the French Medical Institute for Children in Kabul, managed by AKU.

In 2007, the Examination Board conducted its first Secondary School Certificate examinations.

[ 5 ] The year 2015 marked a significant achievement for Aga Khan University, Tanzania, as it was granted a University Charter by President Jakaya Kikwete. In 2012, the Graduate School of Media and Communications, Institute for Human Development, and East Africa Institute were founded.

In 2021, Aga Khan University, Kenya, received a charter from President Uhuru Kenyatta .

[ 6 ] The subsequent academic years, 2022–23, witnessed the launch of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences on the Stadium Road Campus in Karachi, Pakistan. Stephen Lyon was appointed as the Inaugural Dean in September 2022, [ 7 ] and the Faculty officially launched in September 2023.

[ 8 ] Academics [ edit ] The Aga Khan University accounts for 75% of all biomedical research in Pakistan while the remaining 25 percent is shared by all the other institutions.

[ 9 ] AKU publishes more research articles in peer-reviewed, indexed internationally recognised journals than any other university in Pakistan.

[ 9 ] Faculty promotions are dependent on publications in indexed journals while most medical students have published by the time they graduate.

[ citation needed ] Undergraduate medical students have published up to 50 research papers in indexed health journals.

[ 10 ] It is one of the few universities in Pakistan to provide research facilities to students at the undergraduate level. The university maintains a research office to guide and support research conducted at the university. A University Research Council also funds grants after a competitive review process facilitated by a Grants Review Committee. Particular emphasis is also placed on community related health sciences research. AKU organizes international and national research workshops and seminars. A Health Sciences Research Assembly is held annually in which faculty and students present their research.

[ 11 ] The university is a site for NIH clinical trials .

[ 12 ] The seal (logo) of the Aga Khan University is a visual representation of the principles which underlie the founding of the university.

[ 13 ] The circular form of the seal has its roots in the rosettes of early Islamic periods. It also symbolizes the world and reflects the internationality of the Aga Khan University. At the centre of the seal is a star or sun representing light – a universal symbol of the enlightenment that education provides. The light is also symbolic of Nur (divine light). The star incorporates 49 points to commemorate the university's founding by Prince Karim Aga Khan , the Forty-Ninth imam of the Ismaili Muslims . The outer ring circumscribes a Quranic Ayat (3:103) rendered in classic thuluth script .

Campuses [ edit ] Aga Khan University's Karachi campus.

The Aga Khan University is an international university, operating on campuses in Central and South Asia , the African Great Lakes , Europe and the Middle East. In Pakistan, the university is an 84-acre campus including a hospital with two on-campus male and female hostels with a capacity of 300 each. It has a sports and rehabilitation center which is one of the best in Pakistan, with an Olympic-standard swimming pool, cricket practice nets, tennis courts, indoor gymnasium with wooden flooring, squash courts and gyms. It has cricket and football grounds with jogging tracks.

Existing campuses and international programmes include: Faculty of Health Sciences located on an 84-acre (340,000 m 2 ) campus in the heart of Karachi , Pakistan , built in the 1980s [ 14 ] Aga Khan University Health Sciences campus in Nairobi, Kenya Faculty of Arts and Sciences housed in the University Centre on the Stadium Road Campus in Karachi, Pakistan. The Faculty of Arts and Sciences offers undergraduate majors in Asian and Middle Eastern Studies, Social and Development Studies, Human and Environmental Biology, and Politics Philosophy and Economics.

Institute for Educational Development in the Karimabad area of Karachi , Pakistan and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania Institute for the Study of Muslim Civilisations in London, United Kingdom A USD 450 million campus planned for Arusha , in north-eastern Tanzania to be built in the next 15 years Advanced Nursing Studies (ANS) Programmes at campuses in Kenya , Tanzania and Uganda Programmes for capacity development for teachers and nurses in Afghanistan , Egypt and Syria Grading System [ edit ] The Aga Khan University (AKU) uses an absolute grading system with a fixed range. The grading table is: Grading Table Percentage Grade GPA 95-100% A+ 4.00 90-94% A 4.00 85-89% A- 3.70 80-84% B+ 3.30 75-79% B 3.00 70-74% B- 2.70 65-69% C+ 2.30 60-64% C 2.00 55-59% C- 1.70 Below 55% F 0.00 Institutes and Graduate Schools [ edit ] The university is home to several teaching and research Institutes on its different campuses. The Institutes each drive one of the thematic priorities of AKU and AKDN. In London, the Institute for the Study of Muslim Civilisations is a dedicated interdisciplinary research and graduate school that brings together humanities scholars and social scientists to critically engage with cultural, historical, political, economic, legal and religious aspects of Muslim societies. In Pakistan and East Africa, AKU has two Institutes that focus on education: the Institute for Educational Development Pakistan , and Institute for Educational Development East Africa .

Institute for the Study of Muslim Civilisations [ edit ] The Institute for the Study of Muslim Civilisations (AKU-ISMC) was founded in 2002 and accepted its first intake of graduate students in 2006. The AKU-ISMC offers an MA in Muslim Cultures. The MA is accredited by the Higher Education Commission (Pakistan) of Pakistan and regulated by the Quality Assurance Agency in the UK.

[ 15 ] Since 2018, AKU-ISMC has been based in the Aga Khan Centre in the King's Cross area of London. The Aga Khan Centre was designed by the architect Fumihiko Maki.

[ 16 ] In 2020, AKU signed a partnership with Columbia University launching a dual masters in September 2020.

Institute for Educational Development - Pakistan and Tanzania, East Africa.

[ edit ] The Institute for Educational Development in Karachi and East Africa [ 17 ] (AKU-IED) is a center for developing teachers, educators, education managers, researchers and policy makers. Apart from teacher training, AKU-IED offers MEd ( Masters of Education ) and PhD . in Education as well. Established in 2003. AKU-EB is a federal Board of Intermediate and Secondary education in Pakistan. AKU-EB examines students at SSC and HSSC level.

[ 18 ] Graduate School of Media and Communications [ edit ] Launched in 2015, the Aga Khan University Graduate School of Media and Communications (GSMC) is focused on education and tailored training for journalists, communicators and media executives and entrepreneurs in East Africa and beyond.

[ 19 ] On 7 December 2019, GSMC announced a partnership with Facebook to launch the Video Journalism Fellowship.

[ 20 ] Notable people [ edit ] See also: List of Aga Khan University people Alumni [ edit ] Hasan B. Alam , trauma surgeon in the United States.

[ 21 ] Adeel A. Butt , professor of medicine and infectious disease specialist [ 22 ] Adil Haider , trauma surgeon and outcomes research scientist in the United States [ 23 ] Naeem Rahim , nephrologist [ 24 ] and founder of Idaho based JRM Foundation for humanity [ 25 ] Saad Omer , vaccinologist, infectious disease epidemiologist, [ 26 ] and inaugural Director of the O'Donnell School of Public Health.

[ 27 ] Faculty [ edit ] Abdul Gaffar Billoo , pediatric endocrinologist , professor of clinical pediatrics at the Aga Khan University (AKU) [ 28 ] John Harland Bryant , former professor of Community Health Sciences Zulfiqar Bhutta , Director of the Institute for Global Health and Development Sahabzada Yaqub Khan , former foreign minister of Pakistan Marleen Temmerman , Chair of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Aga Khan University Kenya Leif Stenberg , Professor of Islamic Studies and former Dean of the Institute for the Study of Muslim Civilisations (from 2017 to 2023) (UK) Awards and Accolades [ edit ] Centre for Innovation in Medical Education is South Asia's first to be accredited by US-based Society for Simulation in Healthcare.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Village Land Use Plan awarded the Society for College and University Planning's Merit Award for Excellence in Planning for a District or Campus Component.

[ 31 ] Medical College (Pakistan) Urban Health Programme awarded MacJannet Prize for Global Citizenship 2009.

[ 32 ] Zairi International Award in Higher Education 2022, Award of Excellence for Disruptive Education.

[ 33 ] Aga Khan University's Hayat app has been awarded a silver medal at the international Digital Health Awards 2023.

[ 34 ] See also [ edit ] Aga Khan University Hospital Aga Khan Development Network Education in Uganda List of universities in Uganda References [ edit ] ^ "AKU at a glance" .

www.aku.edu . Retrieved 18 July 2021 .

^ "The AKU Mascot" .

About AKU . The Aga Khan University . Retrieved 12 May 2021 .

^ "About the University" .

www.aku.edu . Retrieved 18 July 2021 .

^ "Aga Khan University" .

www.akdn.org .

^ "Historic Timeline" .

www.aku.edu . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ Maombo, Sharon (11 June 2021).

"Uhuru urges universities to invest in CBC research" .

The Star . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "Stephen Lyon joins as inaugural dean of AKU's new Faculty of Arts and Sciences" .

www.aku.edu . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "AKU welcomes inaugural class of faculty of arts and sciences" .

Daily Times . 19 September 2023 . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ a b "Need stressed to promote research" . Dawn (newspaper). 29 March 2007 . Retrieved 11 August 2017 .

^ DOAJ.

"Directory of Open Access Journals" .

doaj.org . Retrieved 5 August 2020 .

^ "Annual Research Institute" .

www.aku.edu . Retrieved 5 August 2020 .

^ "NIH trials at the Aga Khan University" . Retrieved 11 August 2017 .

^ "The Seal – AKU Convocation 2006" . Archived from the original on 6 February 2007 . Retrieved 11 August 2017 .

^ "HARVARD TO AID IN DEVELOPING PAKISTANI TEACHING HOSPITAL" .

The New York Times . 21 December 1981 . Retrieved 11 August 2017 .

^ Higher Education Review (Foreign Providers): Aga Khan University (International) in the United Kingdom Institute for the Study of Muslim Civilisations, October 2020 Retrieved 4 March 2021 ^ Ravenscroft, Tom, Fumihiko Maki unveils Aga Khan Centre in London's King's Cross, Dezeen , 29 June 2018.

Retrieved 4 March 2021 ^ "Institutes for Educational Development | The Aga Khan University" .

www.aku.edu . Retrieved 1 July 2021 .

^ "AKU-EB" .

examinationboard.aku.edu . Retrieved 5 August 2020 .

^ "About Us" .

Aga Khan University | Graduate School of Media and Communications . Retrieved 9 December 2019 .

^ Wanzala, James.

"Varsity, Facebook partner in training" .

The Standard . Retrieved 9 December 2019 .

^ Rohman, Melissa (24 March 2020).

"Distinguished Surgeon Named Chair of Surgery" .

Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine .

^ "Butt, Adeel Ajwad" .

vivo.weill.cornell.edu . Retrieved 12 September 2023 .

^ CSPH Names Adil Haider, MD, MPH as New Director Archived 27 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Brighamandwomens.org. Retrieved on 3 July 2016.

^ "Dr. Naeem Rahim, MD" . Health Grades . Retrieved 19 April 2015 .

^ "Rahim Farhim and JRM Foundation reach out" . Idaho State Journal . Retrieved 19 April 2015 .

^ "Saad Omer" . Retrieved 5 May 2023 .

^ "Rahim Farhim and JRM Foundation reach out" . Idaho State Journal . Retrieved 5 May 2023 .

^ Profile of Aga Khan University – Karachi , Retrieved 11 August 2017 ^ "Pakistani healthcare simulation centre becomes South Asia's first to receive prestigious accreditation" .

www.thenews.com.pk . Retrieved 21 January 2020 .

^ "AKU recoginsed for simulation-based education" .

The Express Tribune . 22 January 2020 . Retrieved 22 January 2020 .

^ "Awards & Recognition" .

HR&A . Retrieved 23 November 2020 .

^ "MacJannet Prize for Global Citizenship to Be Presented at Award Ceremony in Talloires, France" .

Campus Compact . Retrieved 23 November 2020 .

^ News Desk (17 May 2022).

"AKU wins award of excellence for disruptive education" .

Pakistan Observer . Retrieved 18 May 2022 .

^ News Desk (16 June 2023).

"Hayat wins silver medal at Int'l Digital Health Awards 2023" .

Pakistan Observer . Retrieved 20 June 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Aga Khan University Aga Khan University Alumni Association Aga Khan University GPA Calculator Video: AKU President Firoz Rasul speaks on next 25 years of the Aga Khan University Archived 29 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX v t e Universities in Uganda Public Busitema University Gulu University Kyambogo University Makerere University Metropolitan University Business School Mbarara University of Science & Technology Muni University Soroti University Uganda Management Institute Private Africa Renewal University African Bible University African Rural University Aga Khan University All Saints University Ankole Western University Bishop Stuart University Bugema University Busoga University Cavendish University Uganda Great Lakes Regional University Ibanda University International Health Sciences University International University of East Africa Islamic University in Uganda Kabale University Kampala International University Kampala University Kumi University LivingStone International University Muteesa I Royal University Mountains of the Moon University Ndejje University Nkumba University Nsaka University St. Augustine International University St. Lawrence University Stafford University Uganda Uganda Christian University Uganda Martyrs University Uganda Pentecostal University Uganda Technology & Management University University of the Sacred Heart Gulu Valley University of Science and Technology Victoria University Uganda Military universities Uganda Military Engineering College v t e Universities and colleges in Karachi Public Adamjee Government Science College Bahria University D. J. Sindh Government Science College Dawood University of Engineering & Technology Dow University of Health Sciences Institute of Business Administration Institute of Industrial Electronics Engineering Government Islamia Science College, Karachi Government College of Commerce & Economics Government College for Men Nazimabad Government College for Women Shahrah-e-Liaquat Government Degree College Memon Goth Government National College, Karachi Jinnah Sindh Medical University National Academy of Performing Arts (NAPA) NED University of Engineering & Technology Pakistan Navy Engineering College Pakistan Marine Academy Pakistan Shipowners' Government College Ra'ana Liaquat Ali Khan Government College of Home Economics Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto University of Law Sindh Madressatul Islam University Siraj ud Daula College Sir Syed Government Girls College Saint Patrick's College Sindh Muslim Law College University of Karachi Private Aga Khan University Dadabhoy Institute of Higher Education DHA Suffa University Greenwich University Habib University Hamdard University Ilma University Indus Valley School of Art and Architecture Iqra University Jamia Binoria Jamia Darul Uloom, Karachi Jamia Uloom-ul-Islamia Jinnah University for Women Karachi Institute of Economics and Technology Mohammad Ali Jinnah University Shaheed Zulfikar Ali Bhutto Institute of Science and Technology Sir Syed University of Engineering and Technology Textile Institute of Pakistan Usman Institute of Technology Ziauddin University 24°53′34″N 67°04′29″E ﻿ / ﻿ 24.8928°N 67.0747°E ﻿ / 24.8928; 67.0747 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aga_Khan_University&oldid=1290430137 " Categories : Aga Khan University Universities and colleges established in 1983 Private universities and colleges in Sindh Medical colleges in Sindh Universities and colleges in London Private universities and colleges in Kenya Private universities in Tanzania 1983 establishments in Pakistan Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2021 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the affiliations parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015 Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 19:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aga Khan University 16 languages Add topic

