Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Re-designing design 3 The importance of languaging 4 Metadesign conceptual tools 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Metadesign 2 languages Italiano 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conceptual framework aimed at defining and creating social, economic and technical infrastructures This article is about the theory of metadesigning. For the design company, see MetaDesign .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Metadesign" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( May 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article has an unclear citation style .

The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .

( May 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Metadesign (or meta-design) is an emerging conceptual framework aimed at defining and creating social, economic and technical infrastructures in which new forms of collaborative design can take place. It consists of a series of practical design-related tools for achieving this.

As a methodology, its aim is to nurture emergence of the previously unthinkable as possibilities or prospects through the collaboration of designers within interdisciplinarity 'metadesign' teams. Inspired by the way living systems work, this new field aims to help improve the way we feed, clothe, shelter, assemble, communicate and live together.

Team members working in a metadesign workshop organized by researchers at Goldsmiths, University of London (2008) History [ edit ] Metadesign has been initially put forward as an industrial design approach to complexity theory and information systems by Dutch designer Andries Van Onck in 1963, while at Ulm School of Design (later at Politecnico di Milano and Rome and Florence ISIA ). Since then, several different design, creative and research approaches have used the name "Metadesign", ranging from Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela 's biological approach, to Gerhard Fischer 's and Elisa Giaccardi's [ 1 ] techno-social approach, and Paul Virilio 's techno-policital approach.

Later on, a very active group was present at Politecnico di Milano , and several different universities and graduate programs began applying Metadesign in design teaching around the world generally based at Van Onck's approach, further developed at Politecnico di Milano. Nevertheless, there's a very active, but widely dispersed, group that base their activities at Maturana and Varela's approach.

More recently, some efforts have been made to systematize Metadesign as a structured creative process, such as (1) Fischer's and Giaccardi's and (2) Caio Vassão 's academic works, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] among several others, based on a much wider reference frame, ranging from post-structuralist philosophy , Neil Postman 's media ecology, Christopher Alexander 's pattern languages and deep ecology .

This variety of approaches is justified by the myriad interpretations that can be derived from the etymological structure of the term.

Re-designing design [ edit ] The Greek word ' meta ' originally meant 'beyond' or 'after' and is now sometimes used to imply a comprehensive, insightful self-awareness. Employed as a prefix, it explicitly denotes self-referentiality. Metadesign, therefore, alludes to a design practice that (re)designs itself (see Maturana and Varela's term autopoiesis ). The idea of Metadesign acknowledges that future uses and problems cannot be completely anticipated at design time.

Aristotle 's influential theory of design defined it by saying that the 'cause' of design was its final state. This teleological perspective is similar to the orthodox idea of an economic payback at the point of sale, rather than successive stages when the product could be seen to achieve high levels of perceived value, throughout the whole design cycle. Some supporters of metadesign hope that it will extend the traditional notion of system design beyond the original development of a system by allowing users to become co-designers.

The importance of languaging [ edit ] By harnessing creative teamwork within a suitable co-design framework, some metadesigners have sought to catalyse changes at a behavioural level.

[ 4 ] However, as Albert Einstein said, "We can't solve problems by using the same kind of thinking we used when we created them". This points to a need for appropriate innovation at all levels, including the metaphorical language that serves to sustain a given paradigm.

[ 5 ] In practical terms this adds considerable complexity to the task of managing actions and outcomes. What may be so neatly described as 'new knowledge', in practical terms, exists as an interpersonal and somatic web of tacit knowledge that needs to be interpreted and applied by many collaborators.

[ 6 ] This tends to reduce the semantic certainty of roles, actions and descriptors within a given team, [ 7 ] making it necessary to rename particular shared experiences that seem inappropriately defined. In other instances it may be necessary to invent new words to describe perceived gaps in what can be discussed within a prevailing vernacular.

Humberto Maturana 's work on distributed language and the field of biosemiotics is germane to this task.

[ citation needed ] Some researchers have used bisociation [ 8 ] in order to create an auspicious synergy of benign synergies.

[ 9 ] In aspiring to this outcome, metadesign teams will cultivate auspicious 'diversities-of-diversities'. It suggests that metadesign would offer a manifold ethical space. In this respect, related approaches include what Arthur Koestler (1967) called holarchy , or what John Dewey and John Chris Jones have called 'creative democracy'.

Metadesign conceptual tools [ edit ] Regarding a wide range of applications and contexts, Vassão has argued that Metadesign can be understood as a set of four "conceptual tools", utilizing Gilles Deleuze 's understanding of the term "tool": Levels of abstraction (the ability to understand the structure and limits of abstractions, language and instrumental thinking); Diagrams and topology (the use of diagrammatic thinking and design, sustained by topological understanding); Procedural design (the creation of realities through the use of procedures, such as in game and role playing, as well as in procedural design, art and architecture); Emergence (the absence of absolute control, and the ability to take advantage of unintended and unforeseen results).

Vassão has argued that, in all different approaches to metadesign, the presence of these conceptual tools can be verified.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Cybernetics Complex adaptive system Ecology Lateral thinking Systems thinking References [ edit ] ^ Fischer, G., & Giaccardi, E. (2006) "Meta-Design: A Framework for the Future of End User Development." In H. Lieberman, F. Paternò, & V. Wulf, eds., End User Development — Empowering people to flexibly employ advanced information and communication technology , Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 427-457.

http://l3d.cs.colorado.edu/~gerhard/papers/EUD-meta-design-online.pdf ^ Giaccardi, Elisa. (2003) Principles of Metadesign: processes and levels of co-creation in the new design space.

2003. Doctorate thesis [1] ^ Vassão, Caio Adorno.

Arquitetura livre: complexidade, metadesign e ciência nômade.

("Free Architecture: complexity, metadesign and nomad science"). 2008. Doctorate thesis (in Portuguese).

[2] ^ Wood, J., (2007), "Win-Win-Win-Win-Win-Win: synergy tools for metadesigners", a chapter in "Designing for the 21st Century, Interdisciplinary Questions and Insights" book, (ed. Thomas Inns) Gower Publishing, ISBN 978-0-566-08737-0 , December 2007.

^ Wood, J., (2013), "Metadesigning Paradigm Change: an ecomimetic, language-centred approach", a chapter in Handbook of Design for Sustainability , edited by Stuart Walker & Jacques Giroud (Berg), 2013.

^ Backwell, J., & Wood, J., (2011), Catalysing Network Consciousness in Leaderless Groups: A Metadesign Tool, in Consciousness Reframed 12, Art, Identity and the Technology of the Transformation, editors Roy Ascott & Luis Miguel Girão, University of Aveiro, Portugal, pp. 36-41.

^ Wood, J., & Backwell, J., (2009), "Mapping Network Consciousness: syncretizing difference to co-create a synergy-of-synergies", chapter in New Realities: Being Syncretic, Ixth Consciousness Reframed Conference Vienna, 2008. Series: Edition Angewandte Ascott, R.; Bast, G.; Fiel, W.; Jahrmann, M.; Schnell, R. (Eds.) 2009, ISBN 978-3-211-78890-5 .

^ Koestler, 1964.

^ Fuller, 1975.

^ Vassão, Caio Adorno. Metadesign: ferramentas, estratégias e ética para a complexidade. ("Metadesign: tools, strategies and ethics towards complexity.") Blucher, São Paulo, 2010. (in Portuguese) [3] Wood, J. ed., 2022. Metadesigning designing in the Anthropocene. Taylor & Francis.

External links [ edit ] Attainable Utopias - Definition of Metadesign Metadesigners Open Network v t e Design Outline Designer Disciplines Communication design Advertising Book design Brand design Exhibit design Film title design Graphic design Motion Postage stamp design Print design Illustration Information design Instructional design News design Photography Retail design Signage / Traffic sign design Typography / Type design Video design Visual merchandising Environmental design Architecture Architectural lighting design Building design Passive solar Ecological design Environmental impact design Garden design Computer-aided Healthy community design Hotel design Interior architecture Interior design EID Keyline design Landscape architecture Sustainable Landscape design Spatial design Urban design Industrial design Automotive design Automotive suspension design CMF design Corrugated box design Electric guitar design Furniture design Sustainable Hardware interface design Motorcycle design Packaging and labeling Photographic lens design Product design Production design Sensory design Service design Interaction design Experience design EED Game design Level design Video game design Hardware interface design Icon design Immersive design Information design Interactive design Sonic interaction design User experience design User interface design Web design Other applied arts Public art design Ceramic / glass design Fashion design Costume design Jewellery design Floral design Game art design Property design Scenic design Sound design Stage/set lighting design Textile design Other design & engineering Algorithm design Behavioural design Boiler design Database design Drug design Electrical system design Experimental design Filter design Geometric design Work design Integrated circuit design Circuit design Physical design Power network design Mechanism design Nuclear weapon design Nucleic acid design Organization design Process design Processor design Protein design Research design Social design Software design Spacecraft design Strategic design Systems design Test design Approaches Active Activity-centered Adaptive web Affective Brainstorming By committee By contract C-K theory Closure Configuration Contextual Continuous Cradle-to-cradle Creative problem-solving Creativity techniques Critical Design fiction Defensive Design–bid–build Design–build architect-led Diffuse Domain-driven Ecological design Energy neutral Engineering design process Probabilistic design Ergonomic Error-tolerant Evidence-based Fault-tolerant Feminist For assembly For behaviour change For manufacturability For Six Sigma For testing For the environment For X Framework-oriented Functional Generative Geodesign HCD High-level Hostile Inclusive Integrated Integrated topside Intelligence-based Iterative KISS principle Low-level Metadesign Mind mapping Modular New Wave Object-oriented Open Over Parametric Participatory Platform-based Policy-based Prevention through Process-centered Public interest Opinion poll Public opinion Rational Regenerative Reliability engineering Research-based Responsibility-driven RWD Safe-life Speculative Sustainable Systemic SOD Tableless web Theory of constraints Top-down and bottom-up Transformation Transgenerational TRIZ Universal Design for All Usage-centered Use-centered User-centered Empathic User innovation Value-driven Value sensitive Privacy by Quality by Secure by Design choice computing controls culture flow justice leadership management marker methods pattern research science sprint strategy theory thinking Tools Intellectual property Organizations Awards Tools AAD Architectural model Blueprint Comprehensive layout CAD CAID Virtual home design software CAutoD Design quality indicator Electronic design automation Flowchart Mockup Design specification Design system Prototype Sketch Storyboard Technical drawing HTML editor Website wireframe Intellectual property Clean-room design Community design Design around Design infringement Design patent Fashion design copyright Geschmacksmuster Industrial design rights European Union Organizations American Institute of Graphic Arts Chartered Society of Designers Design and Industries Association Design Council International Forum Design Design Research Society Awards European Design Award German Design Award Good Design Award (Museum of Modern Art) Good Design Award (Chicago Athenaeum) Graphex IF Product Design Award James Dyson Award Prince Philip Designers Prize Related topics Agile Concept art Conceptual design Creative industries Cultural icon .design Dominant design Enterprise architecture Form factor Futures studies Indie design Innovation management Intelligent design Lean startup New product development OODA loop Philosophy of design Process simulation Reference design Slow design STEAM fields Unintelligent design Visualization Wicked problem Design attributes brief change classic competition architectural student director education elements engineer firm history knowledge language life load museum optimization paradigm principles rationale review specification studies studio technology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metadesign&oldid=1291464863 " Categories : Cybernetics Organization design Organizational theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2011 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from May 2011 All articles with style issues Wikipedia references cleanup from May 2011 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from May 2011 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 11:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Metadesign 2 languages Add topic

