Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Uses related to Nazi Germany Toggle Uses related to Nazi Germany subsection 1.1 Hitler's description 1.2 In enacting the Holocaust 1.3 Goebbels's description 1.3.1 Alleged quotation 1.4 U.S. psychological profile of Hitler 1.5 Hitler's death 2 Other uses Toggle Other uses subsection 2.1 Cold War era 2.2 Donald Trump's false claims of a stolen election 2.3 21st-century usage in American politics 2.4 China 3 Analysis 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Big lie 25 languages العربية Basa Bali Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Gaeilge 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית Lingua Franca Nova Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Shqip Simple English Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Big Lie ) Propaganda technique For other uses, see Big Lie (disambiguation) .

Adolf Hitler in the early 1920s, about the time he began writing Mein Kampf (1925) A big lie ( German : große Lüge ) is a gross distortion or misrepresentation of the truth primarily used as a political propaganda technique .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The German expression was first used by Adolf Hitler in his book Mein Kampf (1925) to describe how people could be induced to believe so colossal a lie because they would not believe that someone "could have the impudence to distort the truth so infamously". Hitler claimed that the technique had been used by Jews to blame Germany's loss in World War I on German general Erich Ludendorff , who was a prominent nationalist political leader in the Weimar Republic .

According to historian Jeffrey Herf , the Nazis used the idea of the original big lie to turn sentiment against Jews and justify the Holocaust . Herf maintains that Nazi Germany 's chief propagandist Joseph Goebbels and the Nazi Party actually used the big lie technique that they described – and that they used it to turn long-standing antisemitism in Europe into mass murder . Herf further argues that the Nazis' big lie was their depiction of Germany as an innocent, besieged nation striking back at " international Jewry ", which the Nazis blamed for starting World War I .

Nazi propaganda repeatedly claimed that Jews held outsized and secret power in Britain, Russia, and the United States. It further spread claims that the Jews had begun a war of extermination against Germany , and used these to assert that Germany had a right to annihilate the Jews in self-defense.

In the 21st century, the term has been applied to Donald Trump 's and his allies' attempts to overturn the result of the 2020 U.S. presidential election , specifically the false claim that the election was stolen through massive voter and electoral fraud . The scale of the claims resulted in Trump supporters attacking the United States Capitol .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Later reports indicate that Trump knew he had genuinely lost the election while promoting the narrative.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Scholars say that constant repetition across many different forms of media is necessary for the success of the big lie technique, as is a psychological motivation for the public to believe the extreme assertions.

Uses related to Nazi Germany Hitler's description Hitler claimed that Jews had spread the "big lie" that General Erich Ludendorff (pictured) was responsible for the country's loss in World War I .

Hitler's definition is given in Chapter 10 of Adolf Hitler 's Mein Kampf (part of a single paragraph in both the German original and James Murphy 's translation): But it remained for the Jews, with their unqualified capacity for falsehood, and their fighting comrades, the Marxists, to impute responsibility for the downfall precisely to the man who alone had shown a superhuman will and energy in his effort to prevent the catastrophe which he had foreseen and to save the nation from that hour of complete overthrow and shame. By placing responsibility for the loss of the world war on the shoulders of Ludendorff they took away the weapon of moral right from the only adversary dangerous enough to be likely to succeed in bringing the betrayers of the Fatherland to Justice.

All this was inspired by the principle – which is quite true within itself – that in the big lie there is always a certain force of credibility; because the broad masses of a nation are always more easily corrupted in the deeper strata of their emotional nature than consciously or voluntarily; and thus in the primitive simplicity of their minds they more readily fall victims to the big lie than the small lie, since they themselves often tell small lies in little matters but would be ashamed to resort to large-scale falsehoods.

It would never come into their heads to fabricate colossal untruths, and they would not believe others could have the impudence to distort the truth so infamously. Even though the facts which prove this to be so may be brought clearly to their minds, they will still doubt and waver and will continue to think there may be some other explanation. For the grossly impudent lie always leaves traces behind it, even after it has been nailed down, a fact which is known to all expert liars in this world and to all who conspire together in the art of lying.

— Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf , vol. I, ch. X [ 9 ] In 1943, The New York Times contributor Edwin James asserted that Hitler's biggest lie was his revisionist claim that Germany was not defeated in war in 1918, but rather was betrayed by internal groups.

[ 10 ] This stab-in-the-back myth was spread by right-wing groups, including the Nazis .

[ 11 ] In enacting the Holocaust According to historian Jeffrey Herf , the Nazis used the idea of the original big lie to turn sentiment against Jews and justify the Holocaust . Herf maintains that Joseph Goebbels and the Nazi Party actually used the big lie technique that they described – and that they used it to turn long-standing antisemitism in Europe into mass murder .

[ 12 ] Herf further argues that the Nazis' big lie was their depiction of Germany as an innocent, besieged land striking back at international Jewry , which the Nazis blamed for starting World War I .

Nazi propaganda repeatedly claimed that Jews held power behind the scenes in Britain, Russia, and the United States. It further spread claims that the Jews had begun a war of extermination against Germany , and used these to assert that Germany had a right to annihilate the Jews in self-defense.

[ 13 ] The Cold War historian Zachary Jonathan Jacobson describes its use: [ 14 ] Adolf Hitler first defined the Big Lie as a deviant tool wielded by Viennese Jews to discredit the Germans' deportment in World War I . Yet, in tragically ironic fashion, it was Hitler and his Nazi regime that actually employed the mendacious strategy. In an effort to rewrite history and blame European Jews for Germany's defeat in World War I , Hitler and his propaganda minister accused them of profiting from the war, consorting with foreign powers and "war shirking" (avoiding conscription). Jews, Hitler contended, were the weak underbelly of the Weimer state that exposed the loyal and true German population to catastrophic collapse. To sell this narrative, Joseph Goebbels insisted "all effective propaganda must be limited to a very few points and must harp on these in slogans until the last member of the public understands." In short, Nazi fascism hinged on creating one streamlined, overarching lie ... the Nazis built an ideology on a fiction, the notion that Germany's defeat in World War I could be avenged (and reversed) by purging the German population of those purportedly responsible: the Jews.

Goebbels's description Joseph Goebbels , the head of Nazi Germany's Ministry of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels also put forth a theory which has come to be commonly associated with the expression "big lie". Goebbels wrote the following paragraph in an article dated 12 January 1941, sixteen years after Hitler first used the phrase. The article, titled "Aus Churchills Lügenfabrik" (English: "From Churchill's Lie Factory") was published in Die Zeit ohne Beispiel: The essential English leadership secret does not depend on particular intelligence. Rather, it depends on a remarkably stupid thick-headedness. The English follow the principle that when one lies, one should lie big, and stick to it. They keep up their lies, even at the risk of looking ridiculous.

[ 15 ] Alleged quotation The following supposed quotation of Joseph Goebbels has been repeated in numerous books and articles and on thousands of web pages, yet none of them has cited a primary source. According to the research and reasoning of Randall Bytwerk, it is an unlikely thing for Goebbels to have said: [ 16 ] If you tell a lie big enough and keep repeating it, people will eventually come to believe it. The lie can be maintained only for such time as the State can shield the people from the political, economic and/or military consequences of the lie. It thus becomes vitally important for the State to use all of its powers to repress dissent, for the truth is the mortal enemy of the lie, and thus by extension, the truth is the greatest enemy of the State.

U.S. psychological profile of Hitler The phrase "big lie" was used in a report prepared around 1943 [ 17 ] by Walter C. Langer for the United States Office of Strategic Services in describing Hitler's psychological profile. The report was later published in book form as The Mind of Adolf Hitler in 1972. Langer stated of the dictator: His primary rules were: never allow the public to cool off; never admit a fault or wrong; never concede that there may be some good in your enemy; never leave room for alternatives; never accept blame; concentrate on one enemy at a time and blame him for everything that goes wrong; people will believe a big lie sooner than a little one; and if you repeat it frequently enough people will sooner or later believe it.

[ 18 ] A somewhat similar quote appears in the 1943 Analysis of the Personality of Adolph Hitler: With Predictions of His Future Behaviour and Suggestions for Dealing with Him Now and After Germany's Surrender , by Henry A. Murray : ... never to admit a fault or wrong; never to accept blame; concentrate on one enemy at a time; blame that enemy for everything that goes wrong; take advantage of every opportunity to raise a political whirlwind.

[ 19 ] Hitler's death A 1947 U.S. book on the death of Adolf Hitler describes the infectious Soviet disinformation concerning his purported survival as an example of the technique, nodding to German philosopher Hans Vaihinger 's 1911 book The Philosophy of 'As if' , which ponders the acceptance of lies for utilitarian purposes. The U.S. book asserts that Soviet leadership, "realizing that Communist totalitarian systems and secret police methods require a continuing menace as justification for their existence, decided to keep the ghost of Hitler alive ... as a means of dramatizing the continuing menace of Fascism", bolstering their military.

[ 20 ] In his controversial 1968 book , Soviet historian Lev Bezymenski cites the initial announcement of Hitler's death by Nazi Germany as an example of the big lie, as it claimed him to have died while acting as a soldier in the line of duty.

[ 21 ] Other uses Cold War era A 1964 Senate Internal Security Subcommittee report on The Protocols of the Elders of Zion , a fabricated antisemitic text first published in Russia in 1903, stated that continued circulation of the Protocols could be attributed in part to utilization of "the Hitler technique of the 'big lie'".

[ 22 ] Donald Trump's false claims of a stolen election Further information: Republican reactions to Donald Trump's claims of 2020 election fraud and 2020 United States presidential election § False claims of fraud See also: Trumpism , False or misleading statements by Donald Trump , and Rhetoric of Donald Trump Donald Trump According to CNN fact checker Daniel Dale , as of June 9, 2021, former president Donald Trump had issued 132 written statements since leaving office, of which "a third have included lies about the election" – more than any other subject.

[ 23 ] To sow election doubt, Trump escalated use of "rigged election" and "election interference" statements in advance of the 2024 election compared to the previous two elections—the statements described as part of a "heads I win; tails you cheated" rhetorical strategy.

[ 24 ] During his political career, U.S. president Donald Trump has employed what have been characterized as the firehose of falsehood [ 25 ] and big lie [ 26 ] propaganda techniques. To support his attempts to overturn the 2020 U.S. presidential election , he and his allies repeatedly and falsely claimed that there had been massive election fraud and that Trump was the true winner of the election.

[ 11 ] [ 3 ] By 2023, major news outlets characterized Trump's claims as not merely falsehoods, but as lies.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] U.S. Senators Josh Hawley of Missouri and Ted Cruz of Texas subsequently contested the election results in the Senate.

[ 30 ] Their effort was characterized as "the big lie" by then President-elect Joe Biden : "I think the American public has a real good, clear look at who they are. They're part of the big lie, the big lie." [ 26 ] Republican senators Mitt Romney of Utah and Pat Toomey of Pennsylvania , scholars of fascism Timothy Snyder and Ruth Ben-Ghiat , Russian affairs expert Fiona Hill , and others also used the term "big lie" to refer to Trump's false claims about massive election fraud.

[ 31 ] By May 2021, many Republicans had come to embrace the false claim and use it as justification to impose new voting restrictions and attempt to take control of the administrative management of elections.

[ 32 ] Republicans who opposed the claims faced backlash.

[ 33 ] In early 2021, The New York Times examined Trump's promotion of "the big lie" for political purposes to subvert the 2020 election, and concluded that the lie encouraged the 2021 attack on the U.S. Capitol .

[ 4 ] [ 34 ] The attack was cited in a resolution to impeach Trump for a second time .

[ 35 ] During Trump's second impeachment trial , the house managers Jamie Raskin , Joe Neguse , Joaquin Castro , Stacey Plaskett and Madeleine Dean discussed how Trump used "the big lie" to repeatedly make the false claim the election was stolen from him.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] On October 7, a Senate Judiciary Committee report said that Trump attempted to use the Department of Justice to "lay the foundation of the 'Big Lie'" before the general election and remain in power regardless of election results.

[ 38 ] In early 2022, The New York Times presented a detailed analysis of the continuing efforts by Trump and his allies to further promote "the big lie" and related lies in their attempts to overturn and influence future elections, including those in 2022 and 2024.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] On June 13, 2022, the U.S. House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack presented testimony that Trump knew he lost the 2020 election, but nevertheless promoted the false claim to exploit donors, and, as a result, raked in "half a billion" dollars.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] In the days following his first indictment on March 30, 2023, he repeatedly posted similar election-related commentary to social media.

[ 43 ] Dominion Voting Systems , which provided voting machines to many jurisdictions in the 2020 U.S. elections , filed four major lawsuits related to the big lie that Dominion fixed the election. From Trump's lawyer Rudy Giuliani , Dominion seeks $1.3 billion in damages, alleging that "he and his allies manufactured and disseminated the 'Big Lie', which foreseeably went viral and deceived millions of people into believing that Dominion had stolen their votes and fixed the election." [ 44 ] Separately, in Dominion Voting Systems v. Fox News Network it sought $1.6 billion from Fox News .

[ 45 ] During discovery , Fox News' internal communications were released, indicating that prominent hosts and top executives were aware the network was reporting false statements but continued doing so to retain viewers for financial reasons. On April 18, 2023, Fox News agreed to pay Dominion a $788 million settlement, described by CNN as the "big price" of telling "the Big Lie".

[ 46 ] Dominion is also suing two other TV networks, Newsmax and One America News Network , for $1.6 billion each, as well as My Pillow and its CEO Mike Lindell for $1.2 billion.

[ 47 ] On April 25, 2023, CNN reported that Trump had told a new lie about the 2020 election: "Trump pointedly noted that Biden got more votes than Trump in fewer than a fifth of US counties in 2020. Trump then said, 'Nothing like this has ever happened before. Usually, it's very equal, or – but the winner always had the most counties.'" The statement was described as "complete bunk". Both Bill Clinton (1992 and 1996) and Barack Obama (2008 and 2012) carried "a minority of counties in each of their victories".

William H. Frey , a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution , explained: There is nothing suspicious about winning the presidency with a smaller number of counties. Counties vary widely in size, with large urban and suburban counties – areas where Biden did best – housing far larger populations than most of the outer suburb, small town and rural counties that Trump won.

[ 48 ] On July 28, 2023, a federal district court judge dismissed an October 2022 Trump lawsuit against CNN, stating that CNN's multiple uses of the term "big lie" about Trump's claims of election fraud did not constitute actionable defamation .

[ 49 ] The judge wrote that CNN's statements were opinion, not factually verifiable statements, and that "no reasonable viewer" would infer that "Trump advocates the persecution and genocide of Jews or any other group of people". The suit was dismissed with prejudice , meaning Trump could not sue again on the same basis.

[ 49 ] 21st-century usage in American politics The term has been used by prominent American right-wing figures to describe allegations that Trump's victory in the 2016 elections was the result of collusion between his campaign and Russia. Former Attorney General William Barr described those allegations as "a very damaging, big lie" that inhibited the administration's ability to properly deal with Vladimir Putin , [ 50 ] a sentiment also echoed by Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich .

[ 51 ] By early 2021, Trump and several prominent Republicans started to use the term "the big lie", claiming that it refers to other electoral issues.

[ 52 ] Trump stated that the term refers to the "Fraudulent Presidential Election of 2020".

[ 53 ] An opinion piece in the typically center-right Wall Street Journal , [ 54 ] as well as Republican politicians Mitch McConnell and Newt Gingrich, referred to "the big lie" as Democratic opposition to what were new and more restrictive voter identification requirements .

[ 52 ] McConnell's office referred to a Democratic attempt to abolish the filibuster to enact voting rights legislation as "the left's Big Lie [that] there is some evil anti-voting conspiracy sweeping America".

[ 55 ] Timothy Snyder describes attempts to invert the narrative: The lie is so big that it reorders the world. And so part of telling the big lie is that you immediately say it's the other side that tells the big lie. Sadly, but it's just a matter of record, all of that is in Mein Kampf .

[ 56 ] By January 2022, Republicans were taking actions to impose new voting restrictions and to take complete control of voting and the administrative management of elections, all while a large majority of Republicans continued to believe that the 2020 election had been stolen from them and asserted that democracy was at risk of failing. Extensive press coverage indicated the Republican efforts themselves appeared to present a threat to democracy.

[ 57 ] China Further information: Persecution of Uyghurs in China and Xinjiang internment camps The Government of China has denied committing human rights abuses against Uyghurs in Xinjiang , and has labelled declarations of Uyghur genocide as a "big lie" perpetrated by hostile forces.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] Analysis Psychologists, psychiatrists and others have explained why the big lie technique works. Dr. Ramani Durvasula, a licensed clinical psychologist and professor of psychology who is an expert on narcissistic personality disorder and narcissistic abuse says that: Repetition is important, because the Big Lie works through indoctrination. The Big Lie then becomes its own evidence base – if it is repeated enough, people believe it, and the very repetition almost tautologically becomes the support for the Lie. ... Hear something enough it becomes truth. People assume there is an evidence base when the lie is big (it's like a blind spot). ... [People also fail to realize] that there are people in our midst that lack empathy, have no care for the common good, are grandiose, arrogant, and willing to exploit and manipulate people for solely their own egocentric needs. ... [Instead] a sort of halo effect imbues leaders with presumed expertise and power – when that is not at all the case (most if not all megalomaniacal leaders, despots, tyrants, oligarchs share narcissism/psychopathy as a trait).

[ 61 ] The importance of repetition in the acceptance of the big lie is stressed by Miriam Bowers-Abbott, an associate professor of logic at Mount Carmel College of Nursing, who states: "What's especially helpful is repetition in a variety of contexts. That is, not just the same words over and over – but integration of an idea in lots of ways. It builds its own little web of support." Such repetition can occur in the physical environment, according to Dr. Matt Blanchard, a clinical psychologist at New York University, who states: "Nothing sells the Big Lie like novelty t-shirts, hats and banners. These items are normally associated with sports teams, not life-and-death political issues. But Trump and his circle have deftly used these items to generate the kind of unbridled loyalty Americans associate with pro football. ... The banners and hats crucially add an air of silliness to everything. If I can buy a novelty hat about it, can it really be so serious? ... It's a genius mindf**k." [ 61 ] Blanchard also notes that people assess information that has a direct impact on their lives differently than more abstract information with less proximity to them. He states that "the act of 'believing' is not just one thing that humans do. Instead, this one word represents a wide range of relationships that humans have with information. We don't truly 'believe' things, so much as provisionally accept information we find useful." Because of this, he states that "most people don't whole-heartedly 'believe' the Big Lie, but they are more than happy to provisionally accept it because... why not? It might be entertaining. It might flatter your identity. It might help you bond with other people in your community. Or it might help you vent some rage. ... '[B]elief' is always predicated on usefulness." [ 61 ] Psychiatrist Bandy X. Lee notes that emotional reasons lie beneath the acceptance of outrageous assertions such as the big lie, stating: Usually, they are trying to find comfort and to avoid pain. ... This happens in states of lesser health, where one is less inclined to venture into new domains or to seek creative solutions. There is comfort in repetition, and so a people or a nation under duress will gravitate more toward what is repeated to them than what is realistic. Adolf Hitler understood this very well, which is why the American psychologist Walter Langer coined the phrase to describe his method.

[ 61 ] Social media also plays a role in such emotional responses, according to Bowers-Abbott, who states: It was easier to dislodge untruths before social media. In social media, people tend to take public positions. When that position turns out to be wrong, it's embarrassing. And backing down is typically seen as weakness. So they double-down on untrue claims to save face and personal credibility. ... We are way too emotionally attached to being right. It would be better for our culture as a whole to value uncertainty and intellectual humility and curiosity. Those values help us ask questions without the expectation of permanent answers.

[ 61 ] Durvasula, Blanchard and Lee agree that it is unlikely that a believer in a big lie can be persuaded through the presentation of factual evidence. Durvasula argues that improvement in critical thinking skills is necessary, stating: "It means ending algorithms that only provide confirmatory news and instead people seeing stories and information that provide other points of view ... creating safe spaces to have these conversations ... encouraging civil discourse with those who hold different opinions, teaching people to find common ground (e.g. love of family) even when belief systems are not aligned." Blanchard says that "[S]preaders of the Big Lie will only be discredited in the eyes of their supporters if they face their greatest fear – accountability. ... They must be seen to lose at the ballot box, they must be arrested when they break the law, they must be sued for every defamation, they must be pursued with every legal tool available in an open society. ... Above all else they must be seen as weak. Only then will their lies lose their usefulness for the millions who once saw something to gain – personally, psychologically, politically, financially – in choosing to believe." Lee notes that when attempting to disabuse someone of a big lie, it is important not to put them on the defensive: "You have to fix the underlying emotional vulnerability that led people to believing it in the first place. For populations, it is usually the pain of not having a place in the world, which socioeconomic inequality exacerbates. Deprivation of health care, education, an ability to make a living, and other avenues for dignity can make a population psychologically vulnerable to those who look to exploit them." [ 61 ] See also Brainwashing Brandolini's law Credo quia absurdum – Latin phrase meaning "I believe because it is absurd" Demagogue Fake news Gaslighting Illusory truth effect Just war theory Noble lie Post-truth politics Propaganda Truthiness References Notes ^ "The Big Lie | Definition of The Big Lie by Oxford Dictionary on Lexico.com also meaning of The Big Lie" .

Lexico Dictionaries | English . Archived from the original on 22 January 2021 . Retrieved 17 January 2021 .

^ "Definition of Big Lie" .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 13 June 2021 .

^ a b Higgins, Andrew (10 January 2021).

"The Art of the Lie? The Bigger the Better – Lying as a political tool is hardly new. But a readiness, even enthusiasm, to be deceived has become a driving force in politics around the world, most recently in the United States" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 10 January 2021 .

Mr. Trump has outraged his political opponents and left even some of his longtime supporters shaking their heads at his mendacity. In embracing this big lie, however, the president has taken a path that often works – at least in countries without robustly independent legal systems and news media along with other reality checks.

^ a b Rutenberg, Jim; Becker, Jo; Lipton, Eric; Haberman, Maggie; Martin, Jonathan; Rosenberg, Matthew; Schmidt, Michael S. (31 January 2021).

"77 Days: Trump's Campaign to Subvert the Election – Hours after the United States voted, the president declared the election a fraud – a lie that unleashed a movement that would shatter democratic norms and upend the peaceful transfer of power" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 1 February 2021 .

^ "Trump Knew He Lost The Election Before He Decided He Didn't, Says Aide" .

HuffPost . 20 June 2022.

^ Mike DeBonis and Jacqueline Alemany (28 June 2022).

"Trump sought to lead armed mob to Capitol on Jan. 6, aide says" .

The Washington Post .

^ Harb, Ali; Glasse, Jennifer (12 July 2022).

"Jan 6 panel pushes to link Trump to Capitol violence – a timeline" .

www.aljazeera.com .

^ "What Trump Knew" .

Time .

^ Hitler, Adolf (21 March 1939).

Mein Kampf . Translated by Murphy, James.

Archived from the original on 24 July 2008 . Retrieved 23 August 2008 – via Project Gutenberg .

^ James, Edwin L. (11 April 1943).

"Hitler's Biggest Lie; The Fuehrer's lies are legion and colossal; his biggest is that Germany was not beaten in 1918. Hitler may be planning to use that lie again. Whatever Hitler's purpose in taking up the lie of an undefeated Germany, the record of the collapse is clear. Hitler's Biggest Lie" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 6 December 2020 .

^ a b Bittner, Jochen (30 November 2020).

"1918 Germany Has a Warning for America – Donald Trump's "Stop the Steal" campaign recalls one of the most disastrous political lies of the 20th century" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

^ Herf, Jeffrey (2006).

The Jewish Enemy: Nazi Propaganda During World War II And the Holocaust . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. p. 211.

ISBN 978-0674038592 .

^ Herf, Jeffrey (2005). "The "Jewish War": Goebbels and the Antisemitic Campaigns of the Nazi Propaganda Ministry".

Holocaust and Genocide Studies .

19 : 51– 80.

doi : 10.1093/hgs/dci003 .

^ Jacobson, Zachary Jonathan (21 May 2018).

"Many are worried about the return of the 'Big Lie.' They're worried about the wrong thing" .

The Washington Post .

^ Goebbels, Joseph (12 January 1941).

Die Zeit ohne Beispiel . Munich: Zentralverlag der NSDAP. pp.

364– 369.

Das ist natürlich für die Betroffenen mehr als peinlich. Man soll im allgemeinen seine Führungsgeheimnisse nicht verraten, zumal man nicht weiß, ob und wann man sie noch einmal gut gebrauchen kann. Das haupt-sächlichste englische Führungsgeheimnis ist nun nicht so sehr in einer besonders hervorstechenden Intelligenz als vielmehr in einer manchmal geradezu penetrant wirkenden dummdreisten Dickfelligkeit zu finden. Die Engländer gehen nach dem Prinzip vor, wenn du lügst, dann lüge gründlich, und vor allem bleibe bei dem, was du gelogen hast! Sie bleiben also bei ihren Schwindeleien, selbst auf die Gefahr hin, sich damit lächerlich zu machen.

^ Bytwerk, Randall (2008).

"False Nazi Quotations" .

German Propaganda Archive . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ Hitler and Psychohistory Hans W. Gatzke , The American Historical Review , Vol. 78, No. 2 (Apr., 1973), pp. 394–401.

^ Langer, Walter C.

"A Psychological Analysis of Adolph Hitler" (PDF) .

CIA.gov . p. 46. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 28 January 2022 .

^ "Analysis of the Personality of Adolf Hitler" (PDF) . Office of Strategic Services. p. 219.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2021 . Retrieved 17 January 2018 – via archive.org.

^ Moore, Herbert; Barrett, James W., eds. (1947).

Who Killed Hitler?

. W. F. Heimlich (foreword). New York: The Booktab Press. pp. 131, 136, 138.

So well has the plan worked that few people can now be found anywhere who are convinced that Hitler is dead. It is one more example of the fine art of falsehood and half-truth which the Germans under Goebbels perfected with such bewildering success. It is still another example of the dependable results that can be obtained by psychological strategists in totalitarian countries who can at will use the technique of the notorious 'Philosophy of the As If' in spreading gigantic lies. By such techniques, they are able to influence vast numbers of people to disbelieve the truth long after the facts and circumstances have been authenticated.

^ Bezymenski, Lev (1968).

The Death of Adolf Hitler (1st ed.). New York: Harcourt, Brace & World . pp.

68– 69.

^ Protocols of the Elders of Zion: A Fabricated 'historic' Document (Report). U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee to Investigate the Administration of the Internal Security Act. 1964 . Retrieved 22 February 2022 .

^ Dale, Daniel (12 June 2021).

"Trump is doing more lying about the election than talking about any other subject" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 16 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

Similar graphic in source attributed to Janie Boschma, CNN.

^ Yourish, Karen; Smart, Charlie (24 May 2024).

"Trump's Pattern of Sowing Election Doubt Intensifies in 2024" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2024 . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

^ Multiple sources: Stelter, Brian (30 November 2020).

" 'Firehose of falsehood:' How Trump is trying to confuse the public about the election outcome" .

CNN . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

Maza, Carlos (31 August 2018).

"Why obvious lies make great propaganda" .

Vox . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

Zappone, Chris (12 October 2016).

"Donald Trump campaign's 'firehose of falsehoods' has parallels with Russian propaganda" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

Harford, Tim (6 May 2021).

"What magic teaches us about misinformation" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 10 December 2022 . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

Clifton, Denise (3 August 2017).

"Trump's nonstop lies may be a far darker problem than many realize" .

Mother Jones . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

Ellefson, Lindsey (17 December 2020).

" 'Morning Joe' Rips Trump for 'Firehose of Falsehoods' and 'Nazi-Like Propaganda' on COVID" .

TheWrap . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

^ a b Block, Melissa (16 January 2021).

"Can The Forces Unleashed By Trump's Big Election Lie Be Undone?" .

NPR . Retrieved 3 March 2021 .

^ Yoon, Robert (27 August 2023).

"Trump's drumbeat of lies about the 2020 election keeps getting louder. Here are the facts" .

Associated Press . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

^ Qiu, Linda (17 August 2023).

"Fact-Checking the Breadth of Trump's Election Lies" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

^ Dale, Daniel (3 August 2023).

"21 Donald Trump election lies listed in his new indictment" .

CNN . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

^ Levine, Marianne; Otterbeing, Holly; Everett, Burgess (9 January 2021).

"Election gambit blows up on Hawley and Cruz" .

Politico . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ Multiple sources: Ben-Ghiat, Ruth (25 January 2021).

"Opinion: Trump's big lie wouldn't have worked without his thousands of little lies" .

CNN . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

Snyder, Timothy (9 January 2021).

"The American Abyss" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

Stelter, Brian (11 January 2021).

"Experts warn that Trump's 'big lie' will outlast his presidency" .

CNN . Retrieved 3 March 2021 .

Castronuovo, Celine (8 January 2021).

"Biden says Cruz, other Republicans responsible for 'big lie' that fueled Capitol mob" .

The Hill . Retrieved 10 January 2021 .

^ Multiple sources: Block, Melissa (23 December 2021).

"The clear and present danger of Trump's enduring 'Big Lie' " . National Public Radio . Retrieved 23 December 2021 .

Corasaniti, Nick (24 March 2021).

"Republicans Aim to Seize More Power Over How Elections Are Run" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

Reid, Tim; Layne, Nathan; Lange, Jason (22 September 2021).

"Special Report: Backers of Trump's false fraud claims seek to control next elections" .

Reuters . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

Epstein, Reid J. (9 November 2021).

"Wisconsin Republicans Push to Take Over the State's Elections" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

Gardner, Amy; Hamburger, Tom; Dawsey, Josh (29 November 2021).

"Trump allies work to place supporters in key election posts across the country, spurring fears about future vote challenges" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

Collinson, Stephen (16 September 2021).

"Trump's Big Lie is changing the face of American politics" .

CNN . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

Graziosi, Graig (21 December 2021).

" 'Evil takes no breaks': Warnings as Steve Bannon vows to take over America's entire 'election apparatus' " .

The Independent . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

^ Woodward, Calvin (9 May 2021).

"Trump's 'Big Lie' imperils Republicans who don't embrace it" .

Associated Press . Retrieved 7 June 2021 .

^ Rosenberg, Matthew; Rutenberg, Jim (1 February 2021).

"Key Takeaways From Trump's Effort to Overturn the Election – A Times examination of the 77 days between election and inauguration shows how a lie the former president had been grooming for years overwhelmed the Republican Party and stoked the assault on the Capitol" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 1 February 2021 .

^ Naylor, Brian (11 January 2021).

"Impeachment Resolution Cites Trump's 'Incitement' Of Capitol Insurrection" . NPR.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2021 . Retrieved 11 January 2021 .

^ "Senate" (PDF) .

Congressional Record .

117th United States Congress . 10 February 2021 . Retrieved 15 February 2021 .

^ Thrush, Glenn (10 February 2021).

"Prosecutors describe Trump's 'Big Lie' of a stolen election" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 15 February 2021 .

^ "Subverting Justice: How the Former President and His Allies Pressured DOJ to Overturn the 2020 Election" (PDF) .

United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary . 7 October 2021.

^ Corasaniti, Nick; Yourish, Karen; Collins, Keith (22 May 2022).

"How Trump's 2020 Election Lies – Have Gripped State Legislatures" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 22 May 2022 .

^ Edelman, Adam (22 May 2022).

"Election deniers who say Trump won in 2020 are running to be top cop in 4 battleground states – At least 15 people who push false claims about the 2020 results are running for attorney general in 14 states, including four swing states, according to a group tracking the races" .

NBC News . Retrieved 22 May 2022 .

^ Pagliery, Jose (13 June 2022).

"Jan. 6 Hearing Bombshells: Trump Knew He Lost – and Profited – HE KNEW" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved 13 June 2022 .

^ Markay, Lachlan (3 December 2020).

"Election Lies Help Trump and RNC Rake in Half a Billion – BIG $$$" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved 13 June 2022 .

^ Price, Michelle L.; Riccardi, Nicholas (10 April 2023).

"Trump's Response To Criminal Charges Revives Election Lies" .

HuffPost . Retrieved 10 April 2023 .

^ Wolfe, Jan; Heavey, Susan (25 January 2021).

"Trump lawyer Giuliani faces $1.3 billion lawsuit over 'big lie' election fraud claims" .

Reuters . Retrieved 1 February 2021 .

^ Folkenflik, David; Romo, Vanessa (18 May 2021).

"Fox News Moves To Have Dominion Voting Systems Lawsuit Dismissed" .

NPR . Retrieved 24 September 2021 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (19 April 2023).

"With historic settlement, Rupert Murdoch is paying the price for Trump's election lies" .

CNN . Retrieved 20 April 2023 .

^ Ivanova, Irina (19 April 2023).

"This private equity firm is the biggest winner in the Dominion-Fox News settlement" .

CBS News . Retrieved 20 April 2023 .

^ Dale, Daniel (25 April 2023).

"Fact check: Trump, in 2023, tells a new lie about the 2020 election" .

CNN . Retrieved 25 April 2023 .

^ a b Zhang, Andrew (29 July 2023).

"Judge dismisses Trump's 'Big Lie' lawsuit against CNN" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on 29 July 2023 . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

^ Nelson, Joshua (9 March 2022).

"Bill Barr: 'Big lie' about Russian collusion tied Trump's hands in dealing with Putin" .

Fox News .

^ "Newt Gingrich: The true cost of the collusion lie | Opinion" .

Newsweek . 10 April 2019.

^ a b Blake, Aaron (5 April 2021).

"Conservatives try to commandeer 'the big lie' " .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 5 May 2021 .

^ Morgan, David (3 May 2021).

"Trump 'poisoning' democracy with 'big lie' claim – key House Republican" .

Reuters . Retrieved 7 June 2021 .

^ Bowden, John (11 January 2019).

"Wall Street Journal editorial: Conservatives 'could live to regret' Trump emergency declaration" .

The Hill . Retrieved 8 February 2022 .

^ Schnell, Mychael (10 January 2022).

"McConnell's office knocks Democrats over 'the left's Big Lie' " .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 11 January 2022 .

^ Block, Melissa (23 December 2021).

"The clear and present danger of Trump's enduring 'Big Lie' " . National Public Radio . Retrieved 23 December 2021 .

^ Multiple sources: Corasaniti, Nick (24 March 2021).

"Republicans Aim to Seize More Power Over How Elections Are Run" .

The New York Times .

"GOP lawmakers seek greater control over local elections" . Associated Press. 20 April 2021.

Epstein, Reid J. (19 November 2021).

"Wisconsin Republicans Push to Take Over the State's Elections" .

The New York Times .

Amy Gardner; Tom Hamburger; Josh Dawsey (29 November 2021).

"Trump allies work to place supporters in key election posts across the country, spurring fears about future vote challenges" .

The Washington Post .

Jennifer Medina; Nick Corasaniti; Reid J. Epstein (30 January 2022).

"Campaigning to Oversee Elections, While Denying the Last One" .

The New York Times .

"6 in 10 Americans say U.S. democracy is in crisis as the 'Big Lie' takes root" . NPR. 3 January 2022.

"In Bid for Control of Elections, Trump Loyalists Face Few Obstacles" .

New York Times . 15 December 2021.

"Trump's Big Lie is changing the face of American politics" . CNN. 16 September 2021.

"Trump loyalists form alliance in bid to take over election process in key states" .

The Guardian . 13 January 2022.

The disclosure that extremist Republicans dedicated to election subversion have formed a network was first revealed by Steve Bannon, Trump's former chief strategist in the White House who is spearheading a "precinct-by-precinct" movement to inject far-right activists into local elected office. Marchant disclosed the alliance on Bannon's War Room podcast. The revelation can only heighten jitters about the fragile state of American democracy. An NPR analysis of 2022 secretary of state races across the country found that at least 15 candidates have adopted Trump's big lie.

^ Pheby, James (23 April 2021).

"UK MPs say China's Uyghurs 'suffering crimes against humanity and genocide,' as Beijing claims accusations are 'big lie' " .

hongkongfp.com .

Hong Kong Free Press .

Agence France-Presse . Retrieved 28 January 2022 .

^ Inskeep, Steve (28 January 2022).

"China's ambassador to the U.S. warns of 'military conflict' over Taiwan" .

npr.org .

NPR . Retrieved 28 January 2022 .

^ "U.S. raps China's Uyghur abuse as "genocide" in human rights report" .

english.kyodonews.net .

Kyodo News . 31 March 2021 . Retrieved 28 January 2022 .

^ a b c d e f Rozsa, Matthew (February 3, 2021) "The psychological reason that so many fall for the 'Big Lie'" Salon . Retrieved February 11, 2022.

Further reading Baker White, John (1955).

The Big Lie . London: Evans Brothers.

OCLC 874233110 .

de Berg, Henk (2024).

Trump and Hitler: A Comparative Study in Lying . London: Palgrave Macmillan.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-51833-1 .

ISBN 978-3-031-51832-4 .

Kurlansky, Mark (2022).

Big Lies: from Socrates to Social Media .

Thomaston, Maine : Tilbury House Publishers.

ISBN 0884489124 .

External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Big lie .

Look up big lie in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"Analysis of Nazi Propaganda" by Karthik Narayanaswami ( Harvard University ) " The Big Lie and Its Consequences " ( Project Syndicate ; 17 May 2021) Video (18:49): "Inside Trump's Election Plot" on YouTube ( MSNBC News ; July 29, 2022) v t e Disinformation and misinformation Core content Disinformation Misinformation Malinformation Propaganda Disinformation attack Disinformation research Publications about disinformation Mechanisms Psychological Cognitive bias List Denialism Manipulation Misinformation effect Political polarization Psychology of climate change denial Computational Algorithmic radicalization Content moderation Community notes Internet manipulation Social bot Social networking service List User-generated content Economic Fake news websites Surveillance capitalism Programmatic advertising Media and Politics Audience fragmentation Echo chamber (media) Fake news Media bias Media culture Media manipulation Tactics Astroturfing Big Lie Circular reporting Clickbait Conspiracy theory List Culture war Deception Deepfake Disinformation playbook Dog whistle (politics) Doublespeak Doxxing Fake news Fake news website List of fake news websites List of satirical fake news websites False accusation False attribution False balance Fear, uncertainty, and doubt Firehose of falsehood Forgery as covert operation Gaslighting Greenwashing Historical negationism Information warfare Logic and reasoning Cherry picking False dilemma Gish gallop Half-truth Fallacy Formal fallacy Informal fallacy List of fallacies Quote mining Red herring Whataboutism Memetic warfare Pink-slime journalism Psychological warfare Propaganda Black propaganda Counterpropaganda State-sponsored Internet propaganda Perception management Rumors Spin (propaganda) Smear campaign Scientific fabrication Strategy of tension Yellow journalism Related terms Alternative facts Factoid Hoax Infodemic Malinformation Post-truth politics Potemkin village Pseudoscience Tabloid journalism Truthiness Targets and campaigns International Politics Disinformation in the Russian invasion of Ukraine Misinformation in the Gaza war New World Order conspiracy theory Russian disinformation Genocide denial Politics by country List of disinformation attacks by country List of political disinformation website campaigns Antisemitism Holocaust denial International Jewish conspiracy Environmental science Climate change denial Fossil fuel industry ExxonMobil climate change denial Fossil fuels lobby Leaded gasoline Ethyl Corporation Robert A. Kehoe Clair Cameron Patterson Pesticide industry Rachel Carson Silent Spring Red mercury Medicine and Public health 5G misinformation Anti-vaccine activism Lancet MMR autism fraud Vaccines and autism Vaccine misinformation COVID-19 misinformation COVID-19 misinformation by governments COVID-19 vaccine misinformation and hesitancy Birth control misinformation Ebola misinformation GMO conspiracy theories HIV/AIDS denialism Mental illness denial Misinformation related to abortion Tobacco industry playbook Transgender health care misinformation Opposition to water fluoridation Journalism and journalists Safety of journalists Maria Ressa Daily Maverick Rappler The Quint Countering disinformation Academic research Critical thinking Digital literacy Health literacy Information literacy Media literacy Science communication Scientific consensus Scientific literacy List of climate change video games Scientific skepticism Skepticism Truth sandwich Verificado 2018 Watchdog journalism Fact-checking and research Fact-checking Websites List of fact-checking websites Non-profits and charities Africa Check FactCheck.org Full Fact PolitiFact USAFacts Private companies Logically (company) NewsGuard StopFake Other Bellingcat International Fact-Checking Network Media Bias/Fact Check Snopes Quackwatch Projeto Comprova Research Canada Citizen Lab EU East StratCom Task Force Finland Faktabaari New Zealand The Disinformation Project UK Counter disinformation unit Ukraine Center for Countering Disinformation USA Active Measures Working Group Counter Misinformation Team Disinformation Governance Board Countering Foreign Propaganda and Disinformation Act United States Information Agency WikiProjects WikiCred Climate change COVID-19 Medicine Skepticism Vaccine safety v t e Propaganda techniques Accusation in a mirror Ad hominem Appeal to fear Appeal to emotion Atrocity propaganda Bandwagon effect Big lie Black propaganda Blood libel Buzzword Cartographic propaganda Computational propaganda Censorship Cherry picking Cult of personality Demonizing the enemy Disinformation Dog whistle Doublespeak Emotive conjugation Exaggeration False accusation False balance False dilemma Fake news Fear, uncertainty, and doubt Firehose of falsehood Flag-waving Framing Gish gallop Glittering generality Half-truth Historical negationism Ideograph Indoctrination Lawfare Loaded language Newspeak Managing the news Minimisation Monumental propaganda Moralistic fallacy New generation warfare Obscurantism Overcomplication Oversimplification Plain folks Psychological warfare Propaganda of the deed Public relations Rally 'round the flag effect Scapegoating Senbu Shooting and crying Slogan Spin Weasel word Whataboutism White propaganda v t e Media manipulation Context Bias Crowd psychology Deception Dumbing down False balance Half-truths Media Obfuscation Persuasion Manipulation (psychology) Activism Advocacy group Alternative media Boycott Call-out culture Cancel culture Civil disobedience Culture jamming Demonstrations Deplatforming Grassroots Guerrilla communication Hacktivism Internet Media Occupations Petitions Protests Youth Advertising Advertorial / Native advertising Billboards False Infomercials Mobiles Modeling Radio Sex Slogans Testimonials TV Criticism of advertising Annoyance factor Censorship and mass media regulation Books Broadcast law Burying of scholars Catch and kill Corporate Cover-ups Euphemism Films Historical negationism Internet Political Religious Self Hoaxing Alternative facts April Fools' Deepfake audio Fake news websites Fakelore Fictitious entries Firehose of falsehood Forgery Gaslighting List Literary Lying press Photograph manipulation Racial Urban legend Virus Video manipulation Marketing Branding Loyalty Product Product placement Publicity Research Word of mouth News media Agenda-setting Broadcasting Circus Cycle Emotive conjugation False balance Infotainment Managing Narcotizing dysfunction Newspeak Pseudo-event Scrum Sensationalism Tabloid journalism Political campaigning Advertising Astroturfing Attack ad Canvassing Character assassination Dog whistle Election promises Lawn signs Party platforms (or manifestos) Name recognition Negative Push polling Smear campaign Wedge issue Propaganda Bandwagon Big lie Crowd manipulation Disinformation Fearmongering Framing Indoctrination Loaded language National mythology Rally 'round the flag effect Techniques Psychological warfare Airborne leaflets False flag Fifth column Information (IT) Lawfare Political Public diplomacy Sedition Subversion Public relations Cult of personality Doublespeak Non-apology apology Reputation management Slogans Sound bites Spin Transfer Understatement Weasel words Corporate propaganda Sales Cold calling Door-to-door Pricing Product demonstrations Promotion Spaving Promotional merchandise Telemarketing Related Influence-for-hire Media bias United States Media concentration Media democracy Media ecology Media ethics Media franchise Media influence Media proprietor NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐db6c4d8dd‐j45ht
Cached time: 20250814214908
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.450 seconds
Real time usage: 1.661 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5379/1000000
Revision size: 59395/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 231207/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5923/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 322430/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.963/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19325566/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1389.221      1 -total
 51.88%  720.791      1 Template:Reflist
 22.26%  309.240     41 Template:Cite_news
 21.90%  304.253     32 Template:Cite_web
 11.80%  163.908      1 Template:Langx
  7.97%  110.771      1 Template:Misinformation
  7.53%  104.674      1 Template:Short_description
  4.37%   60.654      2 Template:Pagetype
  3.54%   49.245      8 Template:Cite_book
  2.75%   38.181      1 Template:Pp Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:201436:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214908 and revision id 1305880331. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Big_lie&oldid=1305880331 " Categories : 1920s neologisms 1925 quotations Deception Lying Propaganda techniques Views on Adolf Hitler Trumpism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from February 2021 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 16:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Big lie 25 languages Add topic

