Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Career 2 Partial bibliography 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Paul Hoffman (science writer) 5 languages العربية Eesti Français Italiano 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American writer This article is about the American writer and television presenter. For other uses of the name, see Paul Hoffman (disambiguation) .

Paul Hoffman Born 1956 Paul Hoffman (born March 30, 1956) [ 1 ] is the president and CEO of the Liberty Science Center in Jersey City , New Jersey .

[ 2 ] He is also a prominent author, science educator, food entrepreneur, Moth storyteller , and host of the PBS television series Great Minds of Science .

Career [ edit ] He was president and editor in chief of Discover , in a ten-year tenure with that magazine, and served as president and publisher of Encyclopædia Britannica before returning full-time to writing and consulting work. He lives in Brooklyn and Woodstock, New York . Author of at least ten books, he has appeared on CBS This Morning and The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer as a correspondent. Hoffman is also a paradoxologist using the pseudonym Dr. Crypton . He designed the puzzle in the 1984 book Treasure: In Search of the Golden Horse . He also designed the treasure map in the 1984 film, Romancing the Stone , starring Michael Douglas , Kathleen Turner , and Danny DeVito .

[ 3 ] Paul is a chess player rated around 1900 (or class-A level) who was the last man standing when world champion Magnus Carlsen played blindfold blitz chess against three challengers.

[ 4 ] Hoffman, who holds a B.A. degree summa cum laude from Harvard , is the winner of the first National Magazine Award for Feature Writing and is a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences .

Chicago magazine once called him "the smartest man in the world," but Hoffman claims the editors must have caught him on a particularly good day.

The New York Times called Hoffman " the mayor of strange places " because of his penchant for checking in at out-of-the-way places on Foursquare . Paul's most celebrated book, The Man Who Loved Only Numbers , a biography of the Hungarian mathematician Paul Erdős , was awarded the Royal Society Science Books Prize .

Before joining Liberty Science Center in October 2011, Hoffman was the editorial chairman of the video interview website Big Think , where he personally interviewed Dick Cavett , Richard Dawkins , Annie Duke , Arianna Huffington , John Irving , Penn Jillette , Anatoly Karpov , Garry Kasparov and Ed Koch , among others.

Hoffman was the creative director of the Beyond Rubik's Cube exhibition, which appeared at venues around the world starting with LSC in Jersey City, NJ, the Great Lakes Science Center in Cleveland, and Telus World of Science in Edmonton, Canada.

[ 5 ] Exhibition elements included a 35-foot-tall rooftop cube made of lights that people could manipulate with their cellphones, a $2.5 million cube made of diamonds, a giant cube displaying the inner workings of the puzzle, and cube-solving robots.

[ 6 ] Google was LSC's creative partner in the creation of the 7,000-square-foot exhibition.

[ 7 ] These days Hoffman is spearheading the development of SciTech Scity, a 30-acre "City of Tomorrow" innovation campus in Jersey City that aims to launch and grow world-changing science and technology companies and reimagine public school science education.

[ 8 ] Partial bibliography [ edit ] Hoffman, Paul (2007).

King's Gambit: A Son, a Father, and the World's Most Dangerous Game . New York: Hyperion Books .

ISBN 978-1-4013-0097-5 .

Hoffman, Paul (2003).

Wings of Madness: Alberto Santos-Dumont and the Invention of Flight .

Hyperion Books .

ISBN 0-7868-8571-8 .

Hoffman, Paul (1998).

The Man Who Loved Only Numbers: The Story of Paul Erdős and the Search for Mathematical Truth . New York: Hyperion Books .

ISBN 0-7868-8406-1 .

Hoffman, Paul (1988).

Archimedes' Revenge: The Joys and Perils of Mathematics . New York: Fawcett Colombine.

ISBN 0-449-00089-3 .

Crypton, Dr. (1985).

Timid Virgins Make Dull Company and Other Puzzles, Pitfalls, and Paradoxes . New York: Penguin Books .

ISBN 0-14-008043-0 .

References [ edit ] ^ "SO WHAT DO YOU DO, PAUL HOFFMAN, AUTHOR, ASME-WINNING WRITER" . Mediabistro. August 22, 2007 . Retrieved January 4, 2015 .

^ "Paul Hoffman Named President and CEO" .

Liberty Science Center Web site . Liberty Science Center. Archived from the original on October 8, 2011 . Retrieved October 19, 2011 .

^ "Paul Hoffman (Author of The Man Who Loved Only Numbers)" .

^ Barron, James (November 11, 2015).

"An American Chess Master, Age 23, Awaits His Turn on a Bigger Stage" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved January 6, 2023 .

^ Shaffrey, Ted (April 27, 2012).

"Cubism? Rubik helps with toy's anniversary exhibit" . New York. Associated Press.

^ Quenqua, Douglas (August 6, 2012).

"Rubik's Cube Twists Back Into Limelight" .

The New York Times . New York.

^ "Liberty Science Center" . Archived from the original on June 20, 2012 . Retrieved November 15, 2012 .

^ Bergeron, Tom (October 22, 2021).

"SciTech Scity, Game-Changing Innovation Campus, to Break Ground Today" .

ROI-NJ . Jersey City.

External links [ edit ] Paul Hoffman's bio Paul Hoffman's blog Presenting at Cusp Conference 2009 (video) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic 2 Netherlands Greece Korea Israel Belgium Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_Hoffman_(science_writer)&oldid=1286545750 " Categories : 1956 births Harvard University alumni American male biographers American science writers American magazine editors Living people Writers from Brooklyn People from Woodstock, New York 21st-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American biographers Journalists from New York City 20th-century American male writers Discover (magazine) people Historians from New York (state) 21st-century American male writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2025 Articles with hCards Articles with infoboxes completely from Wikidata Articles using Template Infobox person Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 April 2025, at 15:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul Hoffman (science writer) 5 languages Add topic

