Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Michigan State University 2.2 Editor and author 2.2.1 The Conservative Mind 2.3 Journals 2.3.1 Other works 2.3.2 Fiction 2.4 The Heritage Foundation 2.5 Presidential Citizens Medal 3 Personal life 4 Death 5 Philosophy and ideals Toggle Philosophy and ideals subsection 5.1 Gulf War 5.2 Libertarianism 5.3 Neoconservatism 5.4 South Africa 6 Influence 7 Bibliography 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Russell Kirk 23 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hornjoserbsce Italiano مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American political theorist and writer (1918–1994) Russell Kirk Kirk in 1962 Born Russell Amos Kirk ( 1918-10-19 ) October 19, 1918 Plymouth, Michigan , U.S.

Died April 29, 1994 (1994-04-29) (aged 75) Mecosta, Michigan , U.S.

Spouse Annette Courtemanche ​ ​ ( m.

1963) ​ Children 4 Education Education Michigan State University ( BA ) Duke University ( MA ) University of St Andrews ( DLitt ) Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Traditionalist conservatism American conservatism Main interests Politics, history, fiction Notable works The Conservative Mind Roots of American Order Website kirkcenter .org Russell Amos Kirk (October 19, 1918 – April 29, 1994) [ 1 ] was an American political philosopher , moralist , historian, social critic , literary critic , author, and novelist who influenced 20th century American conservatism . In 1953, he authored The Conservative Mind , which traced the development of conservative thought in the Anglo-American tradition and Edmund Burke . The book helped influence the post- World War II American conservative movement.

Kirk is considered the chief proponent of traditionalist conservatism . He was also an accomplished author of Gothic and ghost story fiction and is often cited as one of the most significant conservative men of letters of the 20th century.

Early life and education [ edit ] Kirk was born in Plymouth, Michigan , on October 19, 1918, the son of Russell Andrew Kirk, a railroad engineer, and Marjorie Pierce Kirk. Kirk attended Michigan State University , where he received a Bachelor of Arts , and Duke University , where he was awarded a Master of Arts .

During World War II , Kirk served in the United States Armed Forces and corresponded with Isabel Paterson , a libertarian writer who helped to shape his early political thought. After reading Our Enemy, the State by Albert Jay Nock , Kirk engaged in a similar correspondence with Nock. Following the end of World War II, Kirk attended University of St Andrews in Scotland , where, in 1953, he became the university's first American to be awarded a Doctor of Letters .

[ 2 ] Kirk "laid out a post-World War II program for conservatives by warning them, 'A handful of individuals, some of them quite unused to moral responsibilities on such a scale, made it their business to extirpate the populations of Nagasaki and Hiroshima ; we must make it our business to curtail the possibility of such snap decisions.'" [ 3 ] Career [ edit ] Michigan State University [ edit ] Kirk at his typewriter in the 1950s After obtaining his degree at the University of St. Andrews, Kirk secured an academic position at Michigan State University , his alma mater. He resigned in 1959, after growing disenchanted with the rapid growth in student number and emphasis on intercollegiate athletics and technical training at the expense of the traditional liberal arts . He subsequently referred to Michigan State as "Cow College" or "Behemoth University", and later wrote that academic political scientists and sociologists were "as a breed—dull dogs".

[ 4 ] Editor and author [ edit ] After leaving Michigan State, Kirk returned to his ancestral home in Mecosta, Michigan , where he wrote the many books, academic articles, lectures, and the syndicated newspaper column, which was published for 13 years, in which he exerted his influence on American politics and intellectual life.

The Conservative Mind [ edit ] Main article: The Conservative Mind In 1953, Kirk authored The Conservative Mind , [ 5 ] the published version of Kirk's doctoral dissertation, contributed materially to the 20th century Burke revival, drawing attention to: Conservative statesmen, including John Adams , Alexander Hamilton , Fisher Ames , George Canning , John C. Calhoun , John Randolph of Roanoke , Joseph de Maistre , Benjamin Disraeli , and Arthur Balfour ; Conservative authors, including Samuel Taylor Coleridge , Sir Walter Scott , Alexis de Tocqueville , James Fenimore Cooper , Nathaniel Hawthorne , James Russell Lowell , George Gissing , George Santayana , Robert Frost , and T. S. Eliot ; British and American authors, including Fisher Ames , John Randolph of Roanoke , Orestes Brownson , John Henry Newman , Walter Bagehot , Henry James Sumner Maine , William Edward Hartpole Lecky , Edwin Lawrence Godkin , William Hurrell Mallock , Leslie Stephen , Albert Venn Dicey , Robert Nisbet , Paul Elmer More , and Irving Babbitt .

Journals [ edit ] Kirk wrote extensively for two U.S.-based conservative journals, National Review , which he helped found in 1955, and Modern Age , which he helped found in 1957. He was also the founding editor of Modern Age from 1957 to 1959.

Other works [ edit ] Kirk's other important books include Eliot and his Age: T. S. Eliot's Moral Imagination in the Twentieth Century (1972), The Roots of American Order (1974), and the autobiographical Sword of the Imagination: Memoirs of a Half Century of Literary Conflict (1995). As was the case with his hero Edmund Burke , Kirk became renowned for the prose style of his intellectual and polemical writings.

[ 6 ] Fiction [ edit ] Beyond his scholarly achievements, Kirk was talented both as an oral storyteller and as an author of genre fiction , most notably in his telling of consummate ghost stories in the classic tradition of Sheridan Le Fanu , M. R. James , Oliver Onions , and H. Russell Wakefield . He also wrote other admired and much-anthologized works that are variously classified as horror, fantasy, science fiction, and political satire . These earned him plaudits from fellow creative writers as varied and distinguished as T. S. Eliot , Robert Aickman , Madeleine L'Engle , and Ray Bradbury .

[ citation needed ] Kirk's body of fiction, encompassing three novels and 22 short stories, was written amid a busy career as prolific non-fiction writer, editor, and speaker. Like other speculative fiction authors G. K. Chesterton , C. S. Lewis , and J. R. R. Tolkien , [ citation needed ] each of whom only wrote non-fiction for their day jobs, there are conservative undercurrents, social , cultural , religious , and political , to Kirk's fiction. In 1984, Kirk described the purpose of his fictional stories: The political ferocity of our age is sufficiently dismaying: men of letters need not conjure up horrors worse than those suffered during the past decade by the Cambodians and Ugandans, Afghans and Ethiopians. What I have attempted, rather, are experiments in the moral imagination. Readers will encounter elements of parable and fable...some clear premise is about the character of human existence...a healthy concept of the character of evil...

[ 7 ] His first novel, Old House of Fear (1961, 1965), was written in a self-consciously Gothic vein. The plot is concerned with an American assigned by his employer to a bleak locale in rural Scotland—the same country where Kirk had attended graduate school. This was Kirk's most commercially successful and critically acclaimed fictional work, doing much to sustain him financially in subsequent years.

Old House of Fear was inspired by the novels of John Buchan and Kirk's own Scottish heritage.

[ 7 ] The story of Old House of Fear concerns an young American, Hugh Logan, a World War II veteran who is both brave and sensitive, sent to buy Carnglass, a remote island in the Hebrides.

[ 7 ] Upon reaching the island, he discovers that the island's owner, Lady MacAskival and her beautiful adopted daughter Mary are being held hostage by foreign spies, who are presumably working for the Soviet Union, out to sabotage a nearby NATO base.

[ 7 ] The leader of the spies is Dr. Jackman, an evil genius and nihilist intent upon wrecking a world that failed to acknowledge his greatness and whom reviewers noted was a much more vividly drawn character than the hero Logan.

[ 7 ] Dr. Jackman appears to be a prototype of Kirk's best known character, Manfred Arcane, with the only difference being the former has no values while the latter does.

[ 7 ] His later novels include A Creature of the Twilight (1966), a dark comedy satirizing postcolonial African politics; and Lord of the Hollow Dark (1979, 1989), set in Scotland, which explores the great evil inhabiting a haunted house .

A Creature of the Twilight concerns the adventures in Africa of a reactionary, romantic mercenary Mandred Arcane, a self-proclaimed mixture of Machiavelli and Sir Lancelot, who is an anachronistic survival of the Victorian Age who does not belong in the modern world and yet defiantly still exists, making him the "creature of the twilight".

[ 7 ] Kirk has Arcane write his pseudo-memoir in a consciously Victorian style to underline that he does not belong in the 1960s. Arcane is both a dapper intellectual and a hardened man of action, an elderly man full of an unnatural vigor, who is hired by the son of the assassinated Sultan to put down a Communist rebellion in the fictional African nation of Hamnegri, which he does despite overwhelming odds.

[ 7 ] In 1967, Kirk published a short story "Belgrummo's Hell" about a clever art thief who unwisely tries to rob the estate of the ancient Scottish warlock, Lord Belgrummo, who is later revealed to be Arcane's father.

[ 7 ] In another short story published in the same collection, "The Peculiar Demesne of Archvicar Gerontion" concerned a wizard, Archvicar Gerontion, who tries to kill Arcane by casting deadly spells.

[ 8 ] The Lord of the Hollow Dark is set at the same Belgrummo estate first encountered in "Belgrummo's Hell"  where an evil cult led by the Aleister Crowley -like character Apollinax have assembled to secure for themselves the "Timeless Moment" of eternal sexual pleasure by sacrificing two innocents, an young woman named Marina and her infant daughter in an ancient warren called the Weem under the Belgrummo Estate.

[ 9 ] Assisting Apollinax is Archvicar Gerontion, who is really Arcane in disguise.

[ 9 ] Inspired by the novels of H.P. Lovecraft, Kirk in the Lord of the Hollow Dark has Arcane survive a "horrid chthonian pilgrimage" as he faces dark supernatural forces, confront his own family's history of evil, and refuse the appeal of a "seductive, hubristic immorality".

[ 9 ] The novel concludes with Arcane's own definition of a true "Timeless Moment" which he states: "it comes from faith, from hope, from charity; from having your work in the world; from the happiness of the people you love; or simply as a gift of grace".

[ 9 ] During his lifetime, Kirk also oversaw the publication of three collections which together encompassed all his short stories. (Three more such collections have been published posthumously, but those only reprint stories found in the earlier volumes. One such posthumous collection, Ancestral Shadows: An Anthology of Ghostly Tales , was edited by his student, friend, and collaborator Vigen Guroian , and includes both an essay by Kirk on 'ghostly tales' and Guroian's own analysis of the stories as well as Kirk's motives in writing them.) Many of Kirk's short stories, especially the ghost stories, were set in either Scotland or in the rural parts of his home state of Michigan.

[ 7 ] Among his novels and stories, certain characters tend to recur, enriching the already considerable unity and resonance of his fictional canon . Though—through their themes and prose -style—Kirk's fiction and nonfiction works are complementary, many readers of the one have not known of his work in the other.

Having begun to write fiction fairly early in his career, Kirk ceased fiction writing after the early 1980s, while continuing his non-fiction writing and research through his last year of life. For a comprehensive bibliography of his fiction, see the fiction section of his bibliography .

In 1982, The Portable Conservative Reader , which Kirk edited, included writings by many of the conservatives Kirk featured in The Conservative Mind .

The Heritage Foundation [ edit ] He later was appointed a distinguished fellow at the Heritage Foundation , a Washington, D.C.

-based conservative think tank , where he gave several lectures.

[ 10 ] Kirk taught one semester a year at Hillsdale College , where he was distinguished visiting professor of humanities.

[ 11 ] He was also a contributor to Chronicles magazine.

Presidential Citizens Medal [ edit ] In 1989, Kirk was presented with the Presidential Citizens Medal by President Ronald Reagan .

[ 12 ] Personal life [ edit ] In 1963, Kirk converted to Catholicism and married Annette Courtemanche; [ 13 ] they had four daughters. She and Kirk became known for their hospitality, welcoming many political, philosophical, and literary figures in their Mecosta, Michigan house, known as "Piety Hill", and giving shelter to political refugees, hoboes, and others.

[ 14 ] Their Michigan home, which also became the site of seminars on conservative thought for university students, now houses the Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal . After his conversion to Catholicism, Kirk was a founding board member of Una Voce America .

[ 15 ] Death [ edit ] On April 29, 1994, Kirk died from heart failure at his home in Mecosta, Michigan , at age 75.

[ 16 ] Philosophy and ideals [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Kirk developed six canons of conservatism, which Gerald J. Russello described as including: A belief in a transcendent order, which Kirk described variously as based in tradition, divine revelation , or natural law ; An affection for the "variety and mystery" of human existence; A conviction that society requires orders and classes that emphasize "natural" distinctions; A belief that property and freedom are closely linked; A faith in custom, convention , and prescription, and A recognition that innovation must be tied to existing traditions and customs, which entails a respect for the political value of prudence.

[ 17 ] Kirk said that Christianity and Western Civilization are "unimaginable apart from one another" [ 18 ] and that "all culture arises out of religion. When religious faith decays, culture must decline, though often seeming to flourish for a space after the religion which has nourished it has sunk into disbelief." [ 19 ] [ failed verification ] Kirk declined to drive, calling cars "mechanical Jacobins ", [ 20 ] and would have nothing to do with television and what he called "electronic computers".

[ 21 ] Kirk did not always maintain a stereotypically conservative voting record. In the 1944 presidential election , for instance, Kirk voted for Norman Thomas , the Socialist Party of America candidate as opposed to choosing between incumbent Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Republican challenger Thomas E. Dewey .

[ 22 ] In the 1976 presidential election , he voted for Eugene McCarthy .

[ 23 ] In 1992 he supported Pat Buchanan 's primary challenge to incumbent George H. W. Bush , serving as state chair of the Buchanan campaign in Michigan.

[ 24 ] Gulf War [ edit ] Further information: Gulf War Kirk was highly critical of Republican militarism, arguing in 1992 that U.S. president George H. W. Bush embarked upon "a radical course of intervention in the region of the Persian Gulf " in leading American engagement in the Gulf War , following Saddam Hussein and Iraq's invasion and occupation of Kuwait in August 1990.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] In April 1992, in an address to the Heritage Foundation , Kirk said: [ 27 ] Presidents Woodrow Wilson , Franklin Roosevelt , and Lyndon Johnson were enthusiasts for American domination of the world. Now George Bush appears to be emulating those eminent Democrats. When the Republicans, once upon a time, nominated for the presidency a "One World" candidate, Wendell Willkie , they were sadly trounced. In general, Republicans throughout the twentieth century have been advocates of prudence and restraint in the conduct of foreign affairs.

[ 28 ] Unless the Bush administration abruptly reverses its fiscal and military course, I suggest, the Republican Party must lose its former good repute for frugality, and become the party of profligate expenditure, " butter and guns ." And public opinion would not long abide that. Nor would America's world influence and America's remaining prosperity.

[ 28 ] Yet presidents of the United States must not be encouraged to make Perpetual War for Perpetual Peace, nor to fancy that they can establish a New World Order through eliminating dissenters. In the second century before Christ, the Romans generously liberated the Greek city-states from the yoke of Macedonia. But it was not long before the Romans felt it necessary to impose upon those quarrelsome Greeks a domination more stifling to Hellenic freedom and culture than ever Macedon had been. It is a duty of the Congress of the United States to see that great American Caesars do not act likewise.

[ 28 ] Libertarianism [ edit ] Further information: Libertarianism in the United States Kirk supported Burkean conservatism, based on the writings and philosophy of Edmund Burke , which embraced tradition, political philosophy, belles lettres , and strong religious faith. Especially in his later years, he was an opponent of libertarianism and free market economic reasoning, though he made little reference of these positions in The Conservative Mind .

In a 1991 article for Modern Age , Kirk, quoted T. S. Eliot , who called libertarians "chirping sectaries," adding that conservatives and libertarians share opposition to "collectivism," "the totalist state," and "bureaucracy", but otherwise have "nothing" in common. He called the libertarian movement "an ideological clique forever splitting into sects still smaller and odder, but rarely conjugating." He said a line of division exists between believers in "some sort of transcendent moral order" and "utilitarians admitting no transcendent sanctions for conduct." He included libertarians in the latter category.

[ 29 ] Kirk, therefore, questioned the "fusionism" between libertarians and traditional conservatives that marked much of post-World War II conservatism in the United States.

[ 30 ] Kirk also argued that libertarians "bear no authority, temporal or spiritual" and do not "venerate ancient beliefs and customs, or the natural world, or [their] country, or the immortal spark in [their] fellow men." [ 31 ] In an April 1988 lecture at the Heritage Foundation , Kirk's praised classical liberals , saying that he agreed with them on " ordered liberty " and shared "common cause with regular conservatives against the menace of democratic despotism and economic collectivism." [ 32 ] Tibor Machan , an Auburn University philosophy professor, responded, defending libertarianism in response to Kirk's original Heritage Lecture. Machan argued that the right of individual sovereignty is perhaps most worthy of conserving from the American political heritage, and that when conservatives themselves talk about preserving some tradition, they cannot at the same time claim a disrespectful distrust of the individual human mind, of rationalism itself.

[ 33 ] Neoconservatism [ edit ] Further information: Neoconservatism In the 1980s, Kirk grew disenchanted with American neoconservatives .

[ 34 ] In 2004, Chronicles editor Scott Richert wrote: [One line] helped define the emerging struggle between neoconservatives and paleoconservatives. "Not seldom has it seemed," Kirk declared, "as if some eminent Neoconservatives mistook Tel Aviv for the capital of the United States." A few years later, in another Heritage Foundation speech, Kirk repeated that line verbatim. In the wake of the Gulf War, which he had opposed, he clearly understood that those words carried even greater meaning.

[ 35 ] Kirk said that neoconservatives were "often clever...seldom wise." [ 34 ] Midge Decter , a Jewish director of the Committee for the Free World and wife of neoconservative writer Norman Podhoretz , called Kirk's description of neoconservatives "a bloody outrage, a piece of anti-Semitism by Kirk that impugns the loyalty of neoconservatives." [ 36 ] Decter told The New Republic that, "it's this notion of a Christian civilization. You have to be part of it or you're not really fit to conserve anything. That's an old line and it's very ignorant." [ 37 ] Samuel T. Francis called Kirk's "Tel Aviv" remark "a wisecrack about the slavishly pro-Israel sympathies among neoconservatives." [ 37 ] He described Decter's response as untrue, "reckless" and "vitriolic." Furthermore, he argued that such a denunciation "always plays into the hands of the left, which is then able to repeat the charges and claim conservative endorsement of them.

[ 37 ] South Africa [ edit ] Further information: South Africa In a National Review column on March 9, 1965, "One Man, One Vote' in South Africa", Kirk wrote that the U.S. Supreme Court 's jurisprudence on voting "will work mischief—much injuring, rather than fulfilling, the responsible democracy for which Tocqueville hoped," but in the case of South Africa "this degradation of the democratic dogma, if applied, would bring anarchy and the collapse of civilization." [ 38 ] Kirk wrote that "the 'European' element [makes] South Africa the only 'modern' and prosperous African country." He added that "Bantu political domination [of South Africa] would be domination by witch doctors (still numerous and powerful) and reckless demagogues" and that "Bantu and Coloreds and Indians must feel that they have some political voice in the South African commonwealth." Influence [ edit ] Bradley J. Birzer , a Hillsdale College history professor, argues that Kirk was immensely influential in inspiring the modern conservative movement, but not many of his followers agreed with his unusual approach to the history of conservatism. As summarized by reviewer Drew Maciag: As Birzer's study demonstrates, Kirk's understanding of conservatism was so unique, idiosyncratic, transcendental, elitist, and in certain respects premodern and European, that it bore little resemblance to political conservatism in the United States.

Conservative Mind successfully launched an intellectual challenge to postwar liberalism, but the variety of conservatism Kirk preferred found few takers, even within the American Right.

[ 39 ] Harry Jaffa , a student of Leo Strauss , wrote, "Kirk was a poor Burke scholar. Burke's attack on metaphysical reasoning related only to modern philosophy's attempt to eliminate skeptical doubt from its premises and hence from its conclusions." [ 40 ] Gerald J. Russello argued that Kirk adapted what 19th century Orestes Brownson , an American Catholic writer, called "territorial democracy" to articulate a version of federalism that was based on premises that differ in part from those of the founders and other conservatives. Kirk further believed that territorial democracy could reconcile the tension between treating the states as mere provinces of the central government, and as autonomous political units independent of Washington. Finally, territorial democracy allowed Kirk to set out a theory of individual rights grounded in the particular historical circumstances of the United States, while rejecting a universal conception of such rights.

[ 41 ] In addition to bringing public attention to Anglo-American conservative principles, Kirk described his perception of liberal ideals in the first chapter. Kirk identified these ideals as the perfectibility of man, hostility towards tradition, rapid change in economic and political systems, and the secularization of government.

[ 42 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Main article: Russell Kirk bibliography See also [ edit ] The Imaginative Conservative References [ edit ] ^ "Kirk, Russell Amos - Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com .

Archived from the original on February 23, 2019 . Retrieved June 18, 2019 .

^ "About Russell Kirk" .

kirkcenter.org . The Russell Kirk Center. 2014.

Archived from the original on May 2, 2017 . Retrieved July 31, 2014 .

^ Polner, Murray (March 1, 2010) Left Behind Archived December 17, 2010, at the Wayback Machine , The American Conservative ^ Kirk, Russell, ed., 1982.

The Portable Conservative Reader . Viking: xxxviii.

^ Which went into 7 editions, the later ones with the subtitle "From Burke to Eliot".

Regnery Publishing . 7th edition (2001).

ISBN 0-89526-171-5 ^ Nash (1998).

^ a b c d e f g h i j Di Filippo 1998 , p. 328.

^ Di Filippo 1998 , p. 328-329.

^ a b c d Di Filippo 1998 , p. 329.

^ Many published in his The Politics of Prudence (1993) and Redeeming the Time (1998).

^ Mary Catherine Meyer (February 25, 2016) Kirk should be on the Liberty Walk Archived October 17, 2018, at the Wayback Machine , The Hillsdale Collegian ^ "Russell Kirk" .

The Heritage Foundation . Archived from the original on October 29, 2018 . Retrieved October 28, 2018 .

^ "The Marriage That Shaped American Conservatism" . Lee Edwards. August 20, 2019.

Archived from the original on January 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Timothy Stanley (February 8, 2012).

"Buchanan's Revolution: How Pitchfork Pat raised a rebellion—and why it failed" .

The American Conservative . The American Ideas Institute.

Archived from the original on April 16, 2020 . Retrieved July 31, 2014 .

^ "Update: The Latin Mass in America Today" .

Regina Magazine .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2020 . Retrieved September 27, 2013 .

^ Honan, William H. (April 30, 1994).

"Russell Kirk Is Dead at 75; Seminal Conservative Author" .

The New York Times . p. 13 . Retrieved November 29, 2024 .

^ Russello, Gerald J., 1996, "The Jurisprudence of Russell Kirk," Modern Age 38: 354–363.

ISSN 0026-7457 .

^ [1] Archived January 5, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ "News & Press" .

Thomas Aquinas College . May 27, 2016.

Archived from the original on May 22, 2019 . Retrieved June 18, 2019 .

^ Kirk, Russell (November 28, 1962).

"The Mechanical Jacobin" .

General Features .

Archived from the original on March 8, 2019 . Retrieved March 7, 2019 . As republished in The University Bookman , November 10, 2017.

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: postscript ( link ) ^ Kirk, Russell (1987).

"Humane Learning in the Age of the Computer" .

CERC: Catholic Education Resource Center .

Archived from the original on October 26, 2020 . Retrieved October 21, 2020 .

^ McCarthy, Daniel (October 12, 2012) How Does a Traditionalist Vote?

Archived October 18, 2012, at the Wayback Machine , The American Conservative ^ Kauffman, Bill (May 19, 2008) When the Left Was Right Archived April 30, 2011, at the Wayback Machine , The American Conservative ^ Continetti, Matthew (October 19, 2018).

"The Forgotten Father of American Conservatism" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on August 8, 2019 . Retrieved August 8, 2019 .

^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on March 3, 2012 . Retrieved November 26, 2012 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) Political Errors at the End of the Twentieth Century – Part I: Republican Errors By Russell Kirk . Accessed: November 26, 2012.

^ [2] Archived June 18, 2015, at the Wayback Machine Do Conservatives Hate Their Own Founder? – Thomas E. Woods, Jr . Accessed: November 26, 2012.

^ Political Errors at the End of the 20th Century, Part III: International Errors. Policy Archive, April 1992 . Accessed: November 26, 2012.

^ a b c "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on March 3, 2012 . Retrieved November 26, 2012 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) Political Errors at the End of the Twentieth Century – Part I: Republican Errors By Russell Kirk . Accessed: November 26, 2012.

^ Kirk, Russell (Fall 1981).

"Libertarians: the Chirping Sectaries" (PDF) .

Modern Age . Wilmington, DE: Intercollegiate Studies Institute. pp.

345– 51.

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 2, 2009.

^ "The Volokh Conspiracy – Russell Kirk, Libertarianism, and Fusionism" .

volokh.com .

Archived from the original on April 3, 2019 . Retrieved May 12, 2007 .

^ Boaz, David (January 30, 2009).

"Libertarianism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on May 4, 2015 . Retrieved February 21, 2017 .

^ Kirk, Russell (May 28, 1988).

"A Dispassionate Assessment of Libertarians" .

Lecture #158 on Political Thought .

The Heritage Foundation . Archived from the original on December 18, 2013 . Retrieved December 10, 2013 .

Russell Kirk is a Distinguished Scholar at the Heritage Foundation. He spoke at The Heritage Foundation on April 19, 1988, delivering the second of four lectures on the 'Varieties of the Conservative Impulse.' OCLC 20729276 ^ Machan, Tibor R.

(August 1, 1988).

"A Passionate Defense of Libertarianism" .

Lecture #165 on Political Thought .

The Heritage Foundation .

OCLC 19009917 . Archived from the original on December 18, 2013 . Retrieved December 10, 2013 .

^ a b Russell, Kirk (December 15, 1988).

"The Neoconservatives: An Endangered Species" .

Lecture #178 on Political Thought .

The Heritage Foundation . Archived from the original on September 14, 2006 . Retrieved September 5, 2006 .

^ Richert, Scott P. (2004).

"Russell Kirk and the Negation of Ideology" .

Chronicles Magazine . Archived from the original on July 17, 2006.

^ She claimed Kirk "said people like my husband and me put the interest of Israel before the interest of the United States, that we have a dual loyalty." ^ a b c Francis, Sam.

"The Neo-Conservative Subversion" .

Council of Conservative Citizens . Archived from the original on June 15, 2006.

^ Kirk, Russell, "'One Man, One Vote' In South Africa," National Review March 9, 1965, pg. 198 ^ Drew Maciag review of Bradley J. Birzer , Russell Kirk: American Conservatism (2015) in The Journal of American History 103#4 (March 2017) p. 1096.

doi : 10.1093/jahist/jaw600 ^ Harry V. Jaffa (April 13, 2006).

"Harry V. Jaffa Responds to Claes Ryn" .

The Claremont Institute . Archived from the original on September 27, 2007 . Retrieved May 10, 2007 .

^ Russello, Gerald J., 1996, "The Jurisprudence of Russell Kirk," Modern Age 38: 354–363.

ISSN 0026-7457 .

^ "The Conservative Mind" (PDF) .

kirkcenter.org . 2018.

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 1, 2019 . Retrieved June 18, 2019 .

Further reading [ edit ] Attarian, John, 1998, "Russell Kirk's Political Economy," Modern Age 40 : 87–97.

ISSN 0026-7457 .

Birzer, Bradley J.

Russell Kirk: American Conservative (University Press of Kentucky, 2015). 574 pp.

Brown, Charles C. ed.

Russell Kirk: A Bibliography (2nd ed. 2011: Wilmington, ISI Books, 2011) 220 pages; replaces Brown's 1981 bibliography Campbell, William F. (Fall 1994).

"An Economist's Tribute to Russell Kirk" .

The Intercollegiate Review . The Intercollegiate Studies Institute (reprinted with permission by The Philadelphia Society ).

ISSN 0020-5249 .

OCLC 1716938 . Archived from the original on February 22, 2010.

East, John P.

, 1984, "Russell Kirk as a Political Theorist: Perceiving the Need for Order in the Soul and in Society," Modern Age 28 : 33–44.

ISSN 0026-7457 .

Feser, Edward C.

(2008). "Conservative Critique of Libertarianism". In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE ; Cato Institute . pp.

95– 97.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n62 .

ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Guroian, Vigen .

Ancestral Shadows: An Anthology of Ghostly Tales.

Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2004.

ISBN 0-8028-3938-X .

Di Filippo, Paul (1998). "Kirk Russell". In Pringle, David (ed.).

St. James Guide to Horror, Ghost & Gothic Writers . Detroit: St. James Press. pp.

327– 329.

ISBN 1-55862-206-3 .

Filler, Louis. "'The Wizard of Mecosta': Russell Kirk of Michigan," Michigan History , Vol 63 No 5 (Sept–Oct 1979).

Fuller, Edmund. 'A Genre for Exploring the Reality of Evil." Wall Street Journal, July 23, 1979.

Hennelly, Mark M. Jr., "Dark World Enough and Time," Gothic, Vol 2 No 1 (June 1980).

Herron, Don. "The crepuscular Romantic: An Apprfeciation of the Fiction of Russell Kirk," ' The Romantist , No 3 (1979).

Kirk, Russell, "Introduction: The Canon of Ghostly Tales" in The Scallion Stone by Canon basil A. Smith. Chapel Hill, NC: Whispers Press, 1980.

Herron, Don. "Russell Kirk: Ghost Master of Mecosta" in Darrell Schweitzer (ed) Discovering Modern Horror Fiction , Merce Is, WA: Starmont House, July 1985, pp. 21–47.

Kirk, Russell, 1995.

The Sword of Imagination: Memoirs of a Half-Century of Literary Conflict . Kirk's memoirs.

McDonald, W. Wesley , 1982.

The Conservative Mind of Russell Kirk: `The Permanent Things' in an Age of Ideology . Ph.D. dissertation, The Catholic University of America . Citation: DAI 1982 43(1): 255-A. DA8213740. Online at ProQuest Dissertations & Theses.

--------, 1983, "Reason, Natural Law, and Moral Imagination in the Thought of Russell Kirk," Modern Age 27 : 15–24.

ISSN 0026-7457 .

--------, 2004.

Russell Kirk and The Age of Ideology.

University of Missouri Press.

--------, 1999. "Russell Kirk and the Prospects for Conservatism," Humanitas XII: 56–76.

--------, 2006. "Kirk, Russell (1918–94)," in American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia ISI Books: 471–474. Biographical entry.

McCleod, Aaron.

Great Conservative Minds: A Condensation of Russell Kirk's "The Conservative Mind" (Alabama Policy Institute, 2005) 71pp; detailed page-by-page synopsis Nash, George H., 1998.

The Conservative Intellectual Movement in America .

Person, Jr., James E., 1999. "Russell Kirk: A Critical Biography of a Conservative Mind". Madison Books.

Pournelle, Jerry, "Uncanny Tales of the Moral Imagination," University Bookman , Summer 1979, Vol XIX, No 4.

Russell, Gerald J., 1996, "The Jurisprudence of Russell Kirk," Modern Age 38 : 354–63.

ISSN 0026-7457 . Reviews Kirk's writings on law, 1976–93, exploring his notion of natural law , his emphasis on the importance of the English common law tradition, and his theories of change and continuity in legal history .

--------, 2007. "The Postmodern Imagination of Russell Kirk". University of Missouri Press.

--------, 1999, "Time and Timeless: the Historical Imagination of Russell Kirk," Modern Age 41 : 209–19.

ISSN 0026-7457 .

--------, 2004, "Russell Kirk and Territorial Democracy," Publius 34 : 109–24.

ISSN 0048-5950 .

Steiger, Brad. "A Note on Ghostly Phenomena in Russell Kirk's Old House at Mecosta, Michigan." Strange Powers of E.D.P.

, NY: Belmont Books, 1969.

Sturgeon, Theodore, "A Viewpoint, a Dewpoint," National review , vol XIV No 6, February 12, 1963.

Whitney, Gleaves, 2001, "The Swords of Imagination: Russell Kirk's Battle with Modernity," Modern Age 43 : 311–20.

ISSN 0026-7457 . Argues that Kirk used five "swords of imagination": historical, political, moral, poetic, and prophetic.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Russell Kirk .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Russell Kirk .

The Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal Works by Russell Kirk at Hathi Trust Russell Kirk's articles at Crisis Magazine From The Academy Traverse magazine profile of Russell Kirk by John J. Miller The Neoconservatives: An Endangered Species [unfit] The Heritage Foundation lecture 178, December 15, 1988 Russell Kirk at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database Appearances on C-SPAN Speech by Russell Kirk on March 21, 1968 on American conservatives Audio recording from The University of Alabama's Emphasis Symposium on Contemporary Issues Links to related articles v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e World Fantasy Award — Short Fiction 1975–2000 " Pages from a Young Girl's Journal " by Robert Aickman (1975) " Belsen Express " by Fritz Leiber (1976) " There's a Long, Long Trail A-Winding " by Russell Kirk (1977) " The Chimney " by Ramsey Campbell (1978) " Naples " by Avram Davidson (1979) " Mackintosh Willy " by Ramsey Campbell (1980, tie) " The Woman Who Loved the Moon " by Elizabeth A. Lynn (1980, tie) " The Ugly Chickens " by Howard Waldrop (1981) " The Dark Country " by Dennis Etchison (1982, tie) " Do the Dead Sing?

" by Stephen King (1982, tie) " The Gorgon " by Tanith Lee (1983) " Elle Est Trois, (La Mort) " by Tanith Lee (1984) " The Bones Wizard " by Alan Ryan / " Still Life with Scorpion " by Scott Baker (1985, tie) " Paper Dragons " by James Blaylock (1986) " Red Light " by David J. Schow (1987) " Friend's Best Man " by Jonathan Carroll (1988) " Winter Solstice, Camelot Station " by John M. Ford (1989) " The Illusionist " by Steven Millhauser (1990) " A Midsummer Night's Dream " by Neil Gaiman and Charles Vess (1991) " The Somewhere Doors " by Fred Chappell (1992) " Graves " by Joe Haldeman (1993, tie) " This Year's Class Picture " by Dan Simmons (1993, tie) " The Lodger " by Fred Chappell (1994) " The Man in the Black Suit " by Stephen King (1995) " The Grass Princess " by Gwyneth Jones (1996) " Thirteen Phantasms " by James Blaylock (1997) " Dust Motes " by P. D. Cacek (1998) " The Specialist's Hat " by Kelly Link (1999) " The Chop Girl " by Ian R. MacLeod (2000) 2001–present " The Pottawatomie Giant " by Andy Duncan (2001) " Queen for a Day " by Albert E. Cowdrey (2002) " Creation " by Jeffrey Ford (2003) " Don Ysidro " by Bruce Holland Rogers (2004) " Singing My Sister Down " by Margo Lanagan (2005) " CommComm " by George Saunders (2006) " Journey Into the Kingdom " by M. Rickert (2007) " Singing of Mount Abora " by Theodora Goss (2008) " 26 Monkeys, Also the Abyss " by Kij Johnson (2009) " The Pelican Bar " by Karen Joy Fowler (2010) " Fossil-Figures " by Joyce Carol Oates (2011) " The Paper Menagerie " by Ken Liu (2012) " The Telling " by Gregory Norman Bossert (2013) " The Prayer of Ninety Cats " by Caitlín R. Kiernan (2014) " Do You Like to Look at Monsters?

" by Scott Nicolay (2015) " Hungry Daughters of Starving Mothers " by Alyssa Wong (2016) " Das Steingeschöpf " by G. V. Anderson (2017) " The Birding: A Fairy Tale " by Natalia Theodoridou (2018) " Like a River Loves the Sky " by Emma Törzs / " Ten Deals with the Indigo Snake " by Mel Kassel (2019) " Read After Burning " by Maria Dahvana Headley (2020) " Glass Bottle Dancer " by Celeste Rita Baker (2021) "(emet)" by Lauren Ring (2022) "Incident at Bear Creek Lodge" by Tananarive Due (2023) "Silk and Cotton and Linen and Blood" by Nghi Vo (2024) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bzf9d
Cached time: 20250817050922
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.488 seconds
Real time usage: 1.812 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10731/1000000
Revision size: 47725/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 502983/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 158021/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 203704/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.827/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21122156/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1308.172      1 -total
 25.33%  331.302      1 Template:Navboxes
 19.70%  257.701      1 Template:Reflist
 18.72%  244.837      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 12.42%  162.443     17 Template:Cite_web
 10.82%  141.573      1 Template:Conservatism_navbox
  9.21%  120.431     13 Template:Lang
  8.75%  114.477      3 Template:Navbox
  8.11%  106.103      1 Template:Conservatism_US_footer
  8.10%  105.897      1 Template:Conservatism_US Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1165221:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050922 and revision id 1305756004. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Russell_Kirk&oldid=1305756004 " Categories : 1918 births 1994 deaths 20th-century American historians 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American novelists 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century Roman Catholics Alumni of the University of St Andrews American anti-war activists American critics of atheism American expatriates in the United Kingdom American fantasy writers American horror writers American literary critics American male non-fiction writers American male novelists American military personnel of World War II American political philosophers American political writers American satirical novelists American satirists American traditionalist Catholics Catholics from Michigan Converts to Roman Catholicism Critics of neoconservatism Deaths from congestive heart failure in the United States Duke University alumni Ghost story writers Historians from Michigan Historians of the United States Michigan State University alumni Military personnel from Michigan National Review people Novelists from Michigan People from Mecosta County, Michigan People from Plymouth, Michigan Presidential Citizens Medal recipients The Heritage Foundation people Traditionalist Catholic writers World Fantasy Award–winning writers Writers of Gothic fiction Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: postscript CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2024 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from December 2013 Commons category link from Wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 22:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Russell Kirk 23 languages Add topic

