Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Taxonomy and evolution Toggle Taxonomy and evolution subsection 1.1 Subspecies 2 Description 3 Distribution and habitat 4 Ecology and behaviour Toggle Ecology and behaviour subsection 4.1 Reproduction 5 As an introduced species Toggle As an introduced species subsection 5.1 Australia 5.2 New Zealand 5.3 United States 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Sambar deer 62 languages Afrikaans العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Diné bizaad Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kotava Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ଓଡ଼ିଆ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Seediq Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Species of deer Sambar Stag Hind both R. u. unicolor in Kanha National Park , Madhya Pradesh , India Conservation status Vulnerable ( IUCN 3.1 ) [ 1 ] Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Artiodactyla Family: Cervidae Genus: Rusa Species: R. unicolor Binomial name Rusa unicolor ( Kerr , 1792) Range of the sambar Synonyms Cervus unicolor The sambar ( Rusa unicolor ) is a large deer native to the Indian subcontinent , South China and Southeast Asia that is listed as a vulnerable species on the IUCN Red List since 2008. Populations have declined substantially due to severe hunting, local insurgency , and industrial exploitation of habitat.

[ 1 ] The name "sambar" is also sometimes used to refer to the Philippine deer called the "Philippine sambar", and the Javan rusa called the "Sunda sambar".

Taxonomy and evolution [ edit ] Genetic analysis shows that the closest living relative of the sambar is most likely the Javan rusa of Indonesia.

[ 2 ] This is supported by reports that sambar can still interbreed to produce fertile hybrids with this species.

[ 3 ] Fossil sambar are known from the early Pleistocene , although they are very similar in form to early deer species from the Pliocene , with less of a resemblance to more modern cervines. The species probably arose in the tropical reaches of southern Asia, and later spread across its current range.

Epirusa and Eucladoceros have both been proposed as possible ancestors of the living species and its closest relatives.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Subspecies [ edit ] The nominate subspecies of the sambar in India and Sri Lanka are the largest of the genus, with the largest antlers both in size and in body proportions. The South China sambar of Southern China and mainland Southeast Asia is probably second in terms of size, with slightly smaller antlers than the Indian sambar. The Sumatran sambar that inhabits the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra and the Bornean sambar seem to have the smallest antlers in proportion to their body size. The Formosan sambar is the smallest subspecies, with antler-body proportions more similar to the South China sambar.

Currently, seven subspecies of sambar are recognised, [ 3 ] [ 5 ] although many others have been proposed.

Subspecies Common name Geographic range R. u. unicolor Indian or Sri Lankan sambar India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka R. u. brookei Bornean sambar Borneo R. u. cambojensis Mainland Southeast Asian sambar Mainland Southeast Asia R. u. dejeani South China sambar Southern and southwestern China R. u. equina Malayan sambar Sumatra R. u. hainana Hainan sambar China ( Hainan ) R. u. swinhoei Formosan sambar Taiwan ↑ R. u. boninensis [ 6 ] Bonin sambar Extinct ; Japan ( Bonin Islands ) Description [ edit ] The appearance and the size of the sambar vary widely across its range, which has led to considerable taxonomic confusion in the past; over 40 different scientific synonyms have been used for the species. In general, they attain a height of 102 to 160 cm (40 to 63 in) at the shoulder and may weigh as much as 546 kg (1,204 lb), though more typically 100 to 350 kg (220 to 770 lb).

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Head and body length varies from 1.62 to 2.7 m (5.3 to 8.9 ft), with a 22 to 35 cm (8.7 to 13.8 in) tail.

[ 9 ] Individuals belonging to western subspecies tend to be larger than those from the east, and females are smaller than males.

[ 3 ] Among all living cervid species, only the moose and the elk can attain larger sizes.

[ 10 ] The skeleton displayed at the Museum of Veterinary Anatomy FMVZ USP in São Paulo , Brazil The large, rugged antlers are typically rusine , the brow tines being simple and the beams forked at the tip, so they have only three tines . The antlers are typically up to 110 cm (43 in) long in fully adult individuals. As with most deer, only the males have antlers.

[ 3 ] The shaggy coat can be from yellowish brown to dark grey in colour, and while it is usually uniform in colour, some subspecies have chestnut marks on the rump and underparts. Sambar also have a small but dense mane, which tends to be more prominent in males. The tail is relatively long for deer, and is generally black above with a whitish underside.

[ 3 ] Adult males and pregnant or lactating females possess an unusual hairless, blood-red spot located about halfway down the underside of their throats. This sometimes oozes a white liquid, and is apparently glandular in nature.

[ 11 ] Distribution and habitat [ edit ] The sambar is distributed in much of South Asia as far north as the south-facing slopes of the Himalayas in Nepal , Bhutan and India , in mainland Southeast Asia including Burma , Thailand , Indochina , the Malay Peninsula , Indonesia (Sumatra and Borneo), Taiwan, and South China, including Hainan. In the Himalayan foothills, Myanmar, Sri Lanka , and eastern Taiwan, it ranges up to 3,500 m (11,500 ft). However, in tropical rainforests of Sumatra, sambar are generally more abundant in the lowlands.

[ 12 ] It inhabits tropical dry forests , tropical seasonal forests , subtropical mixed forests with stands of conifers and montane grasslands , broadleaved deciduous and broadleaved evergreen trees , to tropical rainforests , and seldom moves far from water sources.

[ 1 ] In 2023, a study showed that sambar deer had returned to Singapore due to several escapes from zoos, after it has been believed to be extirpated from the island country.

[ 13 ] A sambar stag in Horton Plains National Park, Sri Lanka The sambar prefers the dense cover of deciduous shrubs and grasses, [ 11 ] although the exact nature of this varies enormously with the environment because of its wide Asian range. Home range sizes are probably equally variable, but have been recorded as 1,500 ha (3,700 acres) for males and 300 ha (740 acres) for females in India.

[ 3 ] Ecology and behaviour [ edit ] Sambar are nocturnal or crepuscular . The males live alone for much of the year, and the females live in small herds of up to 16 individuals. Indeed, in some areas, the average herd consists of only three or four individuals, typically consisting of an adult female, her most recent young, and perhaps a subordinate, immature female. This is an unusual pattern for deer, which more commonly live in larger groups. They often congregate near water, and are good swimmers.

[ 3 ] Like most deer, sambar are generally quiet, although all adults can scream or make short, high-pitched sounds when alarmed. However, they more commonly communicate by scent marking and foot stamping.

[ citation needed ] Sambar feed on a wide variety of vegetation, including grasses, foliage, browse, fruit, and water plants, depending on the local habitat.

[ 11 ] They also consume a great variety of shrubs and trees.

[ 3 ] Sambar have been seen congregating in large herds in protected areas such as national parks and reserves in India, Sri Lanka, and Thailand. In Taiwan, sambar along with sika deer , have been raised on farms for their antlers, which they drop annually in April to May and are highly prized for use as knife handles and as grips for handguns .

[ 14 ] Sambar stags in Ranthambore National Park , India A sambar hind with a young stag Stags wallow and dig their antlers in urine-soaked soil, and then rub against tree trunks.

[ 11 ] Sambar are capable of remarkable bipedalism for a deer species, and stags stand and mark tree branches above them with their antlers.

[ 15 ] A stag also marks himself by spraying urine on his own face with a highly mobile penis .

[ 11 ] Despite their lack of antlers, female sambar readily defend their young from most predators, which is relatively unusual among deer. When confronted by pack-hunting dholes or feral domestic dogs, a sambar lowers its head with an erect mane and lashes at the dogs. Sambar prefer to attack predators in shallow water. Several sambar may form a defensive formation, touching rumps and vocalising loudly at the dogs.

[ 11 ] When sensing danger, a sambar stamps its feet and makes a ringing call known as "pooking" or "belling".

[ 15 ] They are the favourite prey of tigers and Asiatic lions . In India, the sambar can comprise up to nearly 45% of the biomass consumed by the Bengal tiger .

[ 16 ] Anecdotally, the tiger is said to even mimic the call of the sambar to deceive it while hunting.

[ 17 ] They also can be taken by crocodiles , mostly the sympatric mugger crocodiles and saltwater crocodiles .

Leopards and dholes largely prey on only young or sickly deer, though they can attack healthy adults as well.

[ 1 ] A tiger attacking a sambar in Ranthambore A sambar attacked by dholes, Bandipur National Park Reproduction [ edit ] Though they mate and reproduce year-round, sambar calving peaks seasonally.

Oestrus lasts around 18 days. The male establishes a territory from which he attracts nearby females, but he does not establish a harem. The male stomps the ground, creating a bare patch, and often wallows in the mud, perhaps to accentuate the colour of his hair, which is typically darker than that of females. While they have been heard to make a loud, coarse bellow, rutting stags are generally not vocal.

[ 3 ] Large, dominant stags defend nonexclusive territories surrounded by several smaller males, [ 15 ] with which they have bonded and formed alliances through sparring. When sparring with rival males, sambar lock antlers and push, like other deer, but uniquely, they also sometimes rear up and clash downward [ 11 ] in a manner similar to species of goat-antelope . Females also fight on their hind legs and use their fore legs to hit each other in the head.

[ 3 ] Two samber stags locking antlers A sambar mother and calf Courtship is based more on tending bonds rather than males vocally advertising themselves.

[ 11 ] Females move widely among breeding territories seeking males to court.

[ 3 ] When mounting, males do not clasp females. The front legs of the male hang loosely, and intromission takes the form of a " copulatory jump ".

[ 15 ] [ 11 ] Gestation probably lasts around 8 months, although some studies suggest it may be slightly longer. Normally, only one calf is born at a time, although twins have been reported in up to 2% of births. Initially weighing 5 to 8 kg (11 to 18 lb), the calves are usually not spotted, although some subspecies have light spots which disappear not long after birth.

[ 3 ] The young begin to take solid food at 5 to 14 days, and begin to ruminate after one month.

[ 18 ] Sambar have lived up to 28 years in captivity, although they rarely survive more than 12 years in the wild.

[ 3 ] As an introduced species [ edit ] Sambar have been introduced to various parts of the world, including Australia , New Zealand and the United States .

[ 19 ] Australia [ edit ] In Australia, hunting sambar is a popular sport. Australian hunting fraternities prize large sambar trophies.

[ 20 ] Excessive numbers of sambar affect native plants, threatening some species with extinction.

Sambar were introduced into Victoria at Mount Sugarloaf in the 1860s, in what is now Kinglake National Park , and at Harewood Estate near Tooradin .

[ 21 ] They quickly adapted to the Koo-Wee-Rup Swamp and thereafter spread into the high country, where in 2017, numbers were estimated at between 750,000 and one million animals.

[ 22 ] Later releases were at Ercildoune Estate near Ballarat , Wilsons Promontory, and French Island in Western Port . Another release occurred on the Cobourg Peninsula in the Northern Territory .

[ 23 ] They are now found throughout Australia's northern and eastern coasts, in the states of Victoria, South Australia , Queensland , the Northern Territory, and the Australian Capital Territory .

In Victoria , sambar are listed as a threat to biodiversity under the Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988 because they reduce the number of native plant species.

[ 24 ] The animals feed on some rare and endangered plants. More than 60 plant species have been identified as directly or indirectly threatened by sambar within Victoria.

Adult male sambar can significantly damage plants, removing most branches on some shrubs and sometimes girdling trees by thrashing their antlers on shrubs and sapling trees. They also feed on seedlings, fruit, or seeds of many plants. They leave scrape marks to advertise their territory.

[ 25 ] The spread of sambar has been steady in both New South Wales and Victoria , with animals being seen on many southern Victorian beaches since 1980, and as far east as Western Port and the outer suburbs of Melbourne .

Considerable debate exists about how they should be managed. Conservation groups believe their environmental effect outweighs their social value. Hunting organisations disagree and want to preserve sambar populations for future generations. Sambar are protected wildlife game species in Victoria and New South Wales, and a game licence is required to hunt them. In Victoria, recent provisions have been made for landowners to control problem deer without having to obtain a Game Licence or Authority to Control Wildlife permit.

[ 26 ] This allows a landowner or other authorised persons to remove problem deer within private property at any time and are permitted to hunt under spotlight, which is prohibited on public land. They are declared a pest species in all other Australian states and territories and can be hunted at any time with no bag limits. Environmental and conservation groups want them declared a feral species in all states, due to their exploding populations and the harm to biodiversity and native species.

In 2008–2009, hunters removed 35,000 sambar from public land in Victoria, many from national parks. This is a small fraction of the 40% of individuals in a sambar population that need to be removed to stop population growth.

[ 27 ] New Zealand [ edit ] In New Zealand , sambar roam the coast and gullies in Horowhenua District , Manawatū District , Rangitikei , and Whanganui . Until recently, they were protected, but the Department of Conservation has now removed hunting regulations surrounding them, allowing them now to be hunted year round.

[ 28 ] United States [ edit ] Sambar were introduced onto St. Vincent Island , Florida , in 1908 [ 29 ] and increased to about 50 individuals by the 1950s.

White-tailed deer also live on St. Vincent Island; however, they inhabit the highlands while the sambar mostly live in the lowlands and marshes. To ensure that the sambar population does not disrupt the native white-tails, hunting permits have been issued since 1987 to regulate the population.

[ 30 ] Each year, about 130 permits are offered for the three-day hunt. This maintains a sambar population of 70–100 individuals.

[ 31 ] They do not herd, but occur in groups of four or five animals, possible family groups. Little is known about the sambar's ecology in Florida.

[ 32 ] Between 1930 and 1941, Sambar were brought to the US state of Texas along with other imported big game that are referred to as exotic game .

[ 33 ] 76% of fenced exotics are found on the Edwards Plateau , whereas 59% of free range exotics are found in South Texas .

[ 34 ] See also [ edit ] Barasingha Chital Indian hog deer References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Timmins, R.J.; Kawanishi, K.; Giman, B.; Lynam, A.J.; Chan, B.; Steinmetz, R.; Baral, H. S.; Samba Kumar, N. (2015) [errata version of 2015 assessment].

" Rusa unicolor " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2015 : e.T41790A85628124.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2015-2.RLTS.T41790A22156247.en . Retrieved 19 February 2022 .

^ Emerson, B.C. & Tate M.L. (1993). "Genetic analysis of evolutionary relationships among deer (subfamily Cervinae)".

Journal of Heredity .

84 (4): 266– 273.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jhered.a111338 .

PMID 8340615 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Leslie, D.M. (2011).

" Rusa unicolor (Artiodactyla: Cervidae)" .

Mammalian Species .

43 (1): 1– 30.

doi : 10.1644/871.1 .

^ K. Suraprasit; J.-J. Jaegar; Y. Chaimanee; O. Chavasseau; C. Yamee; P. Tian; S. Panha (2016).

"The Middle Pleistocene vertebrate fauna from Khok Sung (Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand): biochronological and paleobiogeographical implications" .

ZooKeys (613): 1– 157.

Bibcode : 2016ZooK..613....1S .

doi : 10.3897/zookeys.613.8309 .

PMC 5027644 .

PMID 27667928 .

^ Grubb, P.

(2005).

" Rusa unicolor " . In Wilson, D.E.

; Reeder, D.M (eds.).

Mammal Species of the World: A Taxonomic and Geographic Reference (3rd ed.). Johns Hopkins University Press. pp.

670– 671.

ISBN 978-0-8018-8221-0 .

OCLC 62265494 .

^ Pocock, R.I. (1943). "The Skull-characters of some of the Forms of Sambar ( Rusa ) occurring to the East of the Bay of Bengal. — Part III.

Rusa nigricans and Rusa boninensis ".

Annals and Magazine of Natural History .

10 (63): 191– 196.

doi : 10.1080/03745481.1943.9728010 .

^ Burnie D and Wilson DE (Eds.), Animal: The Definitive Visual Guide to the World's Wildlife . DK Adult (2005), ISBN 0789477645 ^ "Comparative Placentation" . Placentation.ucsd.edu . Retrieved 17 August 2012 .

^ Boitani, Luigi (1984) Simon & Schuster's Guide to Mammals . Simon & Schuster/Touchstone Books, ISBN 978-0-671-42805-1 ^ "Deer – Department of Primary Industries" . Dpi.vic.gov.au. 3 January 2012 . Retrieved 17 August 2012 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Geist, V. (1998).

Deer of the world: their evolution, behaviour, and ecology.

Mechanicsburg: Stackpole Books. pp. 73–77.

^ Figel, J. J.; Safriansyah, R.; Baabud, S. F. & Hambal, M. (2024).

"Intact, under-patrolled forests harbor widespread prey but a male-biased tiger population in the Ulu Masen Ecosystem, Sumatra, Indonesia" .

Scientific Reports .

14 : 23612.

doi : 10.1038/s41598-024-75503-0 .

PMC 11502884 .

^ "Sambar deer making a return in Singapore, study shows | The Straits Times" .

www.straitstimes.com . 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 27 February 2023 .

^ "Handle Materials" . The Knife Connection. Archived from the original on 5 March 2012 . Retrieved 11 March 2012 .

^ a b c d Schaller, G.

(1967).

The Deer and the Tiger: A Study of Wildlife in India . Chicago: University Of Chicago Press. pp.

134– 148.

^ Mondal, K; Gupta, S; Bhattacharjee, S; Qureshi, Q; Sankar, K (2 August 2012).

"Prey selection, food habits and dietary overlap between leopard Panthera pardus (Mammalia: Carnivora) and re-introduced tiger Panthera tigris (Mammalia: Carnivora) in a semi-arid forest of Sariska Tiger Reserve, Western India" .

Italian Journal of Zoology .

79 (4): 607– 616.

doi : 10.1080/11250003.2012.687402 .

^ Perry, R. (1965).

The World of the Tiger . p. 260.

ASIN B0007DU2IU ^ Semiadi, G.; Barry, T. N.; Muir, P.D. (1993). "Growth, milk intake, and behaviour of artificially reared sambar deer ( Cervus unicolor ) and red deer ( Cervus elaphus )".

Journal of Agricultural Science .

121 (2): 273– 281.

doi : 10.1017/S0021859600077157 .

S2CID 85944078 .

^ Long, J.L. (2003). Introduced Mammals of the World: Their History, Distribution and Influence. Clayton: CSIRO Publishing.

ISBN 9780851997483 ^ Pearce, Ken (1992).

Walking Them Up . Melbourne: Australian Deer Research Foundation. pp.

xi– xv.

ISBN 978-0959343892 .

^ "Sambar Deer (Rusa unicolor)" . Australian Deer Association. 2017 . Retrieved 19 January 2017 .

^ Cattermole, Tony (31 March 2015).

"Deer hunters work to control sambar deer numbers in Victoria's Alpine National Park" .

ABC News . Goulburn Murray . Retrieved 18 July 2017 .

^ Bentley, Arthur (1978).

An introduction to the deer of Australia, with special reference to Victoria . Melbourne: Ray Manning for the Koetong Trust, Service Fund, Forests Commission, Victoria. pp.

32– 37.

ISBN 978-0724116898 .

^ "Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988 processes list" (PDF) .

Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning . State Government of Victoria. December 2016 . Retrieved 18 January 2017 .

^ "New plan needed to manage impact of Sambar deer" (Press release). OpenDocument Media Release. Melbourne, Australia: Minister for Environment & Climate Change. 28 November 2007.

^ "Control of deer on private property" (PDF) . Melbourne, Australia: Game Management Authority. 2018.

^ Hone, J.; Duncan, R.P.; Forsyth, D.M. (2010).

"Estimates of maximum annual population growth rates (rm) of mammals and their application in wildlife management" .

Journal of Applied Ecology .

47 (3): 507– 514.

Bibcode : 2010JApEc..47..507H .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2664.2010.01812.x .

^ Deer: DOC's work . Department of Conservation (date=20 November 2013) ^ "Sambar Deer – Cervus unicolor " .

Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission .

^ "St Vincent Sambar Deer" .

Florida Fish And Wildlife Conservation Commission . Retrieved 27 February 2023 .

^ Henry Cabbage (May–June 2006).

"Going after 600-pound sambar deer in Florida!" (PDF) .

Florida Wildlife Magazine : 39– 41. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2009.

^ Field Guide to Mammals . 2002.

ISBN 0-679-44631-1 .

^ "Exotic and Fur-bearing Species" . Texas Parks and Wildlife.

^ Olivera, Andy (12 September 2018).

"Hunting Texas Exotics a Year-Round Opportunity" .

Game & Fish . Game & Fish Mag: A Regional Outdoor Guide . Retrieved 29 December 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Cervus unicolor ( category ) Hunting sambar in New Zealand Sambar deer in New Zealand and their distribution v t e Extant Artiodactyla species Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Infraclass: Eutheria Superorder: Laurasiatheria Suborder Ruminantia Antilocapridae Antilocapra Pronghorn ( A. americana ) Giraffidae Okapia Okapi ( O. johnstoni ) Giraffa Northern giraffe ( G. camelopardalis ) Southern giraffe ( G. giraffa ) Reticulated giraffe ( G. reticulata ) Masai giraffe ( G. tippelskirchi ) Moschidae Moschus Anhui musk deer ( M. anhuiensis ) Dwarf musk deer ( M. berezovskii ) Alpine musk deer ( M. chrysogaster ) Kashmir musk deer ( M. cupreus ) Black musk deer ( M. fuscus ) Himalayan musk deer ( M. leucogaster ) Siberian musk deer ( M. moschiferus ) Tragulidae Hyemoschus Water chevrotain ( H. aquaticus ) Moschiola Indian spotted chevrotain ( M. indica ) Yellow-striped chevrotain ( M. kathygre ) Sri Lankan spotted chevrotain ( M. meminna ) Tragulus Java mouse-deer ( T. javanicus ) Lesser mouse-deer ( T. kanchil ) Greater mouse-deer ( T. napu ) Philippine mouse-deer ( T. nigricans ) Vietnam mouse-deer ( T. versicolor ) Williamson's mouse-deer ( T. williamsoni ) Cervidae Large family listed below Bovidae Large family listed below Family Cervidae Cervinae Muntiacus Bornean yellow muntjac ( M. atherodes ) Hairy-fronted muntjac ( M. crinifrons ) Fea's muntjac ( M. feae ) Gongshan muntjac ( M. gongshanensis ) Sumatran muntjac ( M. montanus ) Southern red muntjac ( M. muntjak ) Pu Hoat muntjac ( M. puhoatensis ) Leaf muntjac ( M. putaoensis ) Reeves's muntjac ( M. reevesi ) Roosevelt's muntjac ( M. rooseveltorum ) Truong Son muntjac ( M. truongsonensis ) Northern red muntjac ( M. vaginalis ) Giant muntjac ( M. vuquangensis ) Elaphodus Tufted deer ( E. cephalophus ) Dama European fallow deer ( D. dama ) Persian fallow deer ( D. mesopotamica ) Axis Chital ( A. axis ) Calamian deer ( A. calamianensis ) Bawean deer ( A. kuhlii ) Hog deer ( A. porcinus ) Rucervus Barasingha ( R. duvaucelii ) Eld's deer ( R. eldii ) Elaphurus Père David's deer ( E. davidianus ) Rusa Visayan spotted deer ( R. alfredi ) Philippine sambar ( R. mariannus ) Rusa deer ( R. timorensis ) Sambar ( R. unicolor ) Cervus Thorold's deer ( C. albirostris ) Red deer ( C. elaphus ) Elk ( C. canadensis ) Central Asian red deer ( C. hanglu ) Sika deer ( C. nippon ) Capreolinae Alces Moose ( A. alces ) Hydropotes Water deer ( H. inermis ) Capreolus European roe deer ( C. capreolus ) Siberian roe deer ( C. pygargus ) Rangifer Reindeer ( R. tarandus ) Hippocamelus Taruca ( H. antisensis ) South Andean deer ( H. bisulcus ) Mazama Red brocket ( M. americana ) Small red brocket ( M. bororo ) Merida brocket ( M. bricenii ) Dwarf brocket ( M. chunyi ) Pygmy brocket ( M. nana ) Amazonian brown brocket ( M. nemorivaga ) Little red brocket ( M. rufina ) Central American red brocket ( M. temama ) Ozotoceros Pampas deer ( O. bezoarticus ) Blastocerus Marsh deer ( B. dichotomus ) Pudu Northern pudu ( P. mephistophiles ) ?

Southern pudu ( P. pudu ) Pudella Peruvian Yungas pudu ( P. carlae ) Northern pudu ( P. mephistophiles ) Odocoileus Mule deer ( O. hemionus ) Yucatan brown brocket ( O. pandora ) White-tailed deer ( O. virginianus ) Subulo Gray brocket ( S. gouazoubira ) Family Bovidae Hippotraginae Hippotragus Roan antelope ( H. equinus ) Sable antelope ( H. niger ) Oryx East African oryx ( O. beisa ) Scimitar oryx ( O. dammah ) Gemsbok ( O. gazella ) Arabian oryx ( O. leucoryx ) Addax Addax ( A. nasomaculatus ) Reduncinae Kobus Waterbuck ( K. ellipsiprymnus ) Kob ( K. kob ) Lechwe ( K. leche ) Nile lechwe ( K. megaceros ) Puku ( K. vardonii ) Redunca Southern reedbuck ( R. arundinum ) Mountain reedbuck ( R. fulvorufula ) Bohor reedbuck ( R. redunca ) Aepycerotinae Aepyceros Impala ( A. melampus ) Peleinae Pelea Grey rhebok ( P. capreolus ) Alcelaphinae Beatragus Hirola ( B. hunteri ) Damaliscus Common tsessebe ( D. lunatus ) Bontebok ( D. pygargus ) Alcelaphus Hartebeest ( A. buselaphus ) Connochaetes Black wildebeest ( C. gnou ) Blue wildebeest ( C. taurinus ) Pantholopinae Pantholops Tibetan antelope ( P. hodgsonii ) Caprinae Large subfamily listed below Bovinae Large subfamily listed below Antilopinae Large subfamily listed below Family Bovidae (subfamily Caprinae ) Ammotragus Barbary sheep ( A. lervia ) Arabitragus Arabian tahr ( A. jayakari ) Budorcas Takin ( B. taxicolor ) Capra Wild goat ( C. aegagrus ) West Caucasian tur ( C. caucasia ) East Caucasian tur ( C. cylindricornis ) Markhor ( C. falconeri ) Domestic goat ( C. hircus ) Alpine ibex ( C. ibex ) Nubian ibex ( C. nubiana ) Iberian ibex ( C. pyrenaica ) Siberian ibex ( C. sibirica ) Walia ibex ( C. walie ) Capricornis Japanese serow ( C. crispus ) Red serow ( C. rubidus ) Mainland serow ( C. sumatraensis ) Taiwan serow ( C. swinhoei ) Hemitragus Himalayan tahr ( H. jemlahicus ) Naemorhedus Red goral ( N. baileyi ) Long-tailed goral ( N. caudatus ) Himalayan goral ( N. goral ) Chinese goral ( N. griseus ) Oreamnos Mountain goat ( O. americanus ) Ovibos Muskox ( O. moschatus ) Nilgiritragus Nilgiri tahr ( N. hylocrius ) Ovis Argali ( O. ammon ) Domestic sheep ( O. aries ) Bighorn sheep ( O. canadensis ) Dall sheep ( O. dalli ) Mouflon ( O. gmelini ) Snow sheep ( O. nivicola ) Urial ( O. vignei ) Pseudois Bharal ( P. nayaur ) Rupicapra Pyrenean chamois ( R. pyrenaica ) Chamois ( R. rupicapra ) Family Bovidae (subfamily Bovinae ) Boselaphini Tetracerus Four-horned antelope ( T. quadricornis ) Boselaphus Nilgai ( B. tragocamelus ) Bovini Bubalus Wild water buffalo ( B. arnee ) Domestic water buffalo ( B. bubalis ) Lowland anoa ( B. depressicornis ) Tamaraw ( B. mindorensis ) Mountain anoa ( B. quarlesi ) Bos American bison ( B. bison ) European bison ( B. bonasus ) Bali cattle ( B. domesticus ) Gayal ( B. frontalis ) Gaur ( B. gaurus ) Domestic yak ( B. grunniens ) Zebu ( B. indicus ) Banteng ( B. javanicus ) Wild yak ( B. mutus ) Cattle ( B. taurus ) Pseudoryx Saola ( P. nghetinhensis ) Syncerus African buffalo ( S. caffer ) Tragelaphini Tragelaphus (including kudus ) Nyala ( T. angasii ) Mountain nyala ( T. buxtoni ) Bongo ( T. eurycerus ) Lesser kudu ( T. imberbis ) Harnessed bushbuck ( T. scriptus ) Sitatunga ( T. spekeii ) Greater kudu ( T. strepsiceros ) Cape bushbuck ( T. sylvaticus ) Taurotragus Giant eland ( T. derbianus ) Common eland ( T. oryx ) Family Bovidae (subfamily Antilopinae ) Antilopini Ammodorcas Dibatag ( A. clarkei ) Antidorcas Springbok ( A. marsupialis ) Antilope Blackbuck ( A. cervicapra ) Eudorcas Mongalla gazelle ( E. albonotata ) Red-fronted gazelle ( E. rufifrons ) Thomson's gazelle ( E. thomsonii ) Heuglin's gazelle ( E. tilonura ) Gazella Arabian gazelle ( G. arabica ) Chinkara ( G. bennettii ) Cuvier's gazelle ( G. cuvieri ) Dorcas gazelle ( G. dorcas ) Mountain gazelle ( G. gazella ) Rhim gazelle ( G. leptoceros ) Speke's gazelle ( G. spekei ) Goitered gazelle ( G. subgutturosa ) Litocranius Gerenuk ( L. walleri ) Nanger Dama gazelle ( N. dama ) Grant's gazelle ( N. granti ) Bright's gazelle ( N. notatus ) Peter's gazelle ( N. petersii ) Soemmerring's gazelle ( N. soemmerringii ) Procapra Mongolian gazelle ( P. gutturosa ) Goa ( P. picticaudata ) Przewalski's gazelle ( P. przewalskii ) Saigini Saiga Saiga antelope ( S. tatarica ) Neotragini Dorcatragus Beira ( D. megalotis ) Madoqua Günther's dik-dik ( M. guentheri ) Kirk's dik-dik ( M. kirkii ) Silver dik-dik ( M. piacentinii ) Salt's dik-dik ( M. saltiana ) Neotragus Royal antelope ( N. pygmaeus ) Nesotragus Bates' pygmy antelope ( N. batesi ) Suni ( N. moschatus ) Oreotragus Klipspringer ( O. oreotragus ) Ourebia Oribi ( O. ourebi ) Raphicerus Steenbok ( R. campestris ) Cape grysbok ( R. melanotis ) Sharpe's grysbok ( R. sharpei ) Cephalophini Cephalophus Aders's duiker ( C. adersi ) Brooke's duiker ( C. brookei ) Peters' duiker ( C. callipygus ) White-legged duiker ( C. crusalbum ) Bay duiker ( C. dorsalis ) Harvey's duiker ( C. harveyi ) Jentink's duiker ( C. jentinki ) White-bellied duiker ( C. leucogaster ) Red forest duiker ( C. natalensis ) Black duiker ( C. niger ) Black-fronted duiker ( C. nigrifrons ) Ogilby's duiker ( C. ogilbyi ) Ruwenzori duiker ( C. rubidis ) Red-flanked duiker ( C. rufilatus ) Yellow-backed duiker ( C. silvicultor ) Abbott's duiker ( C. spadix ) Weyns's duiker ( C. weynsi ) Zebra duiker ( C. zebra ) Philantomba Blue duiker ( P. monticola ) Maxwell's duiker ( P. maxwellii ) Walter's duiker ( P. walteri ) Sylvicapra Common duiker ( S. grimmia ) Suborder Suina Suidae Babyrousa Buru babirusa ( B. babyrussa ) North Sulawesi babirusa ( B. celebensis ) Togian babirusa ( B. togeanensis ) Hylochoerus Giant forest hog ( H. meinertzhageni ) Phacochoerus Desert warthog ( P. aethiopicus ) Common warthog ( P. africanus ) Porcula Pygmy hog ( P. salvania ) Potamochoerus Bushpig ( P. larvatus ) Red river hog ( P. porcus ) Sus Palawan bearded pig ( S. ahoenobarbus ) Bornean bearded pig ( S. barbatus ) Visayan warty pig ( S. cebifrons ) Celebes warty pig ( S. celebensis ) Domestic pig ( S. domesticus ) Flores warty pig ( S. heureni ) Oliver's warty pig ( S. oliveri ) Philippine warty pig ( S. philippensis ) Wild boar ( S. scrofa ) Timor warty pig ( S. timoriensis ) Javan warty pig ( S. verrucosus ) Tayassuidae Tayassu White-lipped peccary ( T. pecari ) Catagonus Chacoan peccary ( C. wagneri ) Dicotyles Collared peccary ( D. tajacu ) Suborder Tylopoda Camelidae Lama Llama ( L. glama ) Guanaco ( L. guanicoe ) Alpaca ( L. pacos ) Vicuña ( L. vicugna ) Camelus Domestic Bactrian camel ( C. bactrianus ) Dromedary/Arabian camel ( C. dromedarius ) Wild Bactrian camel ( C. ferus ) Suborder Whippomorpha Hippopotamidae Hippopotamus Hippopotamus ( H. amphibius ) Choeropsis Pygmy hippopotamus ( C. liberiensis ) Cetacea see Cetacea Taxon identifiers Rusa unicolor Wikidata : Q229337 Wikispecies : Rusa unicolor ADW : Rusa_unicolor AFD : Cervus_unicolor BOLD : 503164 CoL : 4TQSL EoL : 290025 GBIF : 7261386 GISD : 1889 iNaturalist : 75053 IRMNG : 11105498 ITIS : 898215 IUCN : 41790 MDD : 1006325 MSW : 14200453 NatureServe : 2.101128 NCBI : 662561 NZOR: c6518c55-e2f8-4da5-b7db-861326bb6d13 Observation.org : 201226 Open Tree of Life : 844145 Paleobiology Database : 54358 Xeno-canto : Rusa-unicolor Authority control databases : National Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sambar_deer&oldid=1305837651 " Categories : IUCN Red List vulnerable species Rusa (genus) Introduced mammals of Australia Mammals of South Asia Mammals of Southeast Asia Fauna of South China Mammals described in 1792 Taxa named by Robert Kerr (writer) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2017 Articles with 'species' microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Taxonbars with 20–24 taxon IDs This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 10:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sambar deer 62 languages Add topic

