Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Judaism and Samaritanism 2 Christianity Toggle Christianity subsection 2.1 Epistles 2.2 Gospels and Acts 2.3 Nicene Creed and early Christianity 2.4 Modern era 2.5 Influence on civil law and custom 2.6 Denominational views 2.6.1 Catholicism 2.6.2 Lutheranism 2.6.3 Anglicanism 2.6.4 Methodism 2.6.5 Baptists 2.6.6 Plymouth Brethren 2.6.7 Restorationists 3 Islam 4 Zoroastrianism 5 Modern commentaries 6 See also 7 Footnotes Toggle Footnotes subsection 7.1 Citations 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Universal resurrection 9 languages বাংলা Čeština Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Italiano Malagasy Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belief that most or all the dead who have ever lived will be resurrected "Resurrection of the dead" redirects here. For other uses, see Resurrection from the dead (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Eschatology Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Christian Biblical texts Book of Revelation Book of Daniel Olivet Discourse Sheep and Goats Major figures Jesus Two witnesses Four Horsemen Antichrist Different views Preterism Idealism Historicism Futurism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Other events Events of Revelation ( Apocalypse ) Rapture Armageddon Seven Seals Second Coming Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Pralaya Shiva Islamic Figures Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Isa Israfil Mahdi Dajjal Muhammad Al-Qa'im Sufyani Yajuj and Majuj Events Swallowing in Bayda Coming of the Mahdi Return of Isa Resurrection Jewish Biblical texts Book of Isaiah Book of Ezekiel Book of Zechariah Book of Daniel Other sources Rabbinic literature ( Mishnah , Talmud , Midrash ) Medieval Jewish scholars Kabbalah Figures Elijah the Prophet , Messiah ( Mashiach Ben David , Mashiach Ben Yosef ), Gog and Magog , Armilus Events and terms Atchalta De'Geulah , Kibbutz Galuyot , Third Temple , War of Gog and Magog , Resurrection of the dead , Olam Haba Norse Figures and items Bound monster Gjallarhorn Líf and Lífþrasir Naglfar Events Fimbulwinter Ragnarök Vígríðr Taoist Li Hong Divine Incantations Scripture Zoroastrian Frashokereti Saoshyant Inter-religious 2012 phenomenon Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Gog and Magog Last Judgment Messianism ( Messiah / Age ) Millenarianism Universal resurrection v t e General resurrection or universal resurrection is the belief in a resurrection of the dead , or resurrection from the dead ( Koine : ἀνάστασις [τῶν] νεκρῶν , anastasis [ton] nekron ; literally: "standing up again of the dead" [ 1 ] ) by which most or all people who have died would be resurrected (brought back to life). Various forms of this concept can be found in Christian , Islamic , Jewish , Samaritan and Zoroastrian eschatology .

Judaism and Samaritanism [ edit ] Main articles: Heaven in Judaism , Jewish eschatology , Sheol , and Samaritanism This section has an unclear citation style .

The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .

( March 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Vision of the Valley of Dry Bones , fresco from the Dura-Europos synagogue Ezekiel's Vision of the Valley of Dry Bones , engraving by Gustave Doré (1866) There are three explicit examples in the Hebrew Bible of people being resurrected from the dead: The prophet Elijah prays and God raises a young boy from death (1 Kings 17:17–24).

Elisha raises the son of the Shunammite woman (2 Kings 4:32–37); this was the very same child whose birth he previously foretold (2 Kings 4:8–16).

A dead man's body that was thrown into the dead Elisha's tomb is resurrected when the body touches Elisha's bones (2 Kings 13:21).

While there was no belief in personal afterlife with reward or punishment in Judaism before 200 BCE, [ 2 ] in later Judaism and Samaritanism it is believed that the God of Israel will one day give teḥiyyat ha-metim ("life to the dead") to the righteous during the Messianic Age , and they will live forever in the world to come ( Olam Ha-Ba ).

[ 3 ] Jews today base this belief on the Book of Isaiah ( Yeshayahu ), Book of Ezekiel ( Yeḥez'qel ), and Book of Daniel ( Dani'el ). Samaritans base it solely on a verse in the Song of Moses in the Samaritan Pentateuch , since they accept only the Torah and reject the rest of the Hebrew Bible .

During the Second Temple period , Judaism developed a diversity of beliefs concerning the resurrection. The concept of resurrection of the physical body is found in 2 Maccabees , according to which it will happen through recreation of the flesh.

[ 4 ] Resurrection of the dead also appears in detail in the extra-canonical book of Enoch , [ 5 ] in the Apocalypse of Baruch , [ 6 ] and 2 Esdras . According to the British scholar in ancient Judaism Philip R. Davies , there is "little or no clear reference ... either to immortality or to resurrection from the dead" in the Dead Sea Scrolls texts.

[ 7 ] Both Josephus and the New Testament record that the Sadducees did not believe in an afterlife , [ 8 ] but the sources vary on the beliefs of the Pharisees . The New Testament claims that the Pharisees believed in the resurrection, but does not specify whether this included the flesh or not.

[ 9 ] According to Josephus , who himself was a Pharisee, the Pharisees held that only the soul was immortal and the souls of good people will be reincarnated and "pass into other bodies", while "the souls of the wicked will suffer eternal punishment".

[ 10 ] Paul the Apostle , who also was a Pharisee, [ 11 ] said that at the resurrection what is "sown as a natural body is raised a spiritual body".

[ 12 ] Jubilees refers only to the resurrection of the soul, or to a more general idea of an immortal soul.

[ 13 ] The Second Temple Judaism tradition at Qumran held that there would be a resurrection of just and unjust, but of the very good and very bad, [ 14 ] and of Jews only.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ full citation needed ] The extent of the resurrection in 2 Baruch and 4 Ezra is debated by scholars.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] The resurrection of the dead is a core belief in the Mishnah which was assembled in the early centuries of the Christian era.

[ 20 ] The belief in resurrection is expressed on all occasions in the Jewish liturgy ; e.g., in the morning prayer Elohai Neshamah , in the Shemoneh 'Esreh and in the funeral services .

[ 21 ] Jewish halakhic authority Maimonides set down his Thirteen Articles of Faith which have ever since been printed in all Rabbinic Siddur (prayer books). Resurrection is the thirteenth principle: "I firmly believe that there will take place a revival of the dead at a time which will please the Creator, blessed be His name." [ 22 ] Modern Orthodox Judaism holds belief in the resurrection of the dead to be one of the cardinal principles of Rabbinic Judaism .

Harry Sysling, in his 1996 study of Teḥiyyat Ha-Metim in the Palestinian Targumim , identifies a consistent usage of the term " second death " in texts from the Second Temple period and early rabbinical writings , but not in the Hebrew Bible.

[ 23 ] "Second death" is identified with judgment, followed by resurrection from Gehinnom (" Gehenna ") at the Last Day .

[ 24 ] Christianity [ edit ] See also: Christian eschatology , Intermediate state (Christianity) , Christian conditionalism , and Last Judgment Part of a series on Salvation in Christianity General concepts Christian universalism Divine judgment Eschatology Immortality Last Judgment Particular judgment Resurrection ( universal ) Transcendence Universal reconciliation Justification Monergism Synergism Unlimited atonement Particular concepts Conditionalism Entering heaven alive Intermediate state One true faith Punishment Hell ( Christian views , Problem of Hell ) Purgatory Soul death Reward Heaven in Christianity World to come v t e Epistles [ edit ] In the First Epistle to the Corinthians chapter 15, ἀνάστασις νεκρῶν is used for the resurrection of the dead.

[ citation needed ] In verses 54–55, Paul the Apostle is conveyed as quoting from the Book of Hosea 13:14 where he speaks of the abolition of death.
In the Pauline epistles of the New Testament , Paul the Apostle wrote that those who will be resurrected to eternal life will be resurrected with spiritual bodies , which are imperishable; the "flesh and blood" of natural, perishable bodies cannot inherit the kingdom of God, and, likewise, those that are corruptible will not receive incorruption (1 Corinthians 15:35–54). Even though Paul does not explicitly establish that immortality excludes physical bodies, some scholars understand that according to Paul, flesh is simply to play no part, as people are made immortal .

[ 25 ] Other scholars understand that fleshly bodies do take part in the resurrection, while being transformed and glorified (becoming immortal and incorruptible, but without losing their physicality).

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Gospels and Acts [ edit ] The Gospel of Matthew has Jesus famously teach/preach for the first time in 4:17, "Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." Matthew 6:19–21. It introduces the expression ἀναστάσεως τῶν νεκρῶν ( lit.

' standing up of the dead ' ), which is used in a monologue by Jesus who speaks to the crowds about "the resurrection" called simply ῇ ἀναστάσει (Matthew 22:29–33). This type of resurrection refers to the raising up of the dead, all mankind, at the end of this present age, [ 28 ] the general or universal resurrection.

[ 29 ] In the canonical gospels , the resurrection of Jesus is described as a resurrection of the flesh: from the empty tomb in Mark; the women embracing the feet of the resurrected Jesus in Matthew; the insistence of the resurrected Jesus in Luke that he is of "flesh and bones" and not just a spirit or pneuma ; to the resurrected Jesus encouraging the disciples to touch his wounds in John. Ending his guidance in Luke 14 :14 that hosts should invite "the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind" when they hold a banquet, Jesus refers to the "resurrection of the just".

[ 30 ] Irish Archbishop John McEvilly suggests that he "speaks as if the resurrection were for the just alone; because they alone shall rise to glory, and shall receive the reward of good works. The wicked shall rise, but only to receive condemnation." [ 31 ] In the Acts of the Apostles the expression ἀναστάσεως νεκρῶν was used by the Apostles and Paul to defend the doctrine of the resurrection. Paul brought up the resurrection in his trial before Ananias ben Nedebaios . The expression was variously used in reference to a general resurrection (Acts 24:21) [ 29 ] at the end of this present age (Acts 23:6, 24:15).

[ 28 ] Acts 24:15 in the King James Version reads: "there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust".

Nicene Creed and early Christianity [ edit ] Resurrection of the Flesh (c. 1500) by Luca Signorelli – based on 1 Corinthians 15: 52: "the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed." Chapel of San Brizio, Duomo, Orvieto.

Most Christian denominations profess the Nicene Creed , which affirms the resurrection of the dead; most English versions of the Nicene Creed in current use include the phrase: "We look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come ." [ 32 ] The Christian writers Irenaeus and Justin Martyr , in the 2nd century , wrote against the idea that only the soul survived. (The word "soul" is unknown in the Aramaic; it entered Christian theology through the Greek.) [ 33 ] [ full citation needed ] Justin Martyr insists that a man is both soul and body and that Christ has promised to raise both, just as his own body was raised.

[ 34 ] The first-century treatise Didache comments: 'Not the resurrection of everyone, but, as it says, "The Lord will come and all his holy ones with him" (16.7).

[ 35 ] The Christian doctrine of resurrection is based on Christ's resurrection.  There was no ancient Greek belief in a general resurrection of the dead. Indeed, the Greeks held that once a body had been destroyed, there was no possibility of returning to life as not even the gods could recreate the flesh.

[ citation needed ] [ 36 ] Several early Church Fathers, like Pseudo-Justin , Justin Martyr, Tatian , Irenaeus, and Athenagoras of Athens argue about the Christian resurrection beliefs in ways that answer to this traditional Greek scepticism to post-mortal physical continuity. The human body could not be annihilated, only dissolved – it could not even be integrated in the bodies of those who devoured it. Thus God only had to reassemble the minute parts of the dissolved bodies in the resurrection.

[ citation needed ] Traditional Christian Churches , i.e. ones that adhere to the creeds , continue to uphold the belief that there will be a general and universal resurrection of the dead at "the end of time ", as described by Paul when he said: "He hath appointed a day, in which he will judge the world" (Acts 17:31 KJV) and "There shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust" (Acts 24:15 KJV).

The resurrection of the flesh is mentioned in the Aquileian Creed (before the 4th century).

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] As the Aquileian Creed affirms, this faith was shared by the Christian Churches of Rome , Alexandria of Egypt and Jerusalem .

Modern era [ edit ] Detail from a North Mississippi Christian cemetery headstone with the inscription: "May the resurrection find thee on the bosom of thy God." Early Christian church fathers defended the resurrection of the dead against the pagan belief that the immortal soul went to the underworld immediately after death, and afterwards it would be reincarnated into another body ( metempsychosis ). It is a Christian belief that the souls of the righteous go to Heaven .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ full citation needed ] At the close of the medieval period, the modern era brought a shift in Christian thinking from an emphasis on the resurrection of the body back to the immortality of the soul.

[ 41 ] This shift was a result of a change in the zeitgeist , as a reaction to the Renaissance and later to the Enlightenment .  André Dartigues has observed that especially "from the 17th to the 19th century, the language of popular piety no longer evoked the resurrection of the soul but everlasting life . Although theological textbooks still mentioned resurrection, they dealt with it as a speculative question more than as an existential problem." [ 41 ] This shift was supported not by any scripture, but largely by the popular religion of the Enlightenment, deism . Deism allowed for a supreme being , such as the philosophical first cause , but denied any significant personal or relational interaction with this figure. Deism, which was largely led by rationality and reason, could allow a belief in the immortality of the soul , but not necessarily in the resurrection of the dead. American deist Ethan Allen demonstrates this thinking in his work, Reason, the Only Oracle of Man (1784) where he argues in the preface that nearly every philosophical problem is beyond humanity's understanding, including the miracles of Christianity, although he does allow for the immortality of an immaterial soul.

[ 42 ] Influence on civil law and custom [ edit ] In Christian theology, it was once widely believed that to rise on Judgment Day the body had to be whole and preferably buried with the feet to the east so that the person would rise facing God.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] An Act of Parliament from the reign of King Henry VIII stipulated that only the corpses of executed murderers could be used for dissection.

[ 46 ] [ user-generated source?

] Restricting the supply to the cadavers of murderers was seen as an extra punishment for the crime. If one believes dismemberment stopped the possibility of resurrection of an intact body on judgment day, then a posthumous execution is an effective way of punishing a criminal.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] Attitudes towards this issue changed very slowly in the United Kingdom and were not manifested in law until the passing of the Anatomy Act 1832 . Cremation was accepted more slowly; the first UK cremation did not take place till October 1882, on private land, and cremation was not declared lawful until 1884, when Dr.

William Price , a Druid high priest, was tried and acquitted at South Glamorgan Assizes for the attempted cremation of the body of his baby son.

[ 51 ] Denominational views [ edit ] Most Christians believe in the resurrection of the dead, though some progressive and liberal Christians regard resurrection as a symbolic, immaterial, or non-universal event, [ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] rather than as the literal reunion of the body and soul of every good and evil person.

[ 55 ] [ self-published source?

] [ 56 ] [ title missing ] [ web 1 ] [ need quotation to verify ] The near-unanimous consensus among Christians is based on the Bible.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ note 1 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] 1 John 3:2 and Philippians 3:21, discussing the Second Coming of Christ, state: [ 61 ] [ 62 ] Beloved, we are God’s children now; what we shall be has not yet been revealed. We do know that when it is revealed we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

— 1 John 3:2 He will change our lowly body to conform with his glorified body by the power that enables him also to bring all things into subjection to himself.

— Philippians 3:21 Some progressive and liberal Christians believe that only righteous people will be resurrected, [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ full citation needed ] or that people will be reincarnated instead of resurrected, [ 65 ] or that the body will not be physical and immortal like Jesus' own glorified body, [ 25 ] or that there is no afterlife whatsoever.

[ 66 ] Catholicism [ edit ] In Catholicism , Augustine of Hippo believed in a universal resurrection of bodies for all immortal souls .

[ 67 ] According to the Catholic Encyclopedia : "No doctrine of the Christian Faith", says St. Augustine, "is so vehemently and so obstinately opposed as the doctrine of the resurrection of the flesh." This opposition had begun long before the days of St. Augustine.

[ 68 ] According to the Summa Theologica , spiritual beings that have been restored to glorified bodies will have four qualities. which are the result of deification and the beatific vision : Impassibility (incorruptible / painless) – freedom from evil, i.e., temptation, sin, suffering, error, inconvenience, boredom, Satan, and death Subtility (permeability) – freedom from restraint by the laws of science, which includes shapeshifting , teleportation , time travel , control over nature, and superhuman senses and prowess Agility – one's body will not act faster than one's mind or give in to emotion and impulse, for the body will be as obedient to the soul as the soul is to God Clarity – resplendent beauty and the five crowns [ 69 ] According to the Catholic Encyclopedia (1911) article on "General resurrection" [ 70 ] The Fourth Lateran Council (1215) teaches that all men, whether elect or reprobate , "will rise again with their own bodies which they now bear about with them" (chapter " Firmiter "). In the language of the creeds and professions of faith this return to life is called resurrection of the body ( resurrectio carnis , resurrectio mortuorum , anastasis ton nekron ) for a double reason: first, since the soul cannot die , it cannot be said to return to life; second the heretical contention of Hymeneus and Philitus that the Scriptures denote by resurrection not the return to life of the body, but the rising of the soul from the death of sin to the life of grace , must be excluded.

The Catechism of the Catholic Church says: 997 What is "rising"? In death, the separation of the soul from the body, the human body decays and the soul goes to meet God, while awaiting its reunion with its glorified body. God, in his almighty power, will definitively grant incorruptible life to our bodies by reuniting them with our souls, through the power of Jesus' Resurrection.

998 Who will rise? All the dead will rise, "those who have done good, to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil, to the resurrection of judgment." 999 How? Christ is raised with his own body: "See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself"; but he did not return to an earthly life. So, in him, "all of them will rise again with their own bodies which they now bear," but Christ "will change our lowly body to be like his glorious body," into a "spiritual body": But someone will ask, "How are the dead raised? With what kind of body do they come?" You foolish man! What you sow does not come to life unless it dies. and what you sow is not the body which is to be, but a bare kernel ....What is sown is perishable, what is raised is imperishable.... the dead will be raised imperishable.... For this perishable nature must put on the imperishable, and this mortal nature must put on immortality. (1 Cor 15:35-37. 42. 53).

1001 When? Definitively "at the last day," "at the end of the world." Indeed, the resurrection of the dead is closely associated with Christ's Parousia: For the Lord himself will descend from heaven, with a cry of command, with the archangel's call, and with the sound of the trumpet of God. and the dead in Christ will rise first. (1 Thess 4:16) [ 71 ] 1038 The resurrection of all the dead, "of both the just and the unjust" (Acts 24:15), will precede the Last Judgment. This will be "the hour when all who are in the tombs will hear [the Son of man's] voice and come forth, those who have done good, to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil, to the resurrection of judgment" (Jn 5:28-29).

[ 72 ] Concerning the glorified body, the resurrection of the flesh is not in the mere reanimation of a body, but takes place through a transformation of matter and corporeality, of its laws and forms, in such a way that the body, though earthly, is made fit for eternal life in heaven.

[ 73 ] Pope John Paul II , in his work Theology of the Body , taught that the resurrected saint will be deified beyond any understanding of deification, since the saint will experience the beatific vision not just by contemplation but with the whole self – all of one's senses, abilities, virtues, etc. – when one's whole self will rise as perfect as Jesus' risen humanity. This type of deification, John Paul II taught, cannot be obtained, experienced, or foretasted before the general resurrection because it will be given by Jesus at his Second Coming.

[ 74 ] In her dairy, Saint Faustina taught that resurrected saints' happiness will forever grow in quantity and quality, because the saints will forever contemplate God more and more.

[ 75 ] [ self-published source?

] Lutheranism [ edit ] In Lutheranism , Martin Luther personally believed and taught the resurrection of the dead, perhaps in combination with soul sleep , though other scholars hold that his view was more nuanced or even that he held to the immortality of the soul.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] The mainstream teaching of Lutheranism and what Lutherans traditionally believe is in resurrection of the body in combination with the immortal soul .

[ 78 ] According to the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod (LCMS), on the last day all the dead will be resurrected. Their souls will then be reunited with the same bodies they had before dying. The bodies will then be changed, those of the wicked to a state of everlasting shame and torment, those of the righteous to an everlasting state of celestial glory.

[ 79 ] Anglicanism [ edit ] In Anglicanism , scholars such as the former Bishop of Durham N. T. Wright [ 80 ] have defended the primacy of the resurrection in Christian faith. Interviewed by Time in 2008, Wright spoke of "the idea of bodily resurrection that people deny when they talk about their 'souls going to Heaven ' ", adding: "I've often heard people say, 'I'm going to heaven soon, and I won't need this stupid body there, thank goodness.' That's a very damaging distortion, all the more so for being unintentional." Instead, Wright explains: "In the Bible we are told that you die, and enter an intermediate state ." This is 'conscious', but 'compared to being bodily alive, it will be like being asleep'. This will be followed by resurrection into new bodies, he says. 'Our culture is very interested in life after death, but the New Testament is much more interested in what I've called the life after life after death.

' " Among the original Forty-Two Articles (1553) of the Church of England , Article 39 ("The resurrection of the dead is not yeat brought to passe") reads (in modernised English orthography): "The resurrection of the dead is not as yet brought to pass, as though it only belonged to the soul, which by the grace of Christ is raised from the death of sin, but it is to be looked for at the last day; for then (as Scripture doth most manifestly testify) to all that be dead their own bodies, flesh and bone shall be restored, that the whole man may (according to his works) have either reward or punishment, as he hath lived virtuously, or wickedly." [ 81 ] [ self-published source?

] Methodism [ edit ] In Methodism , M. Douglas Meeks, professor of theology and Wesleyan studies at Vanderbilt Divinity School , states that "it is very important for Christians to hold to the resurrection of the body." [ 82 ] John Wesley , the founder of the Methodist Church, in his sermon On the Resurrection of the Dead , defended the doctrine, stating "There are many places of Scripture that plainly declare it. St. Paul, in the 53d verse of this chapter, tells us that 'this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.' [1 Corinthians 15:53]." [ 83 ] In addition, notable Methodist hymns, such as those by Charles Wesley , link "our resurrection and Christ's resurrection".

[ 82 ] F. Belton Joyner in United Methodist Answers , states that the "New Testament does not speak of a natural immortality of the soul, as if we never actually die. It speaks of resurrection of the body, the claim that is made each time we state the historic Apostles' Creed and classic Nicene Creed", given in The United Methodist Hymnal .

[ 84 ] In paragraph 128 of the Book of Discipline of the Free Methodist Church it is written: "There will be a bodily resurrection from the dead of both the just and the unjust, they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, they that have done evil unto the resurrection of the damnation. The resurrected body will be a spiritual body, but the person will be whole identifiable. The Resurrection of Christ is the guarantee of resurrection unto life to those who are in Him." [ 85 ] Baptists [ edit ] With regard to Baptists , James Leo Garrett Jr.

, E. Glenn Hinson, and James E. Tull write that "Baptists traditionally have held firmly to the belief that Christ rose triumphant over death, sin, and hell in a bodily resurrection from the dead." [ 86 ] Plymouth Brethren [ edit ] Many Dispensationalist Evangelicals believe in a universal resurrection, but divided into two separate resurrections; at the Second Coming and then again at the Great White Throne .

[ 87 ] The Doctrinal Basis of the Evangelical Alliance affirms belief in "the resurrection of the body, the judgment of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ, with the eternal blessedness of the righteous, and the eternal punishment of the wicked." [ 88 ] Some millennialists interpret the Book of Revelation as requiring two physical resurrections of the dead, one before the Millennium , the other after it.

[ 89 ] Restorationists [ edit ] Mortalists , those Christians who do not believe that humans have immortal souls , may believe in a universal resurrection, such as Thomas Hobbes in Leviathan .

[ 90 ] [ edition needed ] Some mortalist denominations may believe in a universal resurrection of all the dead, but in two resurrection events, one at either end of a millennium , such as Seventh-day Adventists .

[ 91 ] Other mortalist denominations deny a universal resurrection, such as Christadelphians [ 92 ] and hold that the dead count three groups; the majority who will never be raised, those raised to condemnation, and a second final destruction in the " Second Death ", and those raised to eternal life .

In Christian conditionalism , there are several Restorationist churches, such as the Seventh-day Adventist Church , Christadelphians , Jehovah's Witnesses , and theologians of different traditions who reject the idea of the immortality of a non-physical soul as a vestige of Neoplatonism , and other pagan traditions.

[ citation needed ] In this school of thought, the dead remain dead (and do not immediately progress to a Heaven , Hell , or Purgatory ) until a physical resurrection of some or all of the dead occurs at the end of time, or in Paradise restored on earth, in a general resurrection. Some groups, Christadelphians in particular, consider that it is not a universal resurrection, and that at this time of resurrection that the Last Judgment will take place.

[ 93 ] Latter Day Saints believe that God has a plan of salvation . Before the resurrection, the spirits of the dead are believed to exist in a place known as the spirit world , which is similar to, yet fundamentally distinct from, the traditional concept of Heaven and Hell. It is believed that the spirit retains its wants, beliefs, and desires in the afterlife.

[ 94 ] [ full citation needed ] Doctrine of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints teaches that Jesus Christ was the first person to be resurrected, [ 95 ] and that all those who have lived on the earth will be resurrected because of Jesus Christ, regardless of their righteousness.

[ 95 ] The Church teaches that not all are resurrected at the same time; the righteous will be resurrected in a "first resurrection" and unrepentant sinners in a "last resurrection." [ 95 ] The resurrection is believed to unite the spirit with the body again, and the Church teaches that the body (flesh and bone) will be made whole and become incorruptible, a state which includes immortality.

[ 96 ] There is also a belief in Latter-day Saint doctrine that a few exceptional individuals were removed from the earth "without tasting of death". This is referred to as translation , and these individuals are believed to have retained their bodies in a purified form, though they too will eventually be required to receive resurrection.

[ 97 ] [ full citation needed ] Islam [ edit ] Main articles: Islamic eschatology , Islamic view of the Last Judgment , and Qiyamah According to Islamic eschatology , the Day of Resurrection ( yawm al-qiyāmah ) [ 98 ] is believed to be God 's final assessment of humanity. The sequence of events (according to the most commonly held belief) is the annihilation of all creatures, resurrection of the body, and the judgment of all sentient creatures. The exact time when these events will occur is unknown, however there are said to be major [ 99 ] and minor signs [ 100 ] which are to occur near the time of Qiyamah ( end time ). Many Quranic verses, especially the earlier ones, are dominated by the idea of the nearing of the day of resurrection.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] In the sign of Al Quiyamah , a trumpet will be sounded for the first time, and result in the death of the remaining sinners.  Then there will be a period of forty years. The eleventh sign is the sounding of a second trumpet to signal the resurrection as ba'as ba'da'l-mawt .

[ 103 ] Then all will be naked and running to the Place of Gathering.

[ citation needed ] The Day of Resurrection is one of the six articles of Islamic faith .

[ 104 ] Everybody will account for their deeds in this world and people will go to heaven or hell .

Zoroastrianism [ edit ] Main article: Frashokereti The Zoroastrian belief in an end times renovation of the earth is known as frashokereti , which includes some form of revival of the dead that can be attested from no earlier than the 4th century BCE.

[ 105 ] As distinct from Judaism this is the resurrection of all the dead to universal purification and renewal of the world.

[ 106 ] In the frashokereti doctrine, the final renovation of the universe is when evil will be destroyed, and everything else will be then in perfect unity with God ( Ahura Mazda ). The term probably means "making wonderful, excellent". The doctrinal premises are (1) good will eventually prevail over evil; (2) creation was initially perfectly good, but was subsequently corrupted by evil; (3) the world will ultimately be restored to the perfection it had at the time of creation; (4) the "salvation for the individual depended on the sum of (that person's) thoughts, words and deeds, and there could be no intervention, whether compassionate or capricious, by any divine being to alter this." Thus, each human bears the responsibility for the fate of his own soul, and simultaneously shares in the responsibility for the fate of the world.

[ 107 ] Modern commentaries [ edit ] The difference between belief in resurrection of the flesh and resurrection of the soul was discussed by Oswald Spengler in the second volume of his Decline of the West books. According to him, resurrection of the flesh was a characteristic symbol of the magian high culture, which includes early Christianity , Judaism and Islam . The validity of this classification is contested by contemporary scholars.

See also [ edit ] Religion portal Dying-and-rising god Posthumous execution Preterism Technological resurrection Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Habermas, Gary R.

(2005).

"Resurrection Research from 1975 to the Present: What are Critical Scholars Saying?" . Articles.

www.garyhabermas.com . Retrieved 6 April 2025 .

^ 1 Cor 15:12–20 1 Peter 1:3 Citations [ edit ] ^ Strong 2007 , p. 1604: G386 ἀνάστασις .

^ Gowan, Donald E. (1 January 2003).

The Westminster Theological Wordbook of the Bible . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 188.

ISBN 978-0-664-22394-6 .

^ "Maimonides' 13 Principles of Jewish Faith" .

web.oru.edu . Retrieved 8 August 2020 .

^ 2 Maccabees 7.11, 7.28.

^ 1 Enoch 61.5, 61.2.

^ 2 Baruch 50.2, 51.5 ^ Philip R. Davies (2000). "Death, Resurrection and Life After Death in the Qumran Scrolls". In Alan J. Avery-Peck & Jacob Neusner (eds.) Judaism in Late Antiquity: Part Four: Death, Life -After-Death, Resurrection, and the World-To-Come in the Judaisms of Antiquity.

Leiden. p. 209.

^ Josephus, Antiquities 18.16; Matthew 22.23; Mark 12.18; Luke 20.27; Acts 23.8.

^ Acts 23.8.

^ Josephus, Jewish War , 2.8.14; cf.

Antiquities 8.14–15.

^ Acts 23.6, 26.5.

^ 1 Corinthians 15.35–53 ^ Jubilees 23.31 ^ John Joseph Collins (1997).

Apocalypticism in the Dead Sea Scrolls . p. 112. "The resurrection is not universal. It is the destiny of the very good and the very bad, who are raised for reward and punishment respectively. Daniel uses the metaphor of sleep and awakening to indicate the transition that is in ..." ^ Lester L. Grabbe (1996).

An introduction to first century Judaism: Jewish religion and History in the Second Temple Period .

ISBN 9780567085061 . p. 79. "Here the resurrection is not universal but involves only some of the dead. The righteous achieve what is referred to as 'astral immortality'; that is, they become like the stars of heaven (12:3). After this resurrection is found widely ...

^ The Expositor Samuel Cox, Sir William Robertson Nicoll, James Moffatt - 1884 "and that his soul may repose for ever and ever with those elected unto life everlasting." 3 X. While thus the Jews firmly believed in the Resurrection of the dead, it was no universal resurrection that they held. " ^ Jacob Neusner, Alan Jeffery Avery-Peck (2000).

Judaism in Late Antiquity : Part Four: Death, Life-After-Death. p. 157. "2, p. 301. On the views of resurrection, judgment, and the world to come in 2 Baruch and 4 Ezra, see the article by John J. Collins in this volume and Nickelsburg, Resurrection, pp. 84-85, 138-140.

[ check quotation syntax ] ^ Liv Ingeborg Lied (2008).

The other lands of Israel: imaginations of the land in 2 Baruch . p. 189. "In other words, this is not a resurrection of all Israel or a universal resurrection of mankind (50–51). 'The first' ('the ancients', 'of ... 1Thess 4:15; Cf. Charles, Apocalypse of Baruch, 55–56; Bogaert, Apocalypse de Baruch II, 66)." [ check quotation syntax ] ^ Turid Karlsen Seim, Jorunn Økland (2009).

Metamorphoses: resurrection, body and transformative practices in Early Christianity . p. 29. "In 1 Corinthians 15 Paul argues didactically rather than polemically in defense of a resurrection from the dead.31 In the eschatological scenario of 1 Corinthians 15, there is, differently from 2 Baruch, no universal resurrection ..." ^ Jacob Neusner (2009), World Religions in America: An Introduction , p. 133: "He who says, the resurrection of the dead is a teaching which does not derive from the Torah. ... Excluded are those who deny the resurrection of the dead, or deny that the Torah teaches that the dead will live." ^ "Resurrection: Jewish Creed or Not?" .

Jewish Encyclopedia . Retrieved 26 March 2013 .

^ David Birnbaum (2005).

Jews, Church & Civilization . Volume III. Millennium Education Foundation. p. 157 ^ "Bool of Job" .

^ Harry Sysling (1996), Teḥiyyat ha-metim: the resurrection of the dead in the Palestinian Targums , p. 222: "Here the second death is identical with the judgment in Gehinnom. The wicked will perish and their riches will be given to the righteous." ^ a b Multiple sources: Archibald Robertson & Alfred Plummer (1914).

A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the First Epistle of St Paul to the Corinthians.

Edinburgh. pp. 375–76.

Oscar Cullmann (1965) [1955]. "Immortality of the Soul or Resurrection of the Dead". in Krister Stendahl (ed.) Immortality and Resurrection.

New York. p. 35.

Gunnar af Hällström (1988).

Carnis Resurrection: The Interpretation of a Credal Formula.

Helsinki. p. 10.

Caroline Walker Bynum (1995).

The Resurrection of the Body in Western Christianity, 200–1336.

New York. p. 6.

^ Ware, James P. (2025).

The Final Triumph of God: Jesus, the Eyewitnesses, and the Resurrection of the Body in 1 Corinthians 15 . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4674-6306-5 .

^ Cook, John Granger (2025).

The Enspirited Body in 1 Corinthians 15 . Mohr Siebeck. pp.

399– 400.

ISBN 978-3-16-164174-9 .

^ a b Thayer 1890 , p. ἀνάστασις.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFThayer1890 ( help ) ^ a b Abbott-Smith 1999 , p. 33.

^ Luke 14:14 : NKJV ^ McEvilly, J. (1898), An Exposition Of The Gospels by The Most Rev. John Macevilly D.D.

on Luke 14, accessed on 26 April 2025 ^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church, Profession of Faith" . Retrieved 23 August 2019 .

^ Exegetical Dictionary of the New Testament ^ "Justin Martyr on the Resurrection" . Retrieved 26 March 2013 .

^ Simon Tugwell [ Wikidata ] , The Apostolic Fathers (1990), p. 148: "First, the mention of the resurrection is qualified by the rider, 'Not the resurrection of everyone, but, as it says, "The Lord will come and all his holy ones with him" (16.7). This is probably to be taken, not as meaning that dead sinners never get resurrected, but as referring to a preliminary resurrection of the saints before the millennial earthly reign of Christ, which was widely believed in the early" [ check quotation syntax ] ^ Compare: Endsjø, Dag Øistein (22 June 2009).

Greek Resurrection Beliefs and the Success of Christianity (reprint ed.). Springer.

ISBN 9780230622562 . Retrieved 7 May 2025 .

^ Tyrannius Rufinus , Credo di Aquileia – via Wikisource . As it was originally quoted in the Rufinus' Latin Commentarius symboli apostolorum ^ Schaff, Philipp .

"Aquileian Creed" .

Christian Classics Ethereal Library (in Latin).

hujus carnis resurrectionem ^ "Hereafter" .

Christian Cyclopedia . Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod . Retrieved 20 March 2020 .

^ "Will We Be Reunited with Children Who Have Died?" Archived 7 December 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b André Dartigues (2005). "Resurrection of the Dead". In Jean-Yves Lacoste, ed.

Encyclopedia of Christian Theology . Vol. 3. New York: Routledge. p. 1381.

^ "Deism". In Gordon Stein , ed. (1985).

The Encyclopedia of Unbelief . Vol. 1, A–K. Buffalo, New York: Prometheus. p. 134.

^ Barbara Yorke (2006), The Conversion of Britain . Pearson Education.

ISBN 0-582-77292-3 , 978-0-582-77292-2 .

p. 215 ^ "Essex, Massachusetts – Cemetery: The Old Burying Ground, Essex, Mass.I. Description and History" .

RootsWeb.com . "Up until the early 1800s, graves were marked by pairs of headstones and footstones, with the deceased laid to rest facing east to rise again at dawn of Judgment Day." ^ "ITM Grave and nave: an architecture of cemeteries and sanctuaries in rural Ontario" . "Sanctuaries face east, and burials are with the feet to the east, allowing the incumbent to rise facing the dawn on the Day of Judgment." ^ "The history of judicial hanging in Britain: After the execution" .

Archived 2023-01-20 at the Wayback Machine . "Henry VIII passed a law in 1540 allowing surgeons four bodies of executed criminals each per year. Little was known about anatomy and medical schools were very keen to get their hands on dead bodies that they could dissect." ^ Miriam Shergold and Jonathan Grant .

The evolution of regulations for health research in England (pdf). Department of Health, February 2006. Page 4.

Archived 5 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine . "For example, the Church banned dissection and autopsies on the grounds of the spiritual welfare of the deceased." ^ Staff.

"Resurrection of the Body" .

Archived 23 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine Catholic Answers . Retrieved 17 November 2008.

^ Fiona Haslam (1996).

From Hogarth to Rowlandson: Medicine in Art in Eighteenth-century Britain , Liverpool University Press.

ISBN 0-85323-640-2 , 978-0-85323-640-5 .

p. 280 . ( Thomas Rowlandson , " The Resurrection or an Internal View of the Museum in W-D M-LL street on the last day ", 1782) ^ Mary Abbott (1996).

Life Cycles in England, 1560–1720: Cradle to Grave , Routledge, ISBN 0-415-10842-X , 9780415108423.

p. 33 ^ "History of Cremation in the United Kingdom" . Cremation Society of Great Britain . Retrieved 21 February 2022 .

^ Koester 2000 , pp. 64–65.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFKoester2000 ( help ) ^ Vermes 2008b , p. 141.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFVermes2008b ( help ) ^ De Conick 2006 , p. 6.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFDe_Conick2006 ( help ) ^ Albert Mohler (16 April 2006).

"Not All Christians Believe In The Resurrection Of Christ" .

^ Wright 2003 , p. 272; cf. 321.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFWright2003 ( help ) ^ Dunn 1985 , p. 53.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFDunn1985 ( help ) ^ Dunn 2009 , p. 149.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFDunn2009 ( help ) ^ Terry Miethe, in: Gary Habermas & Anthony G. N. Flew, Did Jesus Rise from the Dead? The Resurrection Debate , ed. Terry Miethe (San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1987), p.xi. Quoted by Michael Martin , The Resurrection as Initially Improbable (chapter). In: Price, Robert M.

; Lowder, Jeffrey Jay, eds. (2005).

The Empty Tomb: Jesus Beyond the Grave . Amherst: Prometheus Books. p.

44 .

ISBN 1-59102-286-X .

^ John R. Rice, The Importance of Christ's Resurrection in the Christian Faith . In: Curtis Hutson (2000), Great Preaching on the Resurrection , ISBN 0-87398-319-X pp. 55–56 ^ Biblehub 1 John 3:2 ^ Biblehub Philippians 3:21 ^ N. T. Wright (2004).

Paul for Everyone: The Pastoral Letters: 1 and 2 Timothy . p. 74. "But he never states this in terms of people having an immortal soul, for the very good reason that he doesn't believe it. Only God possesses immortality (verse 16)." ^ Pearce, F.

After Death What?

^ "Biblical Accounts that Suggest Reincarnation" . Archived from the original on 8 June 2021 . Retrieved 27 August 2023 .

^ "Some Christians have rejected the idea of life after death completely, seeing it as a mythological construction seeking validation of the virtuous life." ^ Aurelius Augustinus, City of God Against the Pagans . "For then, either not all the dead will rise, leaving some human souls without bodies forever, that had once had human bodies, though only in their mother's womb; or if all human souls are to receive in the resurrection the bodies which ..." [ check quotation syntax ] ^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: General Resurrection" . Newadvent.org. 1 June 1911 . Retrieved 26 March 2013 .

^ John A. Hardon , The Catholic Catechism , p. 265 ^ Maas, Anthony John (1911).

"Resurrection" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 12. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church #997-1001 . Retrieved 31 March 2020 .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church #1038 . Retrieved 19 January 2019 .

^ Antonio Ducay . "7 - L'assunzione corporea di Maria".

La prediletta di Dio: sintesi di mariologia . Area 15 - Scienze teologico-religiose (in Italian). Aracne. p. 171.

ISBN 9788854863477 .

^ EWTN, Theology of the Body General Audience 9 December 1981 ^ Divine Mercy In My Soul , 1439 ^ Paul Althaus (1996).

The theology of Martin Luther . "With the New Testament, Luther teaches the resurrection of all the dead and not only of the believers." All enter into judgment. The believers enter into eternal life with Christ; evil men enter into eternal death with the devil and his angels."" [ check quotation syntax ] ^ O’Reggio, Trevor (2011). "A Re-examination of Luther's View on the State of the Dead".

Journal of the Adventist Theological Society .

22 (2): 170.

^ Evangelical Lutheran intelligencer , Volume 5–1830, p. 9. Evangelical Lutheran Synod of Maryland and Virginia. "Every one of those committed to our care is possessed of an immortal soul and should we not exceedingly rejoice, that we in the hands of the Supreme Being, may be instrumental in leading them unto 'fountains of living water'." ^ Graebner, Augustus Lawrence (1910).

Outlines of Doctrinal Theology . Saint Louis, Missouri: Concordia. pp. 233–ff. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006 . Retrieved 16 December 2018 .

^ Van Biema, David (7 February 2008).

"Christians Wrong About Heaven, Says Bishop" .

Time . Archived from the original on 9 February 2008 . Retrieved 22 May 2010 .

^ Beckmann, David.

"The Forty-Two Articles of 1553 – A Selection" .

Revbeckmann.com . Archived from the original on 20 December 2018 . Retrieved 20 December 2018 .

^ a b Holmes, Cecile S. (March–April 2012). "We shall be raised!".

Interpreter Magazine . The United Methodist Church.

^ "Sermon 137, On the Resurrection of the Dead" .

General Board of Global Ministries . The United Methodist Church. Archived from the original on 22 April 2014 . Retrieved 21 April 2014 .

^ Joyner, F. Belton (2007).

United Methodist Questions, United Methodist Answers: Exploring Christian Faith . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 33.

ISBN 9780664230395 .

The New Testament does not speak of a natural immortality of the soul, as if we never actually die. It speaks of resurrection of the body, the claim that is made each time we state the historic Apostles' Creed and classic Nicene Creed. (For the words of these creeds, see UMH 880–882.) ^ 2007 Book of Discipline . Free Methodist Publishing House. 2007. p. 25 . Retrieved 21 April 2014 .

^ Garrett, James Leo; Hinson, E. Glenn; Tull, James E. (1983).

Are Southern Baptists 'Evangelicals'?

. Mercer University Press. p. 29.

ISBN 9780865540330 . Retrieved 21 April 2014 .

^ Herbert Lockyer (1998).

All about the Second Coming . p. xv. "Only some of the dead will rise: 'the dead in Christ will rise first' (1 Thessalonians 4:16). The rest of the dead, the wicked dead, will remain in their graves until the time of the great white throne, when all must be raised".

^ "Creeds of the Evangelical Protestant Churches" .

Christian Classics Ethereal Library . 1846 . Retrieved 21 April 2014 .

^ Ben Witherington (2003).

Revelation . p. 291. "In short John affirms two resurrections of the dead: one is blessed, the other not blessed; one is before the millennium, the other after it.5 It is then proper to conclude that John believes in a future millennial reign upon the earth." ^ Hobbes, Thomas (1976).

Leviathan . p.315. "For though the Scripture be clear for a universal resurrection, yet we do not read that to any of the reprobate is promised an eternal life. For whereas St. Paul, to the question concerning what bodies men shall rise with again," ^ Seventh-Day Adventists answer questions on doctrine General Conference of Seventh-Day Adventists – 1957 "The general resurrection of all the dead occurs at the second advent, which will usher in the eternal world. Satan was 'bound' by the first advent of our Lord, and expelled from the individual hearts of His followers".

^ Tennant, H. (1977).

Christadelphians – What they believe and teach Birmingham, CMPA.

^ Michael Ashton (1991).

Raised to Judgement Bible Teaching about Resurrection & Judgement Christadelphian, Birmingham.

^ LDS Church.

Chapter 41: "The Postmortal Spirit World" .

^ a b c "The Guide to the Scriptures: Resurrection" . LDS Church.

^ "Resurrection" . LDS Church.

^ LDS Church.

"Translated Beings" ^ aka "the Day of Judgment" ( yawm ad-din ) ^ Shaykh Ahmad Ali.

"Major Signs before the Day of Judgment by Shaykh Ahmad Ali" . Inter-islam.org. Archived from the original on 10 July 2016 . Retrieved 26 March 2013 .

^ admin@inter-islam.org.

"Signs of Qiyaamah" . Inter-islam.org. Archived from the original on 23 June 2016 . Retrieved 26 March 2013 .

^ Isaac Hasson, Last Judgment , Encyclopaedia of the Qur'an ^ L. Gardet, Qiyama , Encyclopaedia of the Qur'an ^ Sura 39 ( Az-Zumar ), ayah 68 Quran 39:68 ^ "Six Articles of Islamic Faith" . Archived from the original on 21 April 2016 . Retrieved 2 September 2016 .

^ Richard N. Longenecker – Life in the Face of Death: The Resurrection Message of the New Testament p. 48 1998 "Franz König, for example, concludes that the earliest attestation of Zoroastrian belief in a resurrection cannot be dated before the fourth century BC (cf. Zarathustras Jenseitsvorstellungen und das Alte Testament [Vienna: Herder, ." ^ R. M. M. Tuschling – Angels and Orthodoxy: A Study in Their Development in Syria and ... – 2007 pp.. 23, 271 " While admitting that Judaism and Zoroastrianism share a belief in resurrection, he points to a significant difference between them: in Iranian religion all are resurrected and purified as part of the renewal of the world." ^ Boyce, Mary (1979), Zoroastrians: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices , London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, pp.

27– 29, ISBN 978-0-415-23902-8 References [ edit ] Abbott-Smith, George (1999).

A Manual Greek Lexicon of the New Testament (3rd ed.). Edinburgh: T&T Clark. p. 33.

ISBN 9780567086846 .

Hunolt, Franz (1897).

"Sermon 18: On The Hope In And Truth Of Our Future Resurrection." .

Sermons on the four last things: Death, Judgment, Hell and Heaven . Benzinger Brothers.

Insight (1988).

Insight on the Scriptures, Vol. 1 . Pennsylvania: Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania . pp.

783– 793.

Maas, Anthony John (1911).

"Resurrection" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 12. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Strong, James (2007).

Strong's exhaustive concordance of the Bible (Updated ed.). Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers.

ISBN 9781565633599 .

Thayer, Joseph Henry (1981) [1890].

Thayer's Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament . Peabody, Mass.: Hendrickson.

ISBN 9780913573228 .

"Part 1: Article 11 "The Resurrection of the Body." " .

The catechism of the Council of Trent . Translated by James Donovan. Lucas Brothers. 1829.

External links [ edit ] George A. Barton, Kaufmann Kohler, "Resurrection" , Jewish Encyclopedia (1906) ancient texts on resurrection from Tiresias: The Ancient Mediterranean Religions Source Database.

v t e Christian salvation Absolution Adoption Assurance Atonement Baptism Calling Conditional security Conversion Divinization Election Eternal life extra Ecclesiam nulla salus Faith Forgiveness Glorification Grace Irresistible Prevenient Imputation Justification Means of grace Monergism Mortification Ordo salutis Perseverance Predestination Recapitulation Reconciliation Redemption Regeneration Repentance Resurrection Salvation Sanctification Synergism Theosis Union with Christ Worship Blessing v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Universal_resurrection&oldid=1304852970 " Categories : Afterlife Biblical phrases Christian belief and doctrine Christian eschatology Christian terminology Christianity and death Nicene Creed Resurrection Hidden categories: Harv and Sfn no-target errors CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Webarchive template wayback links Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2018 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia references cleanup from March 2025 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from March 2025 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles containing Hebrew-language text All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from March 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from March 2025 All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from March 2025 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2025 Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles with citations needing edition from March 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 15:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Universal resurrection 9 languages Add topic

