Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Other compasses 3 Uses 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Brunton compass 3 languages Català Español 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Precision compass made by Brunton, Inc. of Riverton, Wyoming This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Brunton compass" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A standard Brunton Geo, used commonly by geologists A Brunton compass , properly known as the Brunton Pocket Transit , is a precision compass made by Brunton, Inc.

of Riverton, Wyoming . The instrument was patented in 1894 by Canadian-born geologist David W. Brunton.

[ 1 ] Unlike most modern compasses, the Brunton Pocket Transit utilizes magnetic induction damping rather than fluid to damp needle oscillation.  Although Brunton, Inc. makes many other types of magnetic compasses, the Brunton Pocket Transit is a specialized instrument used widely by those needing to make accurate navigational and slope-angle measurements in the field. Users are primarily geologists , but archaeologists , environmental engineers , mining engineers and surveyors also make use of the Brunton's capabilities. The United States Army has adopted the Pocket Transit as the M2 Compass for use by crew-served artillery .

Overview [ edit ] The Pocket Transit may be adjusted for declination angle according to one's location on the Earth. It is used to get directional degree measurements ( azimuth ) through use of the Earth's magnetic field .  Holding the compass at waist-height, the user looks down into the mirror and lines up the target, needle, and guide line that is on the mirror.  Once all three are lined up and the compass is level, the reading for that azimuth can be made.  Arguably the most frequent use for the Brunton in the field is the calculation of the strike and dip of geological features ( faults , contacts, foliation , sedimentary strata , etc.).  Strike is measured by leveling (with the bull's eye level ) the compass along the plane being measured.  Dip is taken by laying the side of the compass perpendicular to the strike measurement and rotating horizontal level until the bubble is stable and the reading has been made.  If field conditions allow, additional features of the compass allow users to measure such geological attributes from a distance.

As with most traditional compasses, directional measurements are made in reference to the Earth's magnetic field . Thus, measurements are sensitive to magnetic interference.  For example, if the user is near an outcrop that contains magnetite or some other iron -bearing material, compass readings can be affected anywhere from several inches from the outcrop to tens of yards away (depending on the strength of the magnetic field).  Since they are measured with a rotating level , dip measurements are unaffected by magnetic interference.

Other compasses [ edit ] There are numerous other compasses used by geologists: The Breithaupt compass is one example. Portable electronic devices are changing the way geologists conduct field work. Unlike analogue compasses, a digital compass relies on an accelerometer and a magnetometer , and may provide information about the reliability of a measurement (e.g. by repeating the same measurement and performing statistical analysis).

Uses [ edit ] Taking a bearing Measuring vertical angles with clinometer Defining points of the same elevation Measuring strike and dip.

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ Hodgson, Michael, Compass and Map Navigator , Guilford, CT: The Globe Pequot Press, (1997) ISBN 0-7627-0488-0, p. 4 ^ Assaad, Fakhry A.; LaMoreaux, James W.; Hughes, Travis, eds. (2013).

Field Methods for Geologists and Hydrogeologists . Springer Science & Business Media. pp.

38– 39.

ISBN 978-3-662-05438-3 . Retrieved 10 June 2015 .

External links [ edit ] The Brunton company How to use the Brunton compass Easy explanation how to use a Brunton Introduction to the Brunton Compass v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brunton_compass&oldid=1273486711 " Categories : Structural geology Surveying Canadian inventions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2017 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 2 February 2025, at 14:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Brunton compass 3 languages Add topic

