Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Distinctions 2 Types 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Non-fiction 29 languages العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Cebuano Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Frysk Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Simple English ไทย Türkçe اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Nonfiction ) Type of genre, true work For other uses, see Non-fiction (disambiguation) .

Literature Oral literature Folklore fable fairy tale folk play folksong heroic epic legend myth proverb Oration Performance audiobook spoken word Saying Major written forms Book Drama closet drama Poetry lyric narrative Prose Nonsense verse Ergodic Electronic Long prose fiction Anthology Serial Novel / romance Short prose fiction Novella Novelette Short story Drabble Sketch Flash fiction Parable Religious Wisdom Prose genres Fiction Children's Encyclopedic Genre action adventure coming-of-age crime erotic fantasy horror military paranormal romance science fiction supernatural western Historical Realist Speculative Non-fiction Academic history philosophy Anecdote Epistle Essay Journalism Letter Life Nature Persuasive Travelogue Poetry genres Narrative Children Epic Dramatic Verse novel National Lyric Ballad Elegy Epigram Ghazal Haiku Hymn Limerick Ode Qasida Sonnet Villanelle Lists Epic Groups and movements Poets Dramatic genres Comedy Libretto Play historical moral Satire Script Tragedy Tragicomedy History Ancient Classical Medieval Modernist Postmodern Lists and outlines Outline Glossary Books Writers Movements Cycles Literary awards poetry Short story collection Lost literary work Lacuna Theory and criticism Sociology Magazines Composition Language Narrative Feud Estate Literature portal v t e Non-fiction (or nonfiction ) is any document or media content that attempts, in good faith , to convey information only about the real world , rather than being grounded in imagination .

[ 1 ] Non-fiction typically aims to present topics objectively based on historical, scientific, and empirical information. However, some non-fiction ranges into more subjective territory, including sincerely held opinions on real-world topics.

[ 2 ] Often referring specifically to prose writing, [ 3 ] non-fiction is one of the two fundamental approaches to story and storytelling , in contrast to narrative fiction , which is largely populated by imaginary characters and events.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] Non-fiction writers can show the reasons and consequences of events, they can compare, contrast, classify, categorise and summarise information, put the facts in a logical or chronological order, infer and reach conclusions about facts, etc.

[ 5 ] They can use graphic, structural and printed appearance features such as pictures , graphs or charts , diagrams , flowcharts , summaries , glossaries , sidebars , timelines , table of contents , headings , subheadings , bolded or italicised words, footnotes , maps , indices , labels , captions , etc. to help readers find information.

[ 5 ] While specific claims in a non-fiction work may prove inaccurate, the sincere author aims to be truthful at the time of composition. A non-fiction account is an exercise in accurately representing a topic, and remains distinct from any implied endorsement.

Distinctions [ edit ] The numerous narrative techniques used within fiction are generally thought inappropriate for use in non-fiction. They are still present particularly in older works, but are often muted so as not to overshadow the information within the work. Simplicity, clarity, and directness are some of the most important considerations when producing non-fiction. Audience is important in any artistic or descriptive endeavour, but it is perhaps most important in non-fiction. In fiction, the writer believes that readers will make an effort to follow and interpret an indirectly or abstractly presented progression of theme, whereas the production of non-fiction has more to do with the direct provision of information. Understanding of the potential readers' use for the work and their existing knowledge of a subject are both fundamental for effective non-fiction. Despite the claim to truth of non-fiction, it is often necessary to persuade the reader to agree with the ideas and so a balanced, coherent, and informed argument is vital. However, the boundaries between fiction and non-fiction are continually blurred and argued upon, especially in the field of biography ; [ 6 ] as Virginia Woolf said: "if we think of truth as something of granite-like solidity and of personality as something of rainbow-like intangibility and reflect that the aim of biography is to weld these two into one seamless whole, we shall admit that the problem is a stiff one and that we need not wonder if biographers, for the most part failed to solve it." [ 7 ] Including information that the author knows to be untrue within such works is usually regarded as dishonest. Still, certain kinds of written works can legitimately be either fiction or non-fiction, such as journals of self-expression, letters , magazine articles, and other expressions of imagination. Though they are mostly either one or the other, a blend of both is also possible. Some fiction may include non-fictional elements; semi-fiction is fiction implementing a great deal of non-fiction, [ 8 ] (such as a fictional description based on a true story). Some non-fiction may include elements of unverified supposition , deduction , or imagination for the purpose of smoothing out a narrative , but the inclusion of open falsehoods would discredit it as a work of non-fiction. The publishing and bookselling businesses sometimes use the term " creative nonfiction " to distinguish works with a more literary or intellectual bent, as opposed to the bulk of non-fiction subjects.

[ 9 ] Types [ edit ] Based on the author's intention or the purpose of the content, the main genres of non-fiction are instructional, explanatory, discussion-based, report-based (non-chronological), opinion-based (persuasive) and relating (chronological recounting) non-fiction.

[ 5 ] [ 10 ] Non-fictional works of these different genres can be created with the help of a range of structures or formats such as: Academic texts , including scholarly papers , scientific papers , monographs , scientific journals , treatises , edited volumes , and conference proceedings .

History books .

Life writings , which include autobiographies , biographies , confessions , diaries , logs , memoirs , epistles , letters , postcards , letter collections , epitaphs , and obituaries .

Literary criticism (including book reports and book reviews ), art criticism , and film criticism .

News stories , editorials , letters to the editor , opinion pieces , manifestos , notices (announcements), documentary films , and factual television .

Persuasive writing ( apologias and polemics ), essays and essay collections , and promotional writing (including brochures , pamphlets , press releases , advertorials ).

Reference works , which include almanacs , encyclopaedias , atlases , bibliographies , chronicles , consumer reports , dictionaries , thesauri , business or telephone directories , handbooks , yearbooks , and books of quotations .

Self-help books , popular science books , blogs , presentations , orations , and sayings .

[ 5 ] Textbooks , study guides , field guides , travelogues , recipes , owner's manuals , and user guides .

Common literary examples of non-fiction include expository , argumentative , functional, and opinion pieces ; essays on art or literature; biographies ; memoirs ; journalism ; and historical, scientific , technical , or economic writings (including electronic ones).

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Documentary practice List of writing genres Category:Non-fiction literary awards References [ edit ] ^ a b Farner, Geir (2014). "Chapter 2: What is Literary Fiction?".

Literary Fiction: The Ways We Read Narrative Literature .

Bloomsbury Publishing USA .

ISBN 9781623564261 .

^ "nonfiction" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.

^ " "nonfiction" definition via Lexico " . Archived from the original on August 25, 2019.

^ Culler, Jonathan (2000).

Literary Theory: A Very Short Introduction .

Oxford University Press . p. 31.

Non-fictional discourse is usually embedded in a context that tells you how to take it: an instruction manual, a newspaper report, a letter from a charity. The context of fiction, though, explicitly leaves open the question of what the fiction is really about. Reference to the world is not so much a property of literary [ i.e.

, fictional] works as a function they are given by interpretation.

^ a b c d Dave Leochko; Tom Rossi (2007), Guiding Readers Through Non-fiction: Effective Strategies for Small-group Instruction , Portage & Main Press, pp.

5– 16 ^ The Institute of Art and Ideas.

"The Art of Life" . IAI.

Archived from the original on 26 June 2023 . Retrieved 14 January 2014 .

^ Woolf, Virginia (2010).

Orlando . Aziloth Books. p. 134.

ISBN 978-1907523687 .

^ The Role of Narrative Fiction and Semi-Fiction in Organizational Studies G. Whiteman. N. Phillips. 13 2006, 12 ^ "The Penguin Press" .

Penguin Group (USA) . Archived from the original on Feb 13, 2014.

^ The National Literacy Strategy: Developing Early Writing , London: Department of Education and Employment, 2001, p. 154 ^ Susan B. Neuman; Linda B. Gambrell, eds. (2013).

Quality Reading Instruction in the Age of Common Core Standards .

International Reading Association . p. 46.

ISBN 9780872074965 .

External links [ edit ] Look up nonfiction or non-fiction in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Non-fiction .

Library resources about Non-fiction Resources in your library What is Creative Nonfiction?

Archived 2012-10-19 at the Wayback Machine Nonfiction – overview at Britannica v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal Authority control databases Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Non-fiction&oldid=1303962107 " Categories : Non-fiction Genres Reality Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from February 2023 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 03:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Non-fiction 29 languages Add topic

