Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 List of cases Toggle List of cases subsection 1.1 1995 1.2 2001 1.3 2004 1.4 2006 1.5 2007 1.6 2011 1.7 2012 1.8 2014 1.9 2015 1.10 2016 1.11 2017 1.12 2018 1.13 2019 1.14 2020 1.15 2021 1.16 2022 1.17 2023 1.18 2024 1.19 2025 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents List of court cases involving Alliance Defending Freedom Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pro-life and pro-choice activists demonstrate on the steps of the United States Supreme Court building during Gonzales v. Carhart .

This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF) is an advocacy organization whose goal is advocating, training, and funding legal cases on the issues of "religious freedom, sanctity of life, and marriage and family." [ 1 ] In 2012 the organization shifted its mission of funding allied attorneys to direct representation of clients though litigation.

[ 2 ] Founded in 1993, ADF has been described as "the largest legal force of the religious right arguing hundreds of pro bono cases across the country.

[ 3 ] Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF) has been involved in several landmark United States Supreme Court cases, including Rosenberger v. University of Virginia , Good News Club v. Milford Central School , and Town of Greece v. Galloway .

Rosenberger was described by law professor Marci Hamilton as a "fork in the road" with respect to judicial review of the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.

[ 4 ] [ better source needed ] Good News Club and Town of Greece established precedents relating to free speech and the establishment clauses of the First Amendment respectively. ADF also litigated a 2014 case challenging the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. In Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc.

, the Court ruled that the birth control mandate in employee-funded health plans was unconstitutional, since there existed a less restrictive means of furthering the law’s interest.

[ 5 ] The case set a precedent for evaluating legal questions relating to religious liberty.

[ 6 ] ADF also played a role in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization , writing model legislation for the Mississippi abortion ban, but did not represent either party in court.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] List of cases [ edit ] Following are legal cases in which the ADF has played a role, either by representing a party, filing an amicus brief, or otherwise participating: 1995 [ edit ] Rosenberger v. University of Virginia (1995). ADF provided funding to defend a student newspaper which was denied university funding due to its religious nature. The case was litigated all the way to the Supreme Court.

[ 9 ] 2001 [ edit ] Good News Club v. Milford Central School (2001). The ADF assisted in this case in which the Supreme Court ruled that religious clubs must be afforded equal access to school facilities.

[ 10 ] 2004 [ edit ] City of Littleton (CO) v. Z.J. Gifts (2004). The  Supreme Court ruled unanimously against an adult bookstore in a case involving business licensing.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Elk Grove Unified School District v. Newdow (2004). The Supreme Court, in a unanimous opinion, reversed a United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit decision that the words “ under God ” in the Pledge of Allegiance violated the First Amendment due to a lack of standing.

[ 13 ] Williams v. Vidmar (2004). In November 2004, the ADF filed a lawsuit on behalf of a Cupertino, California elementary school teacher against his school principal and school board members.

[ 14 ] The lawsuit was settled without money changing hands and without changes in school policies.

[ 15 ] Perry v. Schwarzenegger . ADF represented Proposition 8 proponents ProtectMarriage.com in the Federal lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the proposition, which limited marriage in California to one man and one woman.

[ 16 ] Their participation generated some criticism. The religious rights law firm Liberty Counsel , which has litigated opposition to same-sex marriage in California since 2004, criticized Alliance Defense Fund's handling of the case.

[ 17 ] 2006 [ edit ] Scheidler v. National Organization for Women (2006).

Anti-abortion groups were charged with racketeering. In a unanimous decision the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the anti-abortion groups.

[ 18 ] Ayotte v Planned Parenthood of Northern New England (2006). In a unanimous decision the Supreme Court held that states have a right to require parental notification for abortion.

[ 19 ] The ADF defended Elane Photography in its appeal of being found in violation of the New Mexico Human Rights Act for refusing to photograph a 2006 civil commitment ceremony. In August 2013 the New Mexico Supreme Court found in favor of Willock and that the photographer was in violation of the act.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] 2007 [ edit ] Gonzales v. Carhart (2007). This case upheld the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban of 2003.

[ 23 ] 2011 [ edit ] Arizona Christian School Tuition Organization v. Winn (2011). The ADF prevailed against the ACLU in a case regarding a taxpayer funded school choice program.

[ 24 ] 2012 [ edit ] Bronx Household of Faith v. Board of Education of the City of New York (2012). The ADF lost this case challenging New York City's prohibition on holding worship services in the City's public schools, and the Supreme Court declined to hear the case.

[ 3 ] 2014 [ edit ] Town of Greece v. Galloway (2014). In a significant victory, the Supreme Court ruled that opening legislative sessions with prayer was constitutional.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] McCullen v. Coakley (2014). ADF obtained a unanimous Supreme Court victory in this case which struck down “buffer zones” which were designed to restrict anti-abortion activists. The ruling was a setback for the abortion rights groups.

[ 27 ] Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc.

(2014). In this landmark Supreme Court case, where ADF represented Conestoga, the justices struck down the contraceptive mandate of Obamacare as applied to those with religious objections.

[ 28 ] The ADF served as co-counsel defending Sally Howe Smith, Court Clerk for Tulsa County (Oklahoma), whose denial of a marriage license to a same-sex couple was challenged in Bishop v. Oklahoma . Smith lost in U.S. District Court in January 2014.

[ 29 ] The ADF represented Dr. Mike Adams in a lawsuit against University of North Carolina Wilmington . A first amendment victory in the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit [ 30 ] opened the door to a civil trial in which Adams was also victorious. The case concerned denial of promotion to full professor due to constitutionally-protected speech.

[ citation needed ] In Bostic v. Rainey , the ADF represented Ms. Michele McQuigg, defendant-intervenor in her official capacity as Prince William County Clerk of Circuit Court ; the defendants lost in US District Court in February 2014.

[ 31 ] The ADF defended Virginia's laws against a challenge to the prohibition on same sex marriage, but lost an appeal in the 4th Circuit Court of Appeals on Monday, July 28, 2014; they have stated that they plan to appeal the ruling.

[ 32 ] 2015 [ edit ] Reed v. Town of Gilbert (2015). In a First Amendment case, a pastor's right to place signs announcing church services was upheld by the Supreme Court.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Holt v. Hobbs . The Supreme Court, in a unanimous decision, held that an Arkansas prison policy which prevented an incarcerated Muslim man from growing a short beard in accordance with his deeply-held religious beliefs violated the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act .

[ 36 ] 2016 [ edit ] Zubik v. Burwell . Two ADF cases, Geneva College v. Burwell and Southern Nazarene University v. Burwell were consolidated into Zubic and heard before the Supreme Court in 2016. The case addressed non-church coverage of mandated contraceptives under Obamacare. The individual cases were returned to the respective courts of appeal.

[ 37 ] Masterpiece Cakeshop in Lakewood, Colorado.

Audio recording of oral argument at Masterpiece Cakeshop.

Arlene's Flowers lawsuit . The Washington State Supreme Court rejected a florist's First Amendment claim and ruled in favor of a gay couple who were denied service. The case has been submitted to the United States Supreme Court for consolidation with Masterpiece Cakeshop.

[ 38 ] 2017 [ edit ] Trinity Lutheran Church of Columbia, Inc. v. Comer (2017). In an important First Amendment case the Supreme Court ruled that a Missouri playground resurfacing program violated freedom of religion guaranteed by the Free Exercise Clause. ADF represented the petitioner.

[ 39 ] 2018 [ edit ] Masterpiece Cakeshop v. Colorado Civil Rights Commission . The lawsuit had the potential of setting a "landmark" First Amendment precedent, according to Fox News .

[ 40 ] National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Becerra . Oral arguments in this anti-abortion case were heard at the Supreme Court in 2018. The case pertained to California's FACT Act which mandated crisis pregnancy centers to provide certain disclosures.

[ 41 ] The high court found those notices to be a free speech violation of the First Amendment.

[ 42 ] Cochran vs. City of Atlanta .  After Kelvin J. Cochran was fired by Atlanta Mayor Kasim Reed , a judge declared unconstitutional the city's preclearance rules on what employees could do on their own time outside work.  Atlanta ended up agreeing to pay $1.2 million to Cochran.

[ 43 ] 2019 [ edit ] Brush & Nib v. City of Phoenix . Two Christian artists who owned a stationery store did not want to make custom wedding invitations for same-sex couples on religious grounds, and wished therefore to have an exemption from a Phoenix, Arizona anti-discrimination ordinance.  The artists were represented by ADF.  Lower court rulings upheld the city ordinance, but the Arizona Supreme Court ruled in September 2019 that, based on the Arizona Constitution, the ordinance violated the free-speech rights of the artists.  The ruling  was on narrow factual grounds and pertained only to custom wedding invitations and the artists' right to free speech, and neither granted them a blanket exemption from the ordinance, nor was it a ruling on whether the law was constitutional.  Other businesses which wished to be exempt from the law would need to seek their own court order.  The 4-3 decision did not address whether Phoenix's adoption of LGBTQ people as a protected class was legal.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Lexington-Fayette Urban County Human Rights Commission v. Hands On Originals . ADF represented Blaine Adamson and his printing company, Hands on Originals, after he had been requested to create t-shirts for a local pride festival hosted by the Gay and Lesbian Services Organization (GLSO). Blaine declined the order because creating a t-shirt with the requested message would violate his religious beliefs. The Kentucky Supreme Court unanimously upheld that the GLSO lacked standing to sue Hands on Originals.

[ 47 ] Thompson v. Hebdon . The state of Alaska imposed campaign contribution limits for individuals to political candidates, individuals to election-related groups, political parties to candidates, and total out-of-state donations to a candidate. The petitioners challenged the individual-to-candidate and individual-to-group limits of $500. In a per curiam opinion, the Supreme Court vacated the 9th Circuit’s ruling, noting that the lower court failed to apply Randall v. Sorrell (2006), which invalidated a Vermont law limiting individual contributions.

[ 48 ] 2020 [ edit ] R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral Homes Inc. v. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission . A landmark Supreme Court case ruling that Title VII protection applies to gay and transgender people.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] March for Life Education and Defense Fund v. California . In 2017, the Trump administration issued new HHS rules consistent with the Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc.

(2014) and Zubik v. Burwell (2016) decisions that exempted privately held for-profit corporations and religious institutions from the contraceptive mandate of the Affordable Care Act . Several states, including California and Pennsylvania, challenged these new HHS rules as a violation of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). Organizations such as the Little Sisters of the Poor as well as March for Life Education and Defense Fund intervened in the lawsuit to defend the new rules. In a 7–2 decision, the Supreme Court upheld the new rules in Little Sisters of the Poor Saints Peter and Paul Home v. Pennsylvania (2020). In light of that decision, the Supreme Court vacated the 9th Circuit’s ruling against March for Life.

[ 51 ] 2021 [ edit ] Meriwether v. Hartop, on whether professor was entitled, based on his Christian beliefs, to use pronouns that did not match a student's gender identity and to refuse to use that student's first name, in violation of the university's contrary anti-discrimination policy.

[ 52 ] The Sixth Circuit court ruled in the professor's favor in finding that the university had not adequately accommodated his religious beliefs.

Uzuegbunam v. Preczewski . ADF represented Georgia Gwinnett College student Chike Uzuegbunam, who was twice stopped from preaching on campus. After ADF filed a lawsuit alleging a violation of Uzuegbunam’s free speech rights, the college changed its speech policies, rendering Uzuegbunam’s claims moot and leading to a dismissal of the case in the lower district and appellate courts. ADF appealed to the Supreme Court, asking the college to be held liable for nominal damages. In an 8–1 decision, the Supreme Court held, “A request for nominal damages satisfies the redressability element necessary for Article III standing where a plaintiff’s claim is based on a completed violation of a legal right.” [ 53 ] Thomas More Law Center v. Bonta . This case challenged California's requirement for non-profit organizations such as the Thomas More Law Center to disclose the identity of their donors to California's Attorney General in order to solicit donations in the state. The case was consolidated with Americans for Prosperity v. Bonta. The Supreme Court ruled 6–3 that California's requirement burdened the donors' First Amendment rights.

[ 54 ] OSHA Rule on COVID-19 Vaccination and Testing [ 55 ] 2022 [ edit ] Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization overturned Roe v. Wade (1973), a case that had established a constitutional right to abortion ; abortion access is now controlled by state legislatures. ADF lawyers did not represent parties in this case, but they wrote a model law that Mississippi 's legislature enacted, and the Supreme Court upheld the law.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] 2023 [ edit ] Soule v.

Connecticut Association of Schools . In 2020, several high school female athletes represented by ADF filed a complaint challenging a Connecticut Interscholastic Athletic Conference policy allowing transgender women to compete in the female category. Plaintiffs allege the policy violates Title IX and denies opportunities for people assigned female at birth. A trial court ruled that the plaintiffs lacked standing to bring suit. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit upheld that ruling in December 2022, but granted a rehearing en banc in February 2023. The case currently awaits the en banc panels decision.

[ 56 ] Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine v. FDA . The Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine, represented by ADF, is challenging the FDA’s approval of mifepristone in 2000, as well as its subsequent deregulation, including allowing distribution of the drug by postal mail. The case currently awaits a decision on the merits from the U.S. Court of appeals for the 5th Circuit.

[ 57 ] 303 Creative LLC v. Elenis . Lorie Smith, a graphic designer, sought a pre-enforcement challenge against a Colorado public accommodations law that would have compelled her to create expression about same-sex marriages that violated her religious beliefs. In a 6–3 decision, the Supreme Court ruled that the First Amendment forbade the state of Colorado from forcing her to create expressive designs with messages with that contradict her beliefs. This case follows Masterpiece Cakeshop (2018), in which Jack Phillips, another ADF client, challenged the same Colorado law. Masterpiece was decided in Phillips’s favor but on narrower grounds.

[ 58 ] Arizona Christian University v.

Washington Elementary School District . In February 2023, the Phoenix -area Washington Elementary School District (WESD) voted to not renew a partnership agreement with Arizona Christian University (ACU) because of the university’s Christian beliefs on gender and sexuality. For 11 years, education students from ACU had served as student teachers in WESD classrooms. ADF filed suit representing ACU for religious discrimination, leading the school district to settle the lawsuit and renew its agreement with ACU.

[ 59 ] DeJong v. Pembrook . ADF represented Maggie DeJong, a graduate student at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville (SIUE). While at the university, she expressed her opinions in class discussions and on social media, views informed by her Christian faith and conservative viewpoint. Some students reported her speech as “harmful,” and the university issued three no-contact orders against her and opened an investigation. After receiving a letter from ADF, the university rescinded the no-contact orders and suspended the investigation. ADF then filed a lawsuit against SIUE in May 2022 for violating DeJong’s civil and constitutional rights. In July 2023, SIUE settled the lawsuit, agreeing to have three professors undergo First Amendment training by ADF attorneys.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] T.F. and B.F. v.

Kettle Moraine School District [ 62 ] L.M. v. Town of Middleborough [ 63 ] Mid Vermont Christian School v. Saunders [ 64 ] Mead v. Rockford Public School District 2024 [ edit ] FDA v. Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine Moyle v. United States Tennessee v. Cardona Turning Point USA at SUNY Cortland v. Cortland College Student Association The Babylon Bee v. Bonta 2025 [ edit ] Chiles v. Salazar Oklahoma Statewide Charter School Board v. Drummond Little v. Hecox First Choice Women's Resource v. Platkin West Virginia v. B.P.J.

National Institute of Family and Life Advocates v. Clark Labrador v. Poe Camp IdRaHaJe Association v. Roy Medina v. Planned Parenthood South Atlantic See also [ edit ] List of United States Supreme Court cases involving the First Amendment References [ edit ] ^ Issues , Alliance Defense Fund ^ "Who We Are" .

adflegal.org . ADF . Retrieved January 29, 2017 .

^ a b Sharon Otterman (March 30, 2015).

"Supreme Court Leaves Intact New York's Ban on Religious Services in Schools" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 4, 2015 .

^ Posner, Sarah. " The Legal Muscle Leading the Fight to End the Separation of Church and State Archived August 31, 2007, at the Wayback Machine " April 1, 2007, Washington Spectator Online ^ "Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc" .

^ Allison, Sherry (December 5, 2017).

"Who Is The Alliance Defending Freedom, The Legal Team Behind Masterpiece Cakeshop?" . Colorado Public Radio . Retrieved January 28, 2018 .

^ a b "Who We Are" .

Alliance Defending Freedom . Retrieved June 24, 2023 .

^ a b Amy Littlefield (November 30, 2021).

"The Christian Legal Army Behind the Ban on Abortion in Mississippi" .

The Nation . Retrieved June 29, 2023 .

^ Robert Booth Fowler (November 2010).

Religion and Politics in America: Faith, Culture, and Strategic Choices ...

ReadHowYouWant.com.

ISBN 9781458720955 . Retrieved September 24, 2013 .

^ Joel Stashenko (February 3, 2009).

"Conservative Christian Group Targets New York" . Law.com . Retrieved September 24, 2013 .

^ "City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C." Oyez. January 20, 2018 . Retrieved January 28, 2018 .

^ "Colorado, Petitioner v. George Woldt and Francisco Martinez, Jr" . Free Court Dockets. 2002 . Retrieved January 28, 2018 .

^ "US Supreme Court Docket" .

FindLaw . Retrieved January 28, 2018 .

^ Boyer, Peter J. (March 14, 2005).

"A Reporter at Large: Jesus in the Classroom" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved September 24, 2013 .

^ California teacher, district settle religion lawsuit | First Amendment Center – news, commentary, analysis on free speech, press, religion, assembly, petition Archived February 22, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ Farrell, Michael B. "Will California gay-marriage trial go to Supreme Court?" Christian Science Monitor January 26, 2010: N.PAG. Academic Search Premier. Web. December 7, 2011.

^ "California Judge Strikes Down Prop 8 Marriage Amendment" .

Liberty Counsel . August 4, 2010. Archived from the original on August 9, 2010 . Retrieved August 5, 2010 .

^ "High court rules pro-life protests a lawful right" .

The Washington Times . February 27, 2003 . Retrieved January 28, 2018 .

^ "Protecting young women: Pro-life organizations urge high court to uphold parental notification law" . Alliance Defending Freedom. August 9, 2005 . Retrieved January 28, 2018 .

^ Beard, Sterling (August 22, 2013).

"NM Supreme Court Finds Refusing to Photograph Gay Wedding Illegal" . National Review Online . Retrieved August 23, 2013 .

^ Gentilviso, Chris (August 22, 2013).

"Elane Photography v. Vanessa Willock: Court Rules Against Photographer In Gay Bias Case" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved August 23, 2013 .

^ Gershman, Jacob (August 22, 2013).

"Photographers Discriminated Against Gay Couple, Court Rules" . The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved August 23, 2013 .

^ "Legal ministry's CEO will discuss religious freedom" . Catholic Transcript Magazine. August 27, 2012 . Retrieved January 29, 2018 .

^ "School Choice Research" . Arizona Christian School Tuition Organization . Retrieved January 28, 2018 .

^ Gorbman, Randy; Juan Vazquez (May 5, 2014).

"Supreme Court Rules Prayers in Greece Can Continue" . WXXI News . Retrieved January 20, 2018 .

^ Eric, Eckhholm (May 11, 2014).

"Legal Alliance Gains Host of Court Victories for Conservative Christian Movement" .

New York Times . Retrieved January 21, 2018 .

^ Cunningham, Paige Winfield (July 30, 2014).

"Abortion clinics: Drawing the line" . Politico . Retrieved January 21, 2018 .

^ Cassidy, Suzanne.

"Meet the major legal players in the Conestoga Wood Specialties Supreme Court case" .

Lancaster Online . Retrieved January 21, 2018 .

^ Geidner, Chris (January 14, 2014).

"Oklahoma Ban On Same-Sex Marriages Is Unconstitutional, Federal Judge Rules" .

Buzz Feed . Retrieved January 15, 2014 .

^ "Victory for academic freedom: 4th Circuit says professor's speeches, columns protected by First Amendment – Alliance Defending Freedom" . Archived from the original on October 9, 2016 . Retrieved January 30, 2018 .

^ Dujardin, Peter (February 14, 2014).

"Reaction mixed to Virginia judge's ruling in same-sex marriage case" .

Daily Press . Archived from the original on February 22, 2014 . Retrieved February 17, 2014 .

^ Barnes, Robert; Portnoy, Jenna.

"Appeals court upholds decision overturning Virginia's same-sex marriage ban" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved July 29, 2014 .

^ Cortman, David (June 23, 2015).

"An Important Blow for Free Speech" . National Review . Retrieved January 20, 2018 .

^ "Church sign case seems to sidestep religious freedom issue" .

MSNBC . Retrieved January 21, 2018 .

^ "Supreme Court will hear Gilbert church-sign case" .

azcentral . Retrieved January 21, 2018 .

^ "Holt v. Hobbs" . SCOTUSblog. 2015 . Retrieved January 29, 2018 .

^ Liz, O'Connor (November 30, 2015).

"HHS mandate cases court will hear known collectively as Zubik v. Burwell" . Catholic News Service. Archived from the original on January 30, 2018 . Retrieved January 29, 2018 .

^ Kraemer, Kristen M. (July 17, 2017).

"Richland floral shop owner wants US Supreme Court to review ruling" . Union Bulletin . Retrieved January 28, 2018 .

^ Hurley, Lawrence (June 26, 2017).

"Supreme Court Backs Church In Key Religious Rights Case" . Huffington Post . Retrieved January 21, 2018 .

^ Kurtz, Steve (January 31, 2018).

"The Tenth Amendment: Out of the shadows and into the spotlight" .

Fox News . Retrieved February 24, 2018 .

This term, Supreme Court watchers are paying close attention to "Masterpiece Cakeshop"—the gay wedding cake case—which could be a landmark in First Amendment jurisprudence.

^ Farber, Madeline (November 16, 2017).

"Supreme Court to hear anti-abortion and free speech case: A breakdown of NIFLA v. Becerra" . Fox News . Retrieved January 20, 2018 .

^ Howe, Amy (June 26, 2018).

"Opinion analysis: Divided court rules for anti-abortion pregnancy centers in challenge to California law" . SCOTUSBlog . Retrieved June 26, 2018 .

^ "Atlanta City Council Votes To Settle Ex-Fire Chief's Lawsuit For $1.2 Million" .

CBS Atlanta . Associated Press. October 16, 2018 . Retrieved October 17, 2018 .

Atlanta's City Council has voted to settle a $1.2 million lawsuit brought by the city's former fire chief who was dismissed after he wrote a book that included anti-gay passages.

^ Associated Press (September 17, 2019) "Arizona artists win suit over same-sex wedding invitations" NBC News ^ Trimble, Lynn (September 16, 2019) "Court: Phoenix Business Can Refuse to Make Invitations for Same-Sex Couples" Phoenix New Times ^ Stern, Mark Joseph (September 16, 2019) "Arizona Supreme Court Greenlights Discrimination Against Same-Sex Weddings" Slate ^ "Lexington-Fayette Urban County Human Rights Commission v. Hands-On Originals" .

Justia US Law . Retrieved September 1, 2023 .

^ "DAVID THOMPSON, ET AL., v. HEATHER HEBDON, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE ALASKA PUBLIC OFFICES COMMISSION, ET AL" (PDF) .

Supreme Court . November 25, 2019 . Retrieved November 6, 2023 .

^ Grinberg, Emanuella (August 30, 2018).

"She came out as transgender and got fired. Now her case might become a test for LGBTQ rights at the US Supreme Court" .

CNN . Retrieved June 15, 2020 .

^ "In landmark case, Supreme Court rules LGBTQ workers are protected from job discrimination" .

NBC News . Retrieved June 15, 2020 .

^ "March for Life Education and Defense Fund, Petitioner v. California, et al" .

Supreme Court . October 22, 2019 . Retrieved November 6, 2023 .

^ Meriwether v. Hartop , US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit No. 20-3289 (26 March 2021).

^ "UZUEGBUNAM ET AL. v. PRECZEWSKI" (PDF) .

Supreme Court . Retrieved September 1, 2023 .

^ "AMERICANS FOR PROSPERITY FOUNDATION v. BONTA, ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CALIFORNIA" (PDF) .

Supreme Court . Retrieved September 1, 2023 .

^ "In re: MCP No. 165, Occupational Safety & Health Admin. Rule on COVID-19 Vaccination and Testing, 86 Fed. Reg. 61402" (PDF) . UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS.

^ "Case: Soule v. Connecticut Association of Schools, Inc" .

Civil Rights Litigation Clearinghouse . Retrieved September 1, 2023 .

^ "Alliance Hippocratic Medicine v. FDA, No. 23-10362 (5th Cir. 2023)" .

Justia US Law . Retrieved September 1, 2023 .

^ "303 CREATIVE LLC ET AL. v. ELENIS ET AL" (PDF) .

Supreme Court . June 30, 2023 . Retrieved November 6, 2023 .

^ Kenneth Wong (May 4, 2023).

"Washington Elementary School District reaches deal with Christian college over lawsuit: ADF" .

Fox 10 . Retrieved November 6, 2023 .

^ "MAGGIE R. DEJONG, Plaintiff, v. RANDALL PEMBROOK, JAMIE BALL, and MEGAN A. ROBB, Defendants" .

United States District Court, S.D. Illinois . March 20, 2023 . Retrieved November 6, 2023 .

^ Penny Weaver (July 30, 2023).

"SIUE settles free speech lawsuit for $80,000 plus training, policy updates" .

The Intelligencer . Retrieved November 6, 2023 .

^ "T.F, B.F. v. Kettle Moraine School District" .

Wisconsin Institute for Law & LIberty .

^ "L. M., a Minor, By and Through His Father and Stepmother and Natural Guardians, Christopher and Susan Morrison, Petitioner v. Town of Middleborough, Massachusetts, et al" .

Supreme Court .

^ "Litigation Update: Mid Vermont Christian School v. Saunders" . Federalist Society.

External links [ edit ] Alliance Defending Freedom , official website v t e Alliance Defending Freedom Founders Bill Bright Larry Burkett James Dobson D. James Kennedy Marlin Maddoux Leaders Presidents and CEOs Alan Sears Michael Farris Kristen Waggoner Others Chapman B. Cox Marjorie Dannenfelser Charles W. Pickering See also Blackstone Legal Fellowship Day of Dialogue Pulpit Freedom Sunday God's Not Dead List of court cases Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_court_cases_involving_Alliance_Defending_Freedom&oldid=1305817414 " Categories : Case law lists by party or amicus Legal history of the United States United States case law lists Alliance Defending Freedom litigation Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2018 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 07:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of court cases involving Alliance Defending Freedom Add languages Add topic

