Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Kitāb al-Jāmiʿ li-Mufradāt al-Adwiya wa-l-Aghdhiya 2.2 Kitāb al-Mughnī fī al-Adwiya al-Mufrada 2.3 Other works 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Ibn al-Baytar 37 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Català Čeština الدارجة Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Kurdî Latina മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Português Qaraqalpaqsha Русский سرائیکی سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Andalusian Arab pharmacist, botanist, physician and scientist (1197–1248) Ibn al-Bayṭār Statue of Ibn al-Bayṭār in Benalmádena Costa, Spain Born 1197 Málaga , Andalusia , Almohad Caliphate , now Province of Málaga , Spain Died 1248 (aged 51) Damascus , Ayyubid dynasty , now Syria Known for Scientific classification Oncology Scientific career Fields Botanist , Scientist , Pharmacist , Physician Diyāʾ al-Dīn Abū Muḥammad ʿAbd Allāh ibn Aḥmad al-Mālaqī , commonly known as Ibn al-Bayṭār ( Arabic : ابن البيطار ) (1197–1248 AD) was an Andalusian [ 1 ] Arab [ 2 ] physician, botanist, pharmacist and scientist. His main contribution was to systematically record the additions made by Islamic physicians in the Middle Ages , which added between 300 and 400 types of medicine to the one thousand previously known since antiquity. He was a student of Abu al-Abbas al-Nabati .

[ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Ibn al-Baitar was born in the city of Málaga in al-Andalus (Muslim Spain) at the end of the twelfth century, hence his nisba "al-Mālaqī".

[ 1 ] His name "Ibn al-Baitar" is Arabic for "son of the veterinarian", which was his father's profession.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Ibn al-Bayṭār learned botany from the Málagan botanist Abū al-ʿAbbās al-Nabātī with whom he started collecting plants in and around Spain.

[ 6 ] In 1219, Ibn al-Bayṭār left Málaga, travelling to the coast of North Africa and as far as Anatolia, to collect plants. The major stations he visited include Marrakech , Bugia , Constantinople , Tunis , Tripoli , Barqa and Antalya .

[ citation needed ] After 1224, he entered the service of the Ayyubid Sultan al-Kāmil and was appointed chief herbalist. In 1227 al-Kāmil extended his domination to Damascus, and Ibn al-Bayṭār accompanied him there, which provided him an opportunity to collect plants in Syria. His botanical researches extended over a vast area including Arabia and Palestine. He died in Damascus in 1248.

[ 1 ] Ibn al-Bayṭār used the name "snow of China" (in Arabic, thalj al-Ṣīn ) to describe saltpetre while writing about gunpowder.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Works [ edit ] Kitāb al-Jāmiʿ li-Mufradāt al-Adwiya wa-l-Aghdhiya [ edit ] Copy of Ibn al-Baytar's Kitab al-jami' li-mufradat al-adwiyah wa'l-aghdhiyah , Near East , dated c.

1300 Ibn al-Bayṭār's largest and most widely read book is his Compendium on Simple Medicaments and Foods ( Arabic : كتاب الجامع لمفردات الأدوية والأغذية ).

[ 3 ] It is a pharmacopoeia (pharmaceutical encyclopedia) listing 1400 plants, foods, and drugs, and their uses. It is organized alphabetically by the name of the useful plant or plant component or other substance—a small minority of the items covered are not botanicals. For each item, Ibn al-Bayṭār makes one or two brief remarks himself and gives brief extracts from a handful of different earlier authors about the item. The bulk of the information is compiled from the earlier authors. The book contains references to 150 previous Arabic authors, as well as 20 previous Greek authors.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] One of the sources he quotes most frequently is the Materia Medica" of Dioscorides who was inspired by Magon, another Amazigh, having also written an Arabic commentary on the work.

[ 11 ] Another book often cited by him is Book Two of the Canon of Medicine of Ibn Sīnā (Avicenna). Both of those sources have similarities in layout and subject matter with Ibn al-Bayṭār's own book, but Ibn al-Bayṭār's treatments are richer in detail, and a large minority of Ibn al-Bayṭār's useful plants or plant substances are not covered at all by Dioscorides or Ibn Sīnā. In modern printed edition, the book is more than 900 pages long. As well as in Arabic, it was published in full in translation in German and French in the 19th century.

[ 12 ] Ibn al-Bayṭār provides detailed chemical information on the rosewater and orangewater production. He mentions: The scented shurub ( syrup ) was often extracted from flowers and rare leaves, by means of using hot oils and fat , they were later cooled in cinnamon oil. The oils used were also extracted from sesame and olives .

Essential oil was produced by joining various retorts, the steam from these retorts condensed, combined and its scented droplets were used as perfume and mixed to produce the most costly medicines.

Kitāb al-Mughnī fī al-Adwiya al-Mufrada [ edit ] Ibn al-Bayṭār's second major work is Kitāb al-Mughnī fī al-Adwiya al-Mufrada , كتاب المغني في الأدوية المفردة .an encyclopedia of Islamic medicine which incorporates his knowledge of plants used extensively for the treatment of various ailments, including diseases related to the head, ear, eye, etc.

[ 9 ] Other works [ edit ] Mīzān al-Ṭabīb .ميزان الطبيب Risāla fī l-Aghdhiya wa-l-Adwiya .

Maqāla fī al-Laymūn , Treatise on the Lemon (also attributed to Ibn Jumayʿ); translated into Latin by Andrea Alpago as Ebn Bitar de malis limonis (Venice 1593).

[ 3 ] Tafsīr Kitāb Diyāsqūrīdūs , a commentary on the first four books of Dioscorides ' "Materia Medica." [ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Islamic science Islamic medicine Islamic scholars Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Alam 1997 , pp. 6–8.

^ "The Book of Medicinal and Nutritional Terms" . 1800.

^ a b c Vernet 2008 .

^ Himes, Norman Edwin (1963).

Medical history of contraception .

^ "The Book of Medicinal and Nutritional Terms" . 1800.

^ Saad & Said 2011 .

^ James Riddick Partington (1960).

A history of Greek fire and gunpowder (reprint, illustrated ed.). JHU Press. p. 22.

ISBN 0-8018-5954-9 .

The first definite mention of saltpetre in Arabic language is that in al-Baytar (died 1248), written towards the end of his life, where it is called "snow of China." Al-Baytar was a Spanish Arab, although he travelled a good deal and lived for a time in Egypt.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Peter Watson (2006).

Ideas: A History of Thought and Invention, from Fire to Freud (illustrated, annotated ed.). HarperCollins. p. 304.

ISBN 0-06-093564-2 . Retrieved 2011-11-28 .

The first use of a metal tube in this context was made around 1280 in the wars between the Song and the Mongols, where a new term, chong, was invented to describe the new horror...Like paper, it reached the West via the Muslims, in this case the writings of the Andalusian botanist Ibn al-Baytar, who died in Damascus in 1248. The Arabic term for saltpetre is 'Chinese snow' while the Persian usage is 'Chinese salt'.28 ^ a b Russell McNeil, Ibn al-Bayṭār , Malaspina University-College .

^ Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science, volume 1: Astronomy, Theoretical and Applied , pgs. 271–272. Ed. Roshdi Rasheed. London: Routledge, 1996.

ISBN 0415124107 ^ Tafsīr Kitāb Diyāsqūrīdūs, A commentary of Dioscorides' Materia Medica , by Abu Muhammad 'Abdallah ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Baytar de Málaga, Beirut 1989 (Arabic) ^ German edition in two volumes, 1840–1842, translated by Sontheimer. French edition in three volumes, 1877–1883, translated by Leclerc.

^ Tafsīr Kitāb Diāsqūrīdūs , – Commentaire de la "Materia Medica" de Dioscoride, by Abu Muhammad 'Abdallah ibn Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Baytar de Málaga, (ed. Ibrahim ben Mrad), Beirut 1989 (Arabic w/ Taxonomic names in English) References [ edit ] Alam, Hushang (1997).

"EBN AL-BAYṬĀR, ŻĪĀʾ-AL-DĪN ABŪ MOḤAMMAD ʿABD-ALLĀH" .

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. VIII, Fasc. 1. pp.

6– 8.

Saad, Bashar; Said, Omar (2011).

"3.3" .

Greco-Arab and Islamic Herbal Medicine . West Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 9781118002261 .

Vernet, J. (2008) [1970–80].

"Ibn Al-Bayṭār Al-Mālaqī, Ḍiyāʾ Al-Dīn Abū Muḥammad ʿAbdllāh Ibn Aḥmad" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Encyclopedia.com.

v t e Alchemy in the medieval Islamic world Alchemists 8th century pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana 9th century Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) 10th century Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya Maslama al-Qurṭubī Abū Manṣūr al-Muwaffaq al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) 11th century pseudo-Avicenna al-Khawārizmī al-Kāthī al-Muʿizz ibn Bādīs Aḥmad ibn ʿImād al-Dīn Ibn al-Wāfid (pharmacist) 12th century al-Ṭughrāʾī Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Artephius 13th century al-Simāwī Ibn al-Bayṭār (pharmacist) Abū l-ʿAbbās al-Nabātī (pharmacist) Ḥasan al-Rammāḥ (engineer) 14th century al-Jildakī Ibn al-Rassām Abū l-Ashbā ibn Tammām Concepts Takwin Philosopher's stone al-iksīr Alembic Athanor Works Book of Mercy Books of the Balances al-Burhān fī asrār ʿilm al-mīzān Masāʾil Khālid li-Maryānus al-rāhib Emerald Tablet Five Hundred Books al-ʿIlm al-muktasab fī zirāʿat al-dhahab Mifthāḥ al-ḥikma ( Clavis sapientiae ) al-Miṣbāḥ fī ʿilm al-miftāḥ Nabataean Agriculture One Hundred and Twelve Books Seventy Books Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Turba Philosophorum Nihāyat al-rutba fī ṭalab al-ḥisba (al-Nabarawi) Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Spain Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_al-Baytar&oldid=1300383102 " Categories : Alchemists of the medieval Islamic world Botanists of the medieval Islamic world Physicians from al-Andalus Scholars from the Almohad Caliphate Herbalists People from Málaga Pharmacologists from al-Andalus 1197 births 1248 deaths 13th-century writers from al-Andalus Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 01:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ibn al-Baytar 37 languages Add topic

