Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Writings 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Théophile de Viau 25 languages Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano Қазақша مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands Polski Português Русский کوردی Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French poet (1590–1626) Théophile de Viau Théophile de Viau (1590 – 25 September 1626) was a French Baroque poet and dramatist .

Life [ edit ] Born at Clairac , near Agen in the Lot-et-Garonne and raised as a Huguenot , Théophile de Viau participated in the Huguenot rebellions in Guyenne from 1615–16 in the service of the Comte de Candale. After the war, he was pardoned and became a brilliant young poet in the royal court . Théophile came into contact with the epicurean ideas of Italian philosopher Lucilio Vanini , which questioned the immortality of the soul . (Vanini was accused of heresy and of practising magic, and after having his tongue cut out, was strangled and his corpse burned in Toulouse in 1619.) Because of his heretical views and his libertine lifestyle, de Viau was banished from France in 1619 and travelled in England, though he returned to the court in 1620.  In 1622 a collection of licentious poems, Le Parnasse satyrique , was published under his name, although many of the poems were written by others. However, de Viau was denounced by the Jesuits in 1623 [ 1 ] on moral charges, for his bisexuality. He was imprisoned and sentenced to appear barefoot before Notre-Dame in Paris to be burned alive.

While de Viau was in hiding, the sentence was carried out in effigy, but the poet was eventually caught in flight toward England and put in the Conciergerie prison in Paris for almost two years. The trial led to debates among scholars and writers, and 55 pamphlets were published both for and against de Viau. His sentence was changed to permanent banishment and de Viau spent the remaining months of his life in Chantilly under the protection of the Duke of Montmorency before dying in Paris in 1626.

[ 1 ] Writings [ edit ] De Viau's wrote satirical poems, sonnets , odes and elegies . His works include one play, Les Amours tragiques de Pyrame et Thisbé (performed in 1621), the tragic love story of Pyramus and Thisbe which ends in a double suicide.

He wrote Fragment d'une histoire comique (English: Fragment of a Comic Novel , 1623), in which he expressed his literary tastes. He was not a supporter of "the metaphoric excess and lofty erudition" of his contemporaries. But he also thought "sterile" the constraints proposed by would-be reformers such as François de Malherbe . This disregard for constraints probably added to his reputation as a non-conformist.

[ 2 ] De Viau's poetic style refused the logical and classicist constraints of François de Malherbe and remained attached to the emotional and the baroque images of the late Renaissance, such as in his ode Un corbeau devant moi croasse ( A crow before me caws ), which paints a fantastic scene of thunder, serpents and fire (much like a painting by Salvator Rosa ). Two of his poems are melancholy pleas to the king on the subject of his incarceration or exile, and this tone of sadness is also present in his ode On Solitide which mixes classical motifs with an elegy about the poet in the midst of a forest.

Théophile de Viau was "rediscovered" by the French Romantics in the 19th century.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Chisholm 1911 .

^ Stedman (2012), pp. 59–61.

Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Théophile ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 786.

Stedman, Allison (2012), Rococo Fiction in France, 1600-1715: Seditious Frivolity , Rowman & Littlefield, ISBN 978-1611484366 Dandrey, Patrick, ed.

Dictionnaire des lettres françaises: Le XVIIe siècle.

Collection: La Pochothèque. Paris: Fayard, 1996.

Allem, Maurice, ed.

Anthologie poétique française: XVIIe siècle.

Paris: Garnier Frères, 1966.

Oeuvre poétique complete de Théophile de Viau .

External links [ edit ] Works by or about Théophile de Viau at the Internet Archive English translations of De Viau's poems Works by Théophile de Viau at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy 2 Australia 2 Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz FID People Netherlands Trove 2 Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Théophile_de_Viau&oldid=1297514773 " Categories : 1590 births 1626 deaths 17th-century French male writers 17th-century French poets 17th-century French novelists 17th-century French dramatists and playwrights 17th-century French LGBTQ people Baroque writers Bisexual male writers Bisexual dramatists and playwrights Bisexual poets French bisexual men French bisexual writers French satirists Huguenots Sonneteers French LGBTQ dramatists and playwrights French LGBTQ poets 17th-century French letter writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 26 June 2025, at 17:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Théophile de Viau 25 languages Add topic

