Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Species 2 Disease 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Citations 3.2 Other sources Toggle the table of contents Haplosporidium 2 languages Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genus of protists This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Haplosporidium Scientific classification Domain: Eukaryota Clade : Sar Clade : Rhizaria Phylum: Endomyxa Class: Ascetosporea Order: Haplosporida Family: Haplosporidiidae Genus: Haplosporidium Lühe, 1900 Haplosporidium is a genus in the order Haplosporida .

[ 1 ] They are a group of eukaryotes that are parasites of marine invertebrates, causing multiple disease which has high mortality to its host, including the notorious disease MSX, which caused massive oyster mortalities in Delaware Bay in 1957 and two years later in Chesapeake Bay.

There are four genera under order Haplosporida, according to the Hand book of the Protists(2017) , The principal characteristics of this genus are spores with an apical-hinged operculum and a variety of extensions externally (tails, filaments, extensions, wrapping, folds, and epispore extensions) formed by the same material of the spore wall. The number of ornaments is variable according to the different species. The internal uninucleated endosporoplasm contains a spherulosome (structure formerly designated by the name “spherule”), generally located at the apical region of the spore, several haplosporosomes, and mitochondria.

Species [ edit ] Haplosporidium armoricanum (Van Banning, 1977) Haplosporidium ascidiarum Duboscq & Harrant, 1923 Haplosporidium cadomensis Marchand & Sprague, 1979 Haplosporidium caulleryi Mercier & Poisson, 1922 Haplosporidium comatulae La Haye, Holland & McLean, 1984 Haplosporidium costale Wood & Andrews, 1962 Haplosporidium edule Azevedo, Conchas & Montes, 2003 -  parasitizes the digestive gland tissues of the cockle Cerastoderma edule in Galicia (northwest Spain) and has tape-like filaments.

Haplosporidium heterocirri Caullery & Mesnil, 1899 Haplosporidium hinei Bearham, Spiers, Raidal, Jones, Burreson & Nicholls, 2008 Haplosporidium louisiana infects crabs, Panopeus herbstii in the USA, They are probably conspecific and regarded as H. louisiana. This species is phylogenetically basal to other Haplosporidium spp.

Haplosporidium lusitanicum Azevedo, 1984 - parasitizes the gills and visceral tissues of Helcion pellucidus (Mollusca, Gastropoda). In the basal region of the spore, the wall is thicker and gives rise to two long tape-like proteinaceous filaments.

Haplosporidium montforti Azevedo, Balseiro, Casal, Gestal, Aranguren, Stokes, Carnegie, Novoa, Burreson & Figueras, 2006 Haplosporidium montforti infects the connective tissue, gill, digestive gland, and foot muscle of the abalone, Haliotis tuberculata , imported from Ireland and experimentally grown in Galicia, Spain.

Haplosporidium nelsoni Haskin, Stauber & Mackin, 1966 - infected the eastern oyster ( Crassostrea virginica ), causing the disease MSX.

Haplosporidium nemertis Debaisieux, 1920 Haplosporidium parisi Ormières, 1980 Haplosporidium pinnae very likely responsible for mass mortality of fan mussels, Pinna nobilis , in the Western Mediterranean Sea.

Haplosporidium tumefacientis Taylor, 1966 Disease [ edit ] MSX(Multinucleated Sphere Unknown) is the disease caused by Haplosporidium nelsoni , MSX is lethal to the eastern oyster ( Crassostrea virginica ), The early MSX infections are found in the oyster’s gill. The infection spreads to the digestive diverticulum, and finally all the tissues of the oyster are filled with plasmodia.
MSX infection is not directly transmissible from oyster to oyster. How the infection is transmitted is not yet known. Several researchers believe that an intermediate host is part of the life cycle of this parasite, but what the host is remains unknown. MSX disease is suppressed by low salinities and low temperatures.

References [ edit ] ^ WoRMS (2021). Haplosporidium Lühe, 1900. Accessed at: http://www.marinespecies.org/aphia.php?p=taxdetails&id=391857 on 2021-12-28 Citations [ edit ] 1. John M. ArchibaldAlastair G.B. SimpsonClaudio H. Slamovits(2017).

Handbook of the Protists .

2.Inke Sunila, State Shellfish Pathologist. Connecticut Department of Agriculture Bureau of Aquaculture and Laboratory Milford, Connecticut 06460.

MSX DISEASE 3.Gaetano Catanese, Amalia Grau, Jose Maria Valencia, Jose Rafael Garcia-March, Maite Vázquez-Luis, Elvira Alvarez, Salud Deudero, Susana Darriba, María J. Carballal, Antonio Villalba.(2018).

Haplosporidium pinnae sp. nov., a haplosporidan parasite associated with mass mortalities of the fan mussel, Pinna nobilis, in the Western Mediterranean Sea.

Other sources [ edit ] 1.Isabelle Arzul, Ryan B. Carnegie.(2015) New perspective on the haplosporidan parasites of molluscs https://www.researchgate.net/publication/280998012_New_Perspective_On_The_Haplosporidian_Parasites_Of_Molluscs Taxon identifiers Haplosporidium Wikidata : Q17522624 Wikispecies : Haplosporidium AFD : Haplosporidium CoL : 635RY EoL : 62061 GBIF : 3212315 iNaturalist : 549827 ITIS : 46165 NCBI : 31295 Open Tree of Life : 858068 WoRMS : 391857 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Haplosporidium&oldid=1299748348 " Categories : Endomyxa Rhizaria genera Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2021 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with 'species' microformats This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 05:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Haplosporidium 2 languages Add topic

