Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concept 2 Variable content 3 Sample texts Toggle Sample texts subsection 3.1 Online access 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Precalculus 6 languages Español 日本語 Português Soomaaliga ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Course designed to prepare students for calculus This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Diagram for the deriving the power-reducing formula for the sine function Part of a series of articles about Calculus ∫ ∫ a b f ′ ( t ) d t = f ( b ) − − f ( a ) {\displaystyle \int _{a}^{b}f'(t)\,dt=f(b)-f(a)} Fundamental theorem Limits Continuity Rolle's theorem Mean value theorem Inverse function theorem Differential Definitions Derivative ( generalizations ) Differential infinitesimal of a function total Concepts Differentiation notation Second derivative Implicit differentiation Logarithmic differentiation Related rates Taylor's theorem Rules and identities Sum Product Chain Power Quotient L'Hôpital's rule Inverse General Leibniz Faà di Bruno's formula Reynolds Integral Lists of integrals Integral transform Leibniz integral rule Definitions Antiderivative Integral ( improper ) Riemann integral Lebesgue integration Contour integration Integral of inverse functions Integration by Parts Discs Cylindrical shells Substitution ( trigonometric , tangent half-angle , Euler ) Euler's formula Partial fractions ( Heaviside's method ) Changing order Reduction formulae Differentiating under the integral sign Risch algorithm Series Geometric ( arithmetico-geometric ) Harmonic Alternating Power Binomial Taylor Convergence tests Summand limit (term test) Ratio Root Integral Direct comparison Limit comparison Alternating series Cauchy condensation Dirichlet Abel Vector Gradient Divergence Curl Laplacian Directional derivative Identities Theorems Gradient Green's Stokes' Divergence Generalized Stokes Helmholtz decomposition Multivariable Formalisms Matrix Tensor Exterior Geometric Definitions Partial derivative Multiple integral Line integral Surface integral Volume integral Jacobian Hessian Advanced Calculus on Euclidean space Generalized functions Limit of distributions Specialized Fractional Malliavin Stochastic Variations Miscellanea Precalculus History Glossary List of topics Integration Bee Mathematical analysis Nonstandard analysis v t e In mathematics education , precalculus is a course, or a set of courses, that includes algebra and trigonometry at a level that is designed to prepare students for the study of calculus , thus the name precalculus. Schools often distinguish between algebra and trigonometry as two separate parts of the coursework.

[ 1 ] Concept [ edit ] For students to succeed at finding the derivatives and antiderivatives with calculus , they will need facility with algebraic expressions , particularly in modification and transformation of such expressions.

Leonhard Euler wrote the first precalculus book in 1748 called Introductio in analysin infinitorum ( Latin : Introduction to the Analysis of the Infinite), which "was meant as a survey of concepts and methods in analysis and analytic geometry preliminary to the study of differential and integral calculus." [ 2 ] He began with the fundamental concepts of variables and functions . His innovation is noted for its use of exponentiation to introduce the transcendental functions . The general logarithm, to an arbitrary positive base, Euler presents as the inverse of an exponential function .

Then the natural logarithm is obtained by taking as base "the number for which the hyperbolic logarithm is one", sometimes called Euler's number , and written e {\displaystyle e} . This appropriation of the significant number from Grégoire de Saint-Vincent ’s calculus suffices to establish the natural logarithm. This part of precalculus prepares the student for integration of the monomial x p {\displaystyle x^{p}} in the instance of p = − − 1 {\displaystyle p=-1} .

Today's precalculus text computes e {\displaystyle e} as the limit e = lim n → → ∞ ∞ ( 1 + 1 n ) n {\displaystyle e=\lim _{n\rightarrow \infty }\left(1+{\frac {1}{n}}\right)^{n}} . An exposition on compound interest in financial mathematics may motivate this limit. Another difference in the modern text is avoidance of complex numbers , except as they may arise as roots of a quadratic equation with a negative discriminant , or in Euler's formula as application of trigonometry . Euler used not only complex numbers but also infinite series in his precalculus. Today's course may cover arithmetic and geometric sequences and series, but not the application by Saint-Vincent to gain his hyperbolic logarithm, which Euler used to finesse his precalculus.

Variable content [ edit ] Precalculus prepares students for calculus somewhat differently from how pre-algebra prepares students for algebra. While pre-algebra often has extensive coverage of basic algebraic concepts, precalculus courses might see only small amounts of calculus concepts, if at all, and usually involve covering algebraic topics that might not have been given attention in earlier algebra courses. Some precalculus courses might differ from others in terms of content. For example, an honors-level course might spend more time on conic sections , Euclidean vectors , and other topics needed for calculus, used in fields such as medicine or engineering. A college preparatory/regular class might focus on topics used in business-related careers, such as matrices , or power functions .

A standard course considers functions , function composition , and inverse functions , often in connection with sets and real numbers . In particular, polynomials and rational functions are developed. Algebraic skills are exercised with trigonometric functions and trigonometric identities . The binomial theorem , polar coordinates , parametric equations , and the limits of sequences and series are other common topics of precalculus. Sometimes the mathematical induction method of proof for propositions dependent upon a natural number may be demonstrated, but generally, coursework involves exercises rather than theory.

Sample texts [ edit ] Roland E. Larson & Robert P. Hostetler (1989) Precalculus , second edition, D.C. Heath and Company ISBN 0-669-16277-9 Margaret L. Lial & Charles D. Miller (1988) Precalculus , Scott Foresman ISBN 0-673-15872-1 Jerome E. Kaufmann (1988) Precalculus , PWS-Kent Publishing Company ( Wadsworth ) Karl J. Smith (1990) Precalculus Mathematics: a functional approach , fourth edition, Brooks/Cole ISBN 0-534-11922-0 Michael Sullivan (1993) Precalculus , third edition, Dellen imprint of Macmillan Publishers ISBN 0-02-418421-7 Online access [ edit ] Jay Abramson and others (2014) Precalculus from OpenStax David Lippman & Melonie Rasmussen (2017) Precalculus: an investigation of functions Carl Stitz & Jeff Zeager (2013) Precalculus (pdf) See also [ edit ] Education portal Mathematics portal AP Precalculus AP Calculus AP Statistics Pre-algebra Mathematics education in the United States References [ edit ] ^ Cangelosi, J. S. (2012).

Teaching mathematics in secondary and middle school, an interactive approach .

Prentice Hall .

^ Bos, H. J. M.

(1980). "Chapter 2: Newton, Leibniz and the Leibnizian tradition chapter 2". In Grattan-Guinness, Ivor (ed.).

From the Calculus to Set Theory, 1630 – 1910: An Introductory History .

Duckworth Overlook . p. 76.

ISBN 0-7156-1295-6 .

External links [ edit ] Look up precalculus in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Precalculus information at Mathworld v t e Mathematics education Geography United States New York United Kingdom Approach Traditional Exercise Three-part lesson Singapore Saxon Reform Computer-based Modern elementary New Informal Cognitively guided Ethno Critical Manipulative Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Precalculus&oldid=1279541312 " Category : Mathematics education Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 9 March 2025, at 04:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Precalculus 6 languages Add topic

