Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Anatomy and physiology Toggle Anatomy and physiology subsection 1.1 Antennae 1.2 Mouth and jaws 1.3 Slime papillae 1.3.1 Slime 1.4 Lobopods 1.5 Nervous system 1.6 Skin and muscle 1.7 Circulation 1.8 Respiration 1.9 Digestion and excretion 1.10 Reproductive organs 2 Distribution and habitat Toggle Distribution and habitat subsection 2.1 Distribution 2.2 Habitat 3 Behaviour Toggle Behaviour subsection 3.1 Locomotion 3.2 Sociality 3.3 Feeding 3.4 Growth, development, and reproduction 4 Ecology 5 Phylogeny Toggle Phylogeny subsection 5.1 Internal phylogeny 5.2 External phylogeny 5.3 Genomics 6 Evolution Toggle Evolution subsection 6.1 Insights on decay and fossilization 6.2 Emergence from lobopodians 6.3 Velvet worms and their diversification 7 Conservation status 8 Footnotes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Onychophora 59 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Diné bizaad Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Phylum of invertebrate animals Onychophora Temporal range: Late Carboniferous–Recent PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N stem group from Cambrian Oroperipatus sp. (Peripatidae) Ooperipatellus sp. (Peripatopsidae) Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Subkingdom: Eumetazoa Clade : ParaHoxozoa Clade : Bilateria Clade : Nephrozoa Clade : Protostomia Superphylum: Ecdysozoa Clade : Panarthropoda Phylum: Onychophora Grube , 1850 Families and genera Peripatidae Peripatopsidae † Antennacanthopodia † Antennipatus † Helenodora † Tritonychus † Succinipatopsis ?

† Tertiapatus ?

Onychophora / ɒ n ɪ ˈ k ɒ f ə r ə / (from Ancient Greek : ονυχής , onyches , "claws"; and φέρειν , pherein , "to carry"), commonly known as velvet worms (for their velvety texture and somewhat wormlike appearance) or more ambiguously as peripatus / p ə ˈ r ɪ p ə t ə s / (after the first described genus, Peripatus ), is a phylum of elongate, soft-bodied, many-legged animals .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In appearance they have variously been compared to worms with legs, caterpillars, and slugs.

[ 3 ] They prey upon other invertebrates, which they catch by ejecting an adhesive slime. Approximately 200 species of velvet worms have been described, although the true number is likely to be much greater.

The two extant families of velvet worms are Peripatidae and Peripatopsidae . They show a peculiar distribution, with the peripatids being predominantly equatorial and tropical, while the peripatopsids are all found south of the equator. It is the only phylum within Animalia that is wholly endemic to terrestrial environments, at least among extant members.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Velvet worms are generally considered close relatives of the Arthropoda and Tardigrada , with which they form the proposed taxon Panarthropoda .

[ 6 ] This makes them of palaeontological interest, as they can help reconstruct the ancestral arthropod. Only two fossil species are confidently assigned as onychophorans: Antennipatus from the Late Carboniferous , and Cretoperipatus from the Late Cretaceous , the latter belonging to Peripatidae.

[ 5 ] [ 7 ] In modern zoology , they are known for their mating behaviours and the bearing of live young in some species.

Anatomy and physiology [ edit ] Velvet worms are segmented animals with a flattened cylindrical body cross-section and rows of unstructured body appendages known as oncopods or lobopods (informally: stub feet). They reach lengths between 0.1 and 22 cm (0.04–8.66 in) depending on species, with the smallest known being Ooperipatellus nanus and the largest known Mongeperipatus solorzanoi .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The number of leg pairs ranges from as few as 13 (in Ooperipatellus nanus ) to as many as 43 (in Plicatoperipatus jamaicensis ).

[ 10 ] Their skin consists of numerous, fine transverse rings and is often inconspicuously coloured orange, red or brown, but sometimes also bright green, blue, gold or white, and occasionally patterned with other colours. Segmentation is outwardly inconspicuous, and identifiable by the regular spacing of the pairs of legs and in the regular arrangement of skin pores, excretion organs and concentrations of nerve cells . The individual body sections are largely unspecialised ; even the head develops only a little differently from the abdominal segments. Segmentation is apparently specified by the same gene as in other groups of animals, and is activated in each case, during embryonic development, at the rear border of each segment and in the growth zone of the stub feet. Although onychophorans fall within the protostome group, their early development has a deuterostome trajectory (with the mouth and anus forming separately); this trajectory is concealed by the rather sophisticated processes which occur in early development.

[ 11 ] Antennae [ edit ] On the first head segment is a pair of slender antennae , which serve in sensory perception . They probably do not correspond directly to the antennae of the Arthropoda, [ 12 ] but perhaps rather with their "lips" or labrum . At their base is a pair of simple eyes , except in a few blind species. In front of these, in many Australian species, are various dimples, the function of which is not yet clear. It appears that in at least some species, these serve in the transfer of sperm-cell packages ( spermatophores ).

[ citation needed ] Mouth and jaws [ edit ] On the belly side of the second head segment is the labrum, a mouth opening surrounded by sensitive "lips". In the velvet worms, this structure is a muscular outgrowth of the throat , so, despite its name, it is probably not homologous to the labrum of the Arthropoda and is used for feeding. Deep within the oral cavity lie the sharp, crescent-shaped "jaws", or mandibles , which are strongly hardened and resemble the claws of the feet, with which they are serially homologous; [ 13 ] early in development, the jaw appendages have a position and shape similar to the subsequent legs.

[ 14 ] The jaws are divided into internal and external mandibles and their concave surface bears fine denticles. They move backward and forward in a longitudinal direction, tearing apart the prey, apparently moved in one direction by musculature and the other by hydrostatic pressure.

[ 13 ] The claws are made of sclerotised α-chitin, reinforced with phenols and quinones, and have a uniform composition, except that there is a higher concentration of calcium towards the tip, presumably affording greater strength.

[ 13 ] The surface of the mandibles is smooth, with no ornamentation.

[ 15 ] The cuticle in the mandibles (and claws) is distinct from the rest of the body. It has an inner and outer component; the outer component has just two layers (whereas body cuticle has four), and these outer layers (in particular the inner epicuticle) are dehydrated and strongly tanned, affording toughness.

[ 15 ] Slime papillae [ edit ] Head region of Ooperipatellus viridimaculatus , showing its oral papillae and mouthparts On the third head segment, to the left and right of the mouth, are two openings called "oral papillae", with each containing a large, heavily branched slime gland.

[ 16 ] These slime glands lie roughly in the center of a velvet worm's body and secrete a sort of milky-white slime. The slime is used to both ensnare prey and act as a distraction for defensive purposes.

[ 16 ] In certain species, an organ connected to the slime gland known as the "slime conductor" is broadened into a reservoir, allowing it to hold pre-produced slime.

[ 17 ] Velvet worm slime glands and oral papilla are likely modified and repurposed limbs. The glands themselves are probably modified crural glands.

[ 17 ] All three structures correspond to an evolutionary origin in the leg pairs of the other segments.

[ citation needed ] Slime [ edit ] Peripatopsis overbergiensis squirting its slime The Onychophora forcefully squirt glue-like slime [ a ] from their oral papillae; they do so either in defense against predators or to capture prey.

[ 19 ] The openings of the glands that produce the slime are in the papillae, a pair of highly modified limbs on the sides of the head below the antennae. Inside, they have a syringe-like system that, by a geometric amplifier, allows for fast squirt using slow muscular contraction.

[ 17 ] High speed films show the animal expelling two streams of adhesive liquid through a small opening (50–200 microns ) at a speed of 3 to 5 m/s (10 to 20 ft/s).

[ 17 ] The interplay between the elasticity of oral papillae and the fast unsteady flow produces a passive oscillatory motion (30–60 Hz) of the oral papillae.

[ 17 ] The oscillation causes the streams to cross in mid air, weaving a disordered net; the velvet worms can control only the general direction where the net is thrown.

[ 21 ] The slime glands themselves are deep inside the body cavity, each at the end of a tube more than half the length of the body. The tube both conducts the fluid and stores it until it is required. The distance that the animal can propel the slime varies; usually it squirts it about a centimetre, [ 18 ] but the maximal range has variously been reported to be ten centimetres, [ 22 ] or even nearly a foot, [ 23 ] although accuracy drops with range.

[ 24 ] It is not clear to what extent the range varies with the species and other factors. One squirt usually suffices to snare a prey item, although larger prey may be further immobilised by smaller squirts targeted at the limbs; additionally, the fangs of spiders are sometimes targeted.

[ 24 ] Upon ejection, it forms a net of threads about twenty microns in diameter, with evenly spaced droplets of viscous adhesive fluid along their length.

[ 18 ] It subsequently dries, shrinking, losing its stickiness, and becoming brittle.

[ 18 ] Onychophora eat their dried slime when they can, which seems provident, since an onychophoran requires about 24 days to replenish an exhausted slime repository.

[ 24 ] The slime can account for up to 11% of the organism's dry weight [ 24 ] and is 90% water; its dry residue consists mainly of proteins—primarily a collagen -type protein.

[ 18 ] 1.3% of the slime's dry weight consists of sugars, mainly galactosamine .

[ 18 ] The slime also contains lipids and the surfactant nonylphenol . Onychophora are the only organisms known to produce this latter substance.

[ 18 ] It tastes "slightly bitter and at the same time somewhat astringent".

[ 25 ] The proteinaceous composition accounts for the slime's high tensile strength and stretchiness.

[ 18 ] The lipid and nonylphenol constituents may serve one of two purposes: They may line the ejection channel, stopping the slime from sticking to the organism when it is secreted; or they may slow the drying process long enough for the slime to reach its target.

[ 18 ] Lobopods [ edit ] A pair of claws from Euperipatoides kanangrensis The stub feet that characterise the velvet worms are conical , baggy appendages of the body, which are internally hollow and have no joints. Although the number of feet can vary considerably between species, their structure is basically very similar.

Rigidity is provided by the hydrostatic pressure of their fluid contents, and movement is usually obtained passively by stretching and contraction of the animal's entire body. However, each leg can also be shortened and bent by internal muscles .

[ 26 ] Due to the lack of joints, this bending can take place at any point along the sides of the leg. In some species, two different organs are found within the feet: Crural glands are situated at the shoulder of the legs, extending into the body cavity. They open outwards at the crural papillae—small wart-like bumps on the belly side of the leg—and secrete chemical messenger materials called pheromones . Their name comes from the Latin cruralis meaning "of the legs".

[ 27 ] Coxal vesicles are pouches located on the belly side of the leg, which can be everted and probably serve in water absorption. They belong to the family Peripatidae and are named from coxa , the Latin word for "hip".

[ 28 ] On each foot is a pair of retractable, hardened (sclerotised) chitin claws, which give the taxon its scientific name: Onychophora is derived from the Ancient Greek : ονυχής , onyches , "claws"; and φέρειν , pherein , "to carry". At the base of the claws are three to six spiny "cushions" on which the leg sits in its resting position and on which the animal walks over smooth substrates. The claws are used mainly to gain a firm foothold on uneven terrain. Each claw is composed of three stacked elements, like Russian nesting dolls . The outermost is shed during ecdysis, which exposes the next element, which is fully formed and so does not need time to harden before it is used.

[ 29 ] This distinctive construction identifies many early Cambrian fossils as early offshoots of the onychophoran lineage.

[ 29 ] Nervous system [ edit ] The entire body, including the stub feet, is littered with numerous papillae : warty protrusions responsive to touch that carry a mechanoreceptive bristle at the tip, each of which is also connected to further sensory nerve cells lying beneath. The mouth papillae, the exits of the slime glands, probably also have some function in sensory perception . Sensory cells known as "sensills" on the "lips" or labrum respond to chemical stimuli and are known as chemoreceptors . These are also found on the two antennae, which seem to be the velvet worm's most important sensory organs.

[ citation needed ] Except in a few (typically subterranean ) species, one simply constructed eye (ocellus) lies behind each antenna, laterally, just underneath the head.

[ 30 ] This consists of a chitinous ball lens , a cornea and a retina and is connected to the centre of the brain via an optic nerve .

[ 30 ] The retina comprises numerous pigment cells and photoreceptors; the latter are easily modified flagellated cells, whose flagellum membranes carry a photosensitive pigment on their surface.

The rhabdomeric eyes of the Onychophora are thought to be homologous with the median ocelli of arthropods; this would suggest that the last common ancestor of arthropods may have only had median ocelli.

[ 30 ] However, the innervation shows that the homology is limited: The eyes of Onychophora form behind the antenna, whereas the opposite is true in arthropods.

[ 31 ] Skin and muscle [ edit ] Main article: Dermal papillae (Onychophora) Unlike the arthropods, velvet worms do not possess a rigid exoskeleton . Instead, their fluid-filled body cavity acts as a hydrostatic skeleton, similarly to many distantly related soft-bodied animals that are cylindrically shaped, for example sea anemones and various worms . Pressure of their (near- incompressible ) internal bodily fluid on the body wall provides rigidity, and muscles are able to act against it. The body wall consists of a non-cellular outer skin, the cuticula ; a single layer of epidermis cells forming an internal skin; and beneath this, usually three layers of muscle, which are embedded in connective tissues. The cuticula is about a micrometer thick and covered with fine villi . In composition and structure, it resembles the cuticula of the arthropods, consisting of α-chitin and various proteins , [ 13 ] although not containing collagen . It can be divided into an external epicuticula and an internal procuticula, which themselves consist of exo- and endo-cuticula. This multi-level structure is responsible for the high flexibility of the outer skin, which enables the velvet worm to squeeze itself into the narrowest crevices. Although outwardly water-repellent , the cuticula is not able to prevent water loss by respiration , and, as a result, velvet worms can live only in microclimates with high humidity to avoid desiccation . The surface of the cuticula is scattered with numerous fine papilla , the larger of which carry visible villi-like sensitive bristles. The papillae themselves are covered with tiny scales , lending the skin a velvety appearance (from which the common name is likely derived). It also feels like dry velvet to the touch, for which its water-repellent nature is responsible. Moulting of the skin ( ecdysis ) takes place regularly, around every 14 days, [ 32 ] induced by the hormone ecdysone . The inner surface of the skin bears a hexagonal pattern.

[ 33 ] At each moult, the shed skin is replaced by the epidermis, which lies immediately beneath it; unlike the cuticula, this consists of living cells. Beneath this lies a thick layer of connective tissue, which is composed primarily of collagen fibres aligned either parallel or perpendicular to the body's longitudinal axis. The colouration of Onychophora is generated by a range of pigments.

[ clarification needed ] The solubility of these pigments is a useful diagnostic character: in all arthropods and tardigrades, the body pigment is soluble in ethanol. This is also true for the Peripatidae, but in the case of the Peripatopsidae, the body pigment is insoluble in ethanol.

[ 34 ] Within the connective tissue lie three continuous layers of unspecialised smooth muscular tissue. The relatively thick outer layer is composed of annular muscles, and the similarly voluminous inner layer of longitudinal muscles. Between them lie thin diagonal muscles that wind backward and forward along the body axis in a spiral . Between the annular and diagonal muscles exist fine blood vessels , which lie below the superficially recognisable transverse rings of the skin and are responsible for the pseudo-segmented markings.

[ 26 ] Beneath the internal muscle layer lies the body cavity. In cross-section, this is divided into three regions by so-called dorso-ventral muscles, which run from the middle of the underbelly through to the edges of the upper side: a central midsection and on the left and right, two side regions that also include the legs.

[ citation needed ] Circulation [ edit ] The body cavity is known as a "pseudocoel", or haemocoel . Unlike a true coelom , a pseudocoel is not fully enclosed by a cell layer derived from the embryonic mesoderm . A coelom is, however, formed around the gonads and the waste-eliminating nephridia .

[ 26 ] As the name haemocoel suggests, the body cavity is filled with a blood -like liquid in which all the organs are embedded; in this way, they can be easily supplied with nutrients circulating in the blood. This liquid is colourless as it does not contain pigments ; for this reason, it serves only a limited role in oxygen transport.
Two different types of blood cells (or haemocytes) circulate in the fluid: Amoebocytes and nephrocytes. The amoebocytes probably function in protection from bacteria and other foreign bodies; in some species, they also play a role in reproduction . Nephrocytes absorb toxins or convert them into a form suitable for elimination by the nephridia.

[ citation needed ] The haemocoel is divided by a horizontal partition, the diaphragm, into two parts: The pericardial sinus along the back and the perivisceral sinus along the belly. The former encloses the tube-like heart, and the latter, the other organs. The diaphragm is perforated in many places, enabling the exchange of fluids between the two cavities.

[ citation needed ] The heart itself is a tube of annular muscles consisting of epithelial tissues, with two lateral openings ( ostia ) per segment. While it is not known whether the rear end is open or closed, from the front, it opens directly into the body cavity.

Since there are no blood vessels, apart from the fine vessels running between the muscle layers of the body wall and a pair of arteries that supply the antennae, this is referred to as an open circulation .

[ citation needed ] The timing of the pumping procedure can be divided into two parts: Diastole and systole . During diastole, blood flows through the ostia from the pericardial sinus (the cavity containing the heart) into the heart. When the systole begins, the ostia close and the heart muscles contract inwards, reducing the volume of the heart. This pumps the blood from the front end of the heart into the perivisceral sinus containing the organs. In this way, the various organs are supplied with nutrients before the blood finally returns to the pericardial sinus via the perforations in the diaphragm. In addition to the pumping action of the heart, body movements also influence circulation.

[ citation needed ] Respiration [ edit ] Oxygen uptake occurs to an extent via simple diffusion through the entire body surface, with the coxal vesicles on the legs possibly being involved in some species. However, of most importance is gas exchange via fine unbranched tubes, the tracheae , which draw oxygen from the surface deep into the various organs, particularly the heart.

The walls of these structures, which are less than three micrometers thick in their entirety, consist only of an extremely thin membrane through which oxygen can easily diffuse. The tracheae originate at tiny openings, the spiracles , which themselves are clustered together in dent-like recesses of the outer skin, the atria . The number of "tracheae bundles" thus formed is on average around 75 bundles per body segment; they accumulate most densely on the back of the organism.

[ citation needed ] Unlike the arthropods, the velvet worms are unable to control the openings of their tracheae; the tracheae are always open, entailing considerable water loss in arid conditions. Water is lost twice as fast as in earthworms and forty times faster than in caterpillars.

[ 35 ] For this reason, velvet worms are dependent upon habitats with high air humidity.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Oxygen transport is helped by the oxygen carrier hemocyanin .

[ 38 ] Digestion and excretion [ edit ] Digestive system of Peripatopsis capensis The digestive tract begins slightly behind the head, the mouth lying on the underside a little way from the frontmost point of the body. Here, prey can be mechanically dismembered by the mandibles with their covering of fine toothlets. Two salivary glands discharge via a common conductor into the subsequent "throat", which makes up the first part of the front intestine . The saliva that they produce contains mucus and hydrolytic enzymes , which initiate digestion in and outside the mouth.

The throat itself is very muscular, serving to absorb the partially liquified food and to pump it, via the oesophagus , which forms the rear part of the front intestine, into the central intestine. Unlike the front intestine, this is not lined with a cuticula but instead consists only of a single layer of epithelial tissue, which does not exhibit conspicuous indentation as is found in other animals.

On entering the central intestine, food particles are coated with a mucus-based peritrophic membrane , which serves to protect the lining of the intestine from damage by sharp-edged particles. The intestinal epithelium secretes further digestive enzymes and absorbs the released nutrients, although the majority of digestion has already taken place externally or in the mouth. Indigestible remnants arrive in the rear intestine, or rectum , which is once again lined with a cuticula and which opens at the anus , located on the underside near to the rear end.

[ citation needed ] In almost every segment is a pair of excretory organs called nephridia, which are derived from coelom tissue. Each consists of a small pouch that is connected, via a flagellated conductor called a nephridioduct, to an opening at the base of the nearest leg known as a nephridiopore. The pouch is occupied by special cells called podocytes , which facilitate ultrafiltration of the blood through the partition between haemocoelom and nephridium.

The composition of the urinary solution is modified in the nephridioduct by selective recovery of nutrients and water and by isolation of poison and waste materials, before it is excreted to the outside world via the nephridiopore. The most important nitrogenous excretion product is the water-insoluble uric acid ; this can be excreted in solid state, with very little water. This so-called uricotelic excretory mode represents an adjustment to life on land and the associated necessity of dealing economically with water.

[ citation needed ] A pair of former nephridia in the head were converted secondarily into the salivary glands, while another pair in the final segment of male specimens now serve as glands that apparently play a role in reproduction.

[ 39 ] Reproductive organs [ edit ] Both sexes possess pairs of gonads , opening via a channel called a gonoduct into a common genital opening, the gonopore , which is located on the rear ventral side. Both the gonads and the gonoduct are derived from true coelom tissue.

[ citation needed ] A dissected Euperipatoides kanangrensis . The two ovaries, full of stage II embryos, are floating to the bottom of the image.

In females, the two ovaries are joined in the middle and to the horizontal diaphragm. The gonoduct appears differently depending on whether the species is live-bearing or egg-laying . In live-bearing species, each exit channel divides into a slender oviduct and a roomy "womb", the uterus , in which the embryos develop. The single vagina , to which both uteri are connected, runs outward to the gonopore. In egg-laying species, whose gonoduct is uniformly constructed, the genital opening lies at the tip of a long egg-laying apparatus, the ovipositor . The females of many species also possess a sperm repository called the receptacle seminis , in which sperm cells from males can be stored temporarily or for longer periods.

[ citation needed ] Males possess two separate testes , along with the corresponding sperm vesicle (the vesicula seminalis ) and exit channel (the vasa efferentia ). The two vasa efferentia unite to a common sperm duct, the vas deferens , which in turn widens through the ejaculatory channel to open at the gonopore. Directly beside or behind this lie two pairs of special glands, which probably serve some auxiliary reproductive function; the rearmost glands are also known as anal glands.

[ 40 ] A penis -like structure has so far been found only in males of the genus Paraperipatus but has not yet been observed in action.

[ citation needed ] There are different mating procedures: in some species males deposit their spermatophore directly into the female's genital opening, while others deposit it on the female's body, where the cuticle will collapse, allowing the sperm cells to migrate into the female. There are also Australian species where the male place their spermatophore on top of their head, which is then pressed against the female's genitals. In these species the head have elaborate structures like spikes, spines, hollow stylets, pits, and depressions, whose purpose is to either hold the sperm and / or assist in the sperm transfer to the female. The males of most species also secrete a pheromone from glands on the underside of the legs to attract females.

[ 36 ] Distribution and habitat [ edit ] Distribution [ edit ] Known distribution of modern and fossil velvet worms.

Velvet worms are found in the tropics and in the temperate zone of the Southern Hemisphere . Members of the family Peripatidae are found the tropical regions of South America , Central America , the Caribbean islands, Gabon , Northeast India , and Southeast Asia . Meanwhile, members of Peripatopsidae are found Chile , Australia , Southern Africa , New Guinea , and New Zealand .

[ 41 ] One deviation is the South African Peripatopsis capensis . This animal inadvertently introduced to Santa Cruz Island in the Galapagos and co-occurs with native species.

[ 42 ] When looking at velvet worms as a whole, the majority of are found in Australia and South America.

[ 41 ] Extinct onychophorans have been discovered in parts of the Northern Hemisphere which are currently uninhabited by the group.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] While the onychophoran affinities of Succinipatopsis and Helenodora of are questioned, [ 46 ] [ 47 ] others like the Antennipatus are at a minimum close relatives of crown-group Onychophora ( Peripatidae and Peripatopsidae ).

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] This indicates that velvet worms were far more widespread in the past, but subsequently died off for unknown reasons.

[ 50 ] Habitat [ edit ] Velvet worms always sparsely occupy the habitats where they are found: they are rare among the fauna of which they are a part.

[ citation needed ] All extant velvet worms are terrestrial (land-living) and prefer dark environments with high air humidity. They are found particularly in the rainforests of the tropics and temperate zones, where they live among moss cushions and leaf litter , under tree trunks and stones, in rotting wood or in termite tunnels. They also occur in unforested grassland , if there exist sufficient crevices in the soil into which they can withdraw during the day, [ citation needed ] and in caves.

[ 51 ] Two species live in caves , a habitat to which their ability to squeeze themselves into the smallest cracks makes them exceptionally well-adapted and in which constant living conditions are guaranteed. Since the essential requirements for cave life were probably already present prior to the settlement of these habitats, this may be described as exaptation .

[ citation needed ] Some species of velvet worms are able to occupy human-modified land-uses, such as cocoa and banana plantations in South America and the Caribbean, but for others, conversion of rainforests is likely one of the most important threats to their survival [ citation needed ] (see Conservation ).

[ clarification needed ] Velvet worms are photophobic: They are repelled by bright light sources.

[ 36 ] Because the danger of desiccation is greatest during the day and in dry weather, it is not surprising that velvet worms are usually most active at night and during rainy weather. Under cold or dry conditions, they actively seek out crevices in which they shift their body into a resting state.

[ 52 ] Behaviour [ edit ] Locomotion [ edit ] Peripatoides aurorbis walking Velvet worms move in a slow and gradual motion that makes them difficult for prey to notice.

[ 24 ] Their trunk is raised relatively high above the ground, and they walk with non-overlapping steps.

[ 53 ] To move from place to place, the velvet worm crawls forward using its legs; unlike in arthropods, both legs of a pair are moved simultaneously. The claws of the feet are used only on hard, rough terrain where a firm grip is needed; on soft substrates, such as moss, the velvet worm walks on the foot cushions at the base of the claws.

[ citation needed ] Actual locomotion is achieved less by the exertion of the leg muscles than by local changes of body length. This can be controlled using the annular and longitudinal muscles. If the annular muscles are contracted, the body cross-section is reduced, and the corresponding segment lengthens; this is the usual mode of operation of the hydrostatic skeleton as also employed by other worms. Due to the stretching, the legs of the segment concerned are lifted and swung forward. Local contraction of the longitudinal muscles then shortens the appropriate segment, and the legs, which are now in contact with the ground, are moved to the rear. This part of the locomotive cycle is the actual leg stroke that is responsible for forward movement. The individual stretches and contractions of the segments are coordinated by the nervous system such that contraction waves run the length of the body, each pair of legs swinging forward and then down and rearward in succession.

Macroperipatus can reach speeds of up to four centimetres per second, [ 24 ] although speeds of around 6 body-lengths per minute are more typical.

[ 54 ] The body gets longer and narrower as the animal picks up speed; the length of each leg also varies during each stride.

[ 54 ] Sociality [ edit ] The brains of Onychophora, though small, are very complex; consequently, the organisms are capable of rather sophisticated social interactions.

[ 55 ] Behaviour may vary from genus to genus, so this article reflects the most-studied genus, Euperipatoides .

[ 55 ] The Euperipatoides form social groups of up to fifteen individuals, usually closely related, which will typically live and hunt together. Groups usually live together; in drier regions an example of a shared home would be the moist interior of a rotting log. Group members are extremely aggressive towards individuals from other logs.

[ 55 ] Dominance is achieved through aggression and maintained through submissive behaviour.

[ 55 ] After a kill, the dominant female always feeds first, followed in turn by the other females, then males, then the young.

[ 55 ] When assessing other individuals, individuals often measure one another up by running their antennae down the length of the other individual.

[ 55 ] Once hierarchy has been established, pairs of individuals will often cluster together to form an "aggregate"; this is fastest in male-female pairings, followed by pairs of females, then pairs of males.

[ 55 ] Social hierarchy is established by a number of interactions: Higher-ranking individuals will chase and bite their subordinates while the latter are trying to crawl on top of them.

[ 55 ] Juveniles never engage in aggressive behaviour, but climb on top of adults, which tolerate their presence on their backs.

[ 55 ] Hierarchy is quickly established among individuals from a single group, but not among organisms from different groups; these are substantially more aggressive and very rarely climb one another or form aggregates.

[ 55 ] Individuals within an individual log are usually closely related; especially so with males. This may be related to the intense aggression between unrelated females.

[ 55 ] Feeding [ edit ] Unidentified onychophoran species feeding on a cockroach Velvet worms are ambush predators , hunting only by night , [ 24 ] and are able to capture animals at least their own size, although capturing a large prey item may take almost all of their mucus -secreting capacity.

[ 56 ] They feed on almost any small invertebrates, including woodlice ( Isopoda ), termites ( Isoptera ), crickets ( Gryllidae ), book/bark lice ( Psocoptera ), cockroaches ( Blattidae ), millipedes and centipedes ( Myriapoda ), spiders ( Araneae ), [ 56 ] various worms, and even large snails ( Gastropoda ). Depending on their size, they eat on average every one to four weeks.

[ 24 ] They are considered to be ecologically equivalent to centipedes ( Chilopoda ).

The most energetically favourable prey are two-fifths the size of the hunting onychophoran.

[ 24 ] Ninety percent of the time involved in eating prey is spent ingesting it; re-ingestion of the slime used to trap the insect is performed while the onychophoran locates a suitable place to puncture the prey, and this phase accounts for around 8% of the feeding time, with the remaining time evenly split between examining, squirting, and injecting the prey.

[ 24 ] In some cases, chunks of the prey item are bitten off and swallowed; undigestable components take around 18 hours to pass through the digestive tract.

[ 13 ] Onychophora probably do not primarily use vision to detect their prey; although their tiny eyes do have a good image-forming capacity, their forward vision is obscured by their antennae; [ 24 ] their nocturnal habit also limits the utility of eyesight. Air currents, formed by prey motion, are thought to be the primary mode of locating prey; the role of scent, if any, is unclear.

[ 24 ] Because it takes so long to ingest a prey item, hunting mainly happens around dusk; the onychophorans will abandon their prey at sunrise.

[ 24 ] This predatory way of life is probably a consequence of the velvet worm's need to remain moist. Due to the continual risk of desiccation, often only a few hours per day are available for finding food. This leads to a strong selection for a low cost-benefit ratio, which cannot be achieved with a herbivorous diet.

[ citation needed ] Velvet worms literally creep up on their prey, with their smooth, gradual and fluid movement escaping detection.

[ 24 ] Once they reach their prey, they touch it very softly with their antennae to assess its size and nutritional value. After each poke, the antenna is hastily retracted to avoid alerting the prey.

[ 24 ] This investigation may last anywhere upwards of ten seconds, until the velvet worm makes a decision as to whether to attack it, or until it disturbs the prey and the prey flees.

[ 24 ] Hungry Onychophora spend less time investigating their prey and are quicker to apply their slime.

[ 24 ] Once slime has been squirted, Onychophora are determined to pursue and devour their prey, in order to recoup the energy investment. They have been observed to spend up to ten minutes searching for removed prey, after which they return to their slime to eat it.

[ 24 ] In the case of smaller prey, they may opt not to use slime at all.

[ 24 ] Subsequently, a soft part of the prey item (usually a joint membrane in arthropod prey) is identified, punctured with a bite from the jaws, and injected with saliva. This kills the prey very quickly and begins a slower process of digestion.

[ 24 ] While the onychophoran waits for the prey to digest, it salivates on its slime and begins to eat it (and anything attached to it). It subsequently tugs and slices at the earlier perforation to allow access to the now-liquefied interior of its prey.

[ 24 ] The jaws operate by moving backwards and forwards along the axis of the body (not in a side-to-side clipping motion as in arthropods), conceivably using a pairing of musculature and hydrostatic pressure.

[ 13 ] The pharynx is specially adapted for sucking, to extract the liquefied tissue; the arrangement of the jaws about the tongue and lip papillae ensures a tight seal and the establishment of suction.

[ 13 ] In social groups, the dominant female is the first to feed, not permitting competitors access to the prey item for the first hour of feeding. Subsequently, subordinate individuals begin to feed. The number of males reaches a peak after females start to leave the prey item.

[ 55 ] After feeding, individuals clean their antennae and mouth parts before re-joining the rest of their group.

[ 55 ] Growth, development, and reproduction [ edit ] Almost all velvet worms reproduce sexually . The sole exception is Epiperipatus imthurni , which have no males and reproduce by parthenogenesis .

[ 57 ] In most cases, velvet worms are sexually dimorphic .

Females are usually larger than males and can often have more legs. All velvet worms have internal fertilization , though the way this is done varies widely. For most of them, a package of sperm cells called the spermatophore is placed into female's vagina . In many species, fertilization happens only once. Because of this, copulation can happen before reproductive organs are even fully developed. In cases like this, sperm cells are kept in a special reservoir where they can survive for longer.

The detailed process by which this is achieved is in most cases still unknown, a true penis having been observed only in species of the genus Paraperipatus . In many Australian species, there exist dimples or special dagger - or axe -shaped structures on the head; the male of Florelliceps stutchburyae presses a long spine against the female's genital opening and probably positions its spermatophore there in this way. During the process, the female supports the male by keeping him clasped with the claws of her last pair of legs. The mating behavior of two species of the genus Peripatopsis is particularly curious. Here, the male places two-millimetre spermatophores on the back or sides of the female.

Amoebocytes from the female's blood collect on the inside of the deposition site, and both the spermatophore's casing and the body wall on which it rests are decomposed via the secretion of enzymes . This releases the sperm cells, which then move freely through the haemocoel , penetrate the external wall of the ovaries and finally fertilize the ova . Why this self-inflicted skin injury does not lead to bacterial infections is not yet understood (though likely related to the enzymes used to deteriorate the skin or facilitate the transfer of viable genetic material from male to female). Velvet worms are found in egg-laying ( oviparous ), egg-live-bearing ( ovoviviparous ) and live-bearing ( viviparous ) forms.

In a recent peer-reviewed paper published in the "Journal of Zoology," researchers discovered that certain species of Peripatus exhibit a unique form of parental care. Unlike most invertebrates, where parental involvement is minimal, female Peripatus were observed actively guarding their eggs and even providing protection to their offspring after hatching. This finding challenges the conventional understanding of reproductive behavior in invertebrates and highlights the diversity of parenting strategies in the animal kingdom.

[ 58 ] Ovipary occurs solely in the Peripatopsidae, often in regions with erratic food supply or unsettled climate. In these cases, the yolk -rich eggs measure 1.3 to 2.0 mm and are coated in a protective chitinous shell.

Maternal care is unknown.

The majority of species are ovoviviparous: the medium-sized eggs, encased only by a double membrane, remain in the uterus . The embryos do not receive food directly from the mother, but are supplied instead by the moderate quantity of yolk contained in the eggs—they are therefore described as lecithotrophic . The young emerge from the eggs only a short time before birth. This probably represents the velvet worm's original mode of reproduction, i.e., both oviparous and viviparous species developed from ovoviviparous species.

True live-bearing species are found in both families, particularly in tropical regions with a stable climate and regular food supply throughout the year. The embryos develop from eggs only micrometres in size and are nourished in the uterus by their mother, hence the description " matrotrophic ". The supply of food takes place either via a secretion from the mother directly into the uterus or via a genuine tissue connection between the epithelium of the uterus and the developing embryo, known as a placenta . The former is found only outside the American continents, while the latter occurs primarily in America and the Caribbean and more rarely in the Old World . The gestation period can amount to up to 15 months, at the end of which the offspring emerge in an advanced stage of development. The embryos found in the uterus of a single female do not necessarily have to be of the same age; it is quite possible for there to be offspring at different stages of development and descended from different males. In some species, young tend to be released only at certain points in the year.

[ 59 ] A female can have between 1 and 23 offspring per year; development from fertilized ovum to adult takes between 6 and 17 months and does not have a larval stage. This is probably also the original mode of development. Velvet worms have been known to live for up to six years.

Ecology [ edit ] The velvet worm's important predators are primarily various spiders and centipedes, along with rodents and birds , such as, in Central America, the clay-coloured thrush ( Turdus grayi ). In South America, Hemprichi's coral snake ( Micrurus hemprichii ) feeds almost exclusively on velvet worms.

[ 60 ] For defence, some species roll themselves reflexively into a spiral, while they can also fight off smaller opponents by ejecting slime. Various mites ( Acari ) are known to be ectoparasites infesting the skin of the velvet worm. Skin injuries are usually accompanied by bacterial infections, which are almost always fatal.

[ citation needed ] Phylogeny [ edit ] Internal phylogeny [ edit ] Eoperipatus totoro , a basal member of Peripatidae Living velvet worms are divided into two families: Peripatidae and Peripatopsidae . These diverged around 274 million years ago during the Late Devonian and have since diversified.

[ 61 ] Within Peripatidae, the genera Eoperipatus (found in Southeast Asia ) and Mesoperipatus (found in Gabon ) were the most basal, while the rest of the group is found in tropical regions of the Americas .

[ 61 ] On the other hand, Peritpatopsidae can be divided into two main clades . One has members in Southern Africa and Chile , while the others live in Australasia .

[ 62 ] [ 61 ] Below is a genus -level cladogram of velvet worms. Note that this phylogeny doesn't analyze every species and lumps most peripatids into Neopatida , as many Peripatidae genera are paraphyletic .

[ 63 ] As of 2023, there are around 232 total living species, meaning this phylogeny should eventually be updated.

[ 41 ] Onychophora Peripatopsidae Paraperipatus Peripatopsidae sp. MCZ 131371 & MCZ 141416 Ooperipatus Phallocephale Aethrikos Euperipatoides Occiperipatoides Kumbadjena Peripatoides Diemenipatus Tasmanipatus Ooperipatellus Peripatopsis Metaperipatus Opisthopatus Peripatidae Eoperipatus Mesoperipatus Neopatida External phylogeny [ edit ] In their present forms, the velvet worms are probably very closely related to the arthropods, a very extensive taxon that incorporates, for instance, the crustaceans, insects, and arachnids. They share, among other things, an exoskeleton consisting of α-chitin and non-collagenous proteins; gonads and waste-elimination organs enclosed in true coelom tissue; an open blood system with a tubular heart situated at the rear; an abdominal cavity divided into pericardial and perivisceral cavities; respiration via tracheae; and similar embryonic development. Segmentation, with two body appendages per segment, is also a shared feature.

However, the antennae, mandibles, and oral papillae of velvet worms are probably not homologous to the corresponding features in arthropods; i.e., they probably developed independently.

Another closely related group are the comparatively obscure water bears ( Tardigrada ); however, due to their very small size, water bears have no need for—and hence lack—blood circulation and separate respiratory structures: shared characteristics that support common ancestry of velvet worms and arthropods.

Together, the velvet worms, arthropods, and water bears form a monophyletic taxon, the Panarthropoda , i.e., the three groups collectively cover all descendants of their last common ancestor. Due to certain similarities of form, the velvet worms were usually grouped with the water bears to form the taxon Protoarthropoda. This designation would imply that both velvet worms and water bears are not yet as highly developed as the arthropods. Modern systematic theories reject such conceptions of "primitive" and "highly developed" organisms and instead consider exclusively the historical relationships among the taxa. These relationships are not as yet fully understood, but it is considered probable that the velvet worms' sister groups form a taxon designated Tactopoda , thus: Panarthropoda Velvet worms ( Onychophora ) Tactopoda Water bears ( Tardigrada ) Arthropods ( Arthropoda ) For a long time, velvet worms were also considered related to the annelids . They share, among other things, a worm-like body; a thin and flexible outer skin; a layered musculature; paired waste-elimination organs; as well as a simply constructed brain and simple eyes. Decisive, however, was the existence of segmentation in both groups, with the segments showing only minor specialisation. The parapodia appendages found in annelids therefore correspond to the stump feet of the velvet worms. Within the Articulata hypothesis developed by Georges Cuvier , the velvet worms therefore formed an evolutionary link between the annelids and the arthropods: worm-like precursors first developed parapodia, which then developed further into stub feet as an intermediate link in the ultimate development of the arthropods' appendages. Due to their structural conservatism, the velvet worms were thus considered "living fossils". This perspective was expressed paradigmatically in the statement by the French zoologist A. Vandel: Onychophorans can be considered highly evolved annelids, adapted to terrestrial life, which announced prophetically the Arthropoda. They are a lateral branch which has endured from ancient times until today, without important modifications.

Modern taxonomy does not study criteria such as "higher" and "lower" states of development or distinctions between "main" and "side" branches—only family relationships indicated by cladistic methods are considered relevant. From this point of view, several common characteristics still support the Articulata hypothesis — segmented body; paired appendages on each segment; pairwise arrangement of waste-elimination organs in each segment; and above all, a rope-ladder-like nervous system based on a double nerve strand lying along the belly. An alternative concept, most widely accepted today, is the so-called Ecdysozoa hypothesis . This places the annelids and Panarthropoda in two very different groups: the former in the Lophotrochozoa and the latter in the Ecdysozoa. Mitochondrial gene sequences also provide support for this hypothesis.

[ 64 ] Proponents of this hypothesis assume that the aforementioned similarities between annelids and velvet worms either developed convergently or were primitive characteristics passed unchanged from a common ancestor to both the Lophotrochozoa and Ecdysozoa. For example, in the first case, the rope-ladder nervous system would have developed in the two groups independently, while in the second case, it is a very old characteristic, which does not imply a particularly close relationship between the annelids and Panarthropoda. The Ecdysozoa concept divides the taxon into two, the Panarthropoda into which the velvet worms are placed, and the sister group Cycloneuralia , containing the threadworms ( Nematoda ), horsehair worms ( Nematomorpha ) and three rather obscure groups: the mud dragons ( Kinorhyncha ); penis worms ( Priapulida ); and brush-heads ( Loricifera ).

Protostomia Ecdysozoa Panarthropoda (arthropods, velvet worms, water bears) Cycloneuralia (threadworms, horsehair worms, and others) Lophotrochozoa (annelids, molluscs, and others) (other Protostomes) Particularly characteristic of the Cycloneuralia is a ring of "circumoral" nerves around the mouth opening, which the proponents of the Ecdysozoa hypothesis also recognise in modified form in the details of the nerve patterns of the Panarthropoda. Both groups also share a common skin-shedding mechanism ( ecdysis ) and molecular biological similarities. One problem of the Ecdysozoa hypothesis is the velvet worms' subterminal position of their mouths: Unlike in the Cycloneuralia, the mouth is not at the front end of the body, but lies further back, under the belly. However, investigations into their developmental biology, particularly regarding the development of the head nerves, suggest that this was not always the case, and that the mouth was originally terminal (situated at the tip of the body). This is supported by the fossil record .

The "stem-group arthropod" hypothesis is very widely accepted, but some trees suggest that the onychophorans may occupy a different position; their brain anatomy is more closely related to that of the chelicerates than to any other arthropod.

[ 65 ] The modern velvet worms form a monophyletic group, incorporating all the descendants of their common ancestor. Important common derivative characteristics ( synapomorphies ) include, for example, the mandibles of the second body segment and the oral papillae and associated slime glands of the third; nerve strands extending along the underside with numerous cross-linkages per segment; and the special form of the tracheae. By 2011, some 180 modern species, comprising 49 genera , had been described; [ 66 ] the actual number of species is probably about twice this. According to more recent study, 82 species of Peripatidae and 115 species of Peripatopsidae have been described thus far. However, among the 197 species, 20 are nomina dubia , due to major taxonomic inconsistencies.

[ 67 ] The best-known is the type genus Peripatus , which was described as early as 1825 and which, in English-speaking countries, stands representative for all velvet worms. All genera are assigned to one of two families, the distribution ranges of which do not overlap but are separated by arid areas or oceans: The Peripatopsidae exhibit relatively many characteristics that are perceived as original or "primitive". The number of leg pairs in this family range from 13 (in Ooperipatellus nanus [ 10 ] ) to 29 (in Paraperipatus papuensis [ 68 ] [ 69 ] ).

[ 70 ] Behind or between the last leg pair is the genital opening ( gonopore ).

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] Both oviparous and ovoviviparous, as well as genuinely viviparous, species exist, although the peripatopsids essentially lack a placenta. Their distribution is circumaustral, encompassing Australasia , South Africa , and Chile .

[ 67 ] The Peripatidae exhibit a range of derivative features. They are longer, on average, than the Peripatopsidae and also have more legs. The number of leg pairs in this family range from 19 (in Typhloperipatus williamsoni [ 72 ] ) to 43 (in Plicatoperipatus jamaicensis [ 10 ] ).

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] The gonopore is always between the penultimate leg pair.

[ 70 ] None of the peripatid species are oviparous, and the overwhelming majority are viviparous. The females of many viviparous species develop a placenta with which to provide the growing embryo with nutrients. Distribution of the peripatids is restricted to the tropical and subtropical zones; in particular, they inhabit Central America , northern South America , Gabon , Northeast India , and Southeast Asia .

[ 67 ] Genomics [ edit ] As of February 2025, velvet worms have had only two nuclear genomes sequenced.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] These are of Euperipatoides rowelli (a peripatopsid ) and Epiperipatus broadwayi (a peripatid ). The first one is highly fragmented, while the second is less so, but still needs improvement.

[ 75 ] Velvet worms seem to display genome gigantism, with the more complete assembly (E. broadwayi) having an size of 5.60 giga- base pairs .

[ 75 ] Around 70.92% of its genome are repeat sequences , something that contributes to the bulk of its size. While less substantial, it also has very large introns , or parts of a gene that do not become proteins .

[ 75 ] Evolution [ edit ] Insights on decay and fossilization [ edit ] Feature decay timeline. Yellow means "pristine", orange means "decaying", red means "some or all lost" Due to being soft-bodied, onychophorans need excellent conditions to fossilize . However, even when this happens, their fossils can be subject to taphonomic bias . Experiments were done with modern velvet worms to analyze their decomposition in various saline solutions .

[ 76 ] The study also investigated whether they experienced something called stemward slippage . In this phenomenon, animals are falsely categorized as more primitive due to the decay of certain features.

[ 76 ] The researchers found that different features decayed at significantly different rates.

[ 76 ] Salinity and time of moult had little effect on decay, and the way things decomposed remained the same for different species (though it could happen at different speeds).

[ 76 ] Before any degradation, velvet worms flex into a S, U, or circular shape. Most flexing happens in the first 24 hours, but the process can continue for around two more days.

[ 76 ] In the early stages of decay, the epidermis and outer cuticle separate, causing a bloated appearance. The elongates while increasing in width by around 10–30%. The limbs do the same, increasing in length and width by around 10–25%.

[ 76 ] Around the same time, the internal organs begin to degrade. This eventually culminates in the gut rupturing, destroying the other organs.

[ 76 ] In later stages of decay, the body cuticle shrinks close to its original size. A similar trend was found with the limbs, but it was just short of being statistically significant.

[ 76 ] It's around this time that many external features begin to deteriorate. These include the dermal papillae , leg rings, anus , gonopore , antenna , slime papillae, and eventually eyes . Interestingly, the dermal papillae on the trunk disappear faster than those on the limbs.

[ 76 ] Even as decay progresses, the body is still recognizable. This stops once the outer cuticle finally ruptures. After that, the animal’s anatomy is extremely difficult to interpret. At this stage, the only identifiable features would be the chitinous jaws and claws.

[ 76 ] Onychophorans are unlikely to experience any stemward slippage since their defining features (jaws, feet, and slime papillae) are generally decay-resistant.

[ 76 ] However, decomposition has a significant impact on fossil anatomy. For starters, the preserved body outline is probably somewhat inaccurate, as this gets bloated in the decay process. A similar thing happens with the limbs , so this needs to be accounted for when analyzing locomotion and/or leg length.

[ 76 ] While fossilized onychophorans can appear to display patterning , these aren't true to life.

pigment granules are one of the first things to degrade and can easily move around in the body.

[ 76 ] Another finding is that characters such as internal organs or the body cavity are highly unlikely to fossilize. If these appear preserved in a fossil, they should be treated with skepticism, especially if they’re unmineralized .

[ 76 ] When it comes to placement of the mouth , even moderate decay makes it hard to tell if it's at the front or underside of the head.

[ 76 ] Additionally, fossils that lack decay-resistant features probably lacked them in life. This is even more plausible if the fossil preserves decay-prone features, as their presence indicates a better level of preservation. For example, an onychophoran (or related animal) with eyes but no claws likely never had them.

[ 76 ] Emergence from lobopodians [ edit ] Antennacanthopodia , a close relative of onychophorans Certain fossils from the Early Cambrian bear a striking resemblance to the velvet worms. These fossils, known collectively as lobopodians , were an evolutionary grade that gave rise to arthropods , tardigrades , onychophorans, and the extinct radiodonts .

[ 77 ] How different lobopodians are related varies from study to study. However, with the exception of a single paper, [ 78 ] Antennacanthopodia is the only animal to be confidently viewed as a close onychophoran relative.

[ 77 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] Antennacanthopodia lived during the Cambrian Stage 3 and possessed a variety of onychophoran traits: stubby lobopods, spinous foot pads, an annulated body, and small eyes behind the main antennae . An obvious difference from onychophorans was that the animal had not one, but two pairs of antennae.

[ 83 ] These secondary antennae were shorter than the first pair and thought to be homologous with either the slime papillae [ 83 ] or jaws of velvet worms.

[ 84 ] When Onychophora first arose or moved onto land is currently unknown. However, it could have plausibly happened between the Ordovician and Silurian – approximately 490 to 430 million years ago – via the intertidal zone .

[ 34 ] Velvet worms and their diversification [ edit ] Reconstruction of the Carboniferous possible onychophoran Helenodora The earliest potential onychophoran, Helenodora , originates from the Mid Pennsylvanian Mazon Creek lagerstätte in the United States . Originally described in 1980, [ 85 ] Helenodora was long regarded as the earliest known onychophoran.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 77 ] [ 79 ] This changed in 2016 when a paper by Murdock et al. doubted its affinity. Based on the absence of many decay -resistant features ( claws , jaws, slime papillae) and unclear ecology ( Carbotubulus , a late-surviving aquatic lobopodian , was found in the same formation ), the authors of this study placed Helenodora as a basal lobopodian most closely related to Paucipodia .

[ 88 ] The earliest definite onychophoran is the French Antennipatus from a Stephanian ( Late Pennsylvanian [ 89 ] ) Lagerstätte in Montceau-les-Mines .

[ 5 ] This animal had a ventral (bottom facing) mouth , rings of dermal papillae on its trunk and limbs , and was at least somewhat terrestrial because of its slime papillae.

[ 5 ] However, due to the way it was preserved, it is unknown if Antennipatus belonged to the stem or crown group of the two living families of velvet worm ( Peripatidae and Peripatopsidae ).

[ 5 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Based on molecular dating , crown-group onychophorans diverged around 376 million years ago in the Late Devonian . This estimation happens regardless if Antennipatus is used to constrain the divergence date, or if no calibration is done at all.

[ 91 ] The earliest known crown-group onychophoran, Cretoperipatus , is known from multiple specimens in Burmese amber .

[ 87 ] [ 92 ] [ 90 ] All are from the same general location and date to a maximum age of around 98.79 million years ago (the earliest Cenomanian of the Late Cretaceous ).

[ 90 ] Based on its morphology , Cretoperipatus was early-diverging member of Peripatidae , most closely related to the Asian genera Eoperipatus and Typhloperipatus .

[ 92 ] Despite being preserved in amber , the affinities of the Cenozoic Tertiapatus and Succinipatopsis are surrounded in controversy. Some sources consider them to be onychophorans, [ 86 ] [ 92 ] while others dismiss this.

[ 5 ] Ultimately, these animals should be reanalyzed to better grasp their position on the tree of life .

[ 92 ] Conservation status [ edit ] The global conservation status of velvet worm species is difficult to estimate; many species are only found their type locality (the location at which they were first observed and described). The collection of reliable data is also hindered by velvet worms' low population densities , their typically nocturnal behavior, and possibly as-yet undocumented seasonal influences and sexual dimorphism .

[ 93 ] To date, the only onychophorans evaluated by the IUCN are: [ 94 ] DD Mesoperipatus tholloni NT Plicatoperipatus jamaicensis VU Peripatoides indigo VU Peripatoides suteri VU Peripatopsis alba VU Peripatopsis clavigera EN Leucopatus anophthalmus EN Macroperipatus insularis CR Opisthopatus roseus CR Peripatopsis leonina CR Speleoperipatus spelaeus The primary threat to velvet worms comes from destruction and fragmentation of their habitat due to industrialisation , draining of wetlands , and slash-and-burn agriculture. As mentioned above, many species also have naturally low population densities and closely restricted geographic ranges. As a result, localized disturbances of important ecosystems could lead to the extinction of entire populations or species. Collection of specimens for universities or research institutes also plays a role on a local scale.

[ 93 ] There is a very pronounced difference in the protection afforded to velvet worms between regions: in some countries, such as South Africa , there are restrictions on both collecting and exporting , while in others, such as Australia , only export restrictions exist. Many countries offer no specific safeguards at all.

Tasmania has a protection program that is unique worldwide: one region of forest has its own velvet worm conservation plan tailored to a particular species ( Tasmanipatus barretti ).

[ 93 ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ The secretion ejected by onychophorans is sometimes referred to as glue , but termed slime in current scientific literature; e.g.

Benkendorff et al. (1999) , [ 18 ] Baer & Mayer (2012) , [ 19 ] Concha et al. (2014), [ 17 ] and others.

[ 20 ] References [ edit ] ^ Holm, E.; Dippenaar-Schoeman, A. (2010).

The Arthropods of Southern Africa .

ISBN 978-0-7993-4689-3 .

[ page needed ] ^ Prothero, D. R.; Buell, C. D. (2007).

Evolution: What the Fossils Say and Why It Matters . New York: Columbia University Press. p.

193 .

ISBN 978-0-231-13962-5 .

^ Ruppert, E. E.; Fox, R. S.; Barnes, R. D. (2004).

Invertebrate Zoology: A Functional Evolutionary Approach (7th ed.). Belmont: Thomson-Brooks / Cole. p.

505 .

ISBN 978-0-03-025982-1 .

Because they resemble worms with legs ... Superficially they resemble caterpillars, but have also been compared with slugs ^ Piper, Ross (2007).

"Velvet Worms" .

Extraordinary Animals: An Encyclopedia of Curious and Unusual Animals . Greenwood Press. pp.

109–11 .

ISBN 978-0-313-33922-6 .

^ a b c d e f Garwood, Russell J.; Edgecombe, Gregory D.; Charbonnier, Sylvain; Chabard, Dominique; Sotty, Daniel; Giribet, Gonzalo (2016).

"Carboniferous Onychophora from Montceau-les-Mines, France, and onychophoran terrestrialization" .

Invertebrate Biology .

135 (3): 179– 190.

doi : 10.1111/ivb.12130 .

ISSN 1077-8306 .

PMC 5042098 .

PMID 27708504 .

^ Fishelson, L. (1978).

Zoology . Vol. 1 (3rd ed.). Israel: Hakibutz Hameuchad Publishing. p. 430.

[ verification needed ] ^ Giribet, Gonzalo; Buckman-Young, Rebecca S.; Costa, Cristiano Sampaio; Baker, Caitlin M.; Benavides, Ligia R.; Branstetter, Michael G.; et al. (2018). "The 'Peripatos' in Eurogondwana? – Lack of evidence that south-east Asian onychophorans walked through Europe".

Invertebrate Systematics .

32 (4): 840– 863.

doi : 10.1071/IS18007 .

^ Allwood, Julia; Gleeson, Dianne; Mayer, Georg; Daniels, Savel; Beggs, Jacqueline R.; Buckley, Thomas R. (2010). "Support for vicariant origins of the New Zealand Onychophora".

Journal of Biogeography .

37 (4): 669– 681.

Bibcode : 2010JBiog..37..669A .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2699.2009.02233.x .

S2CID 55395265 .

^ Morera-Brenes, B.; Monge-Nájera, J. (2010). "A new giant species of placented worm and the mechanism by which onychophorans weave their nets (Onychophora: Peripatidae)".

Revista de Biología Tropical .

58 (4): 1127– 1142.

arXiv : 1511.00983 .

doi : 10.15517/rbt.v58i4.5398 .

PMID 21246983 .

^ a b c Yang, Jie; Ortega-Hernández, Javier; Gerber, Sylvain; Butterfield, Nicholas J.; Hou, Jin-bo; Lan, Tian; Zhang, Xi-guang (2015-07-14).

"A superarmored lobopodian from the Cambrian of China and early disparity in the evolution of Onychophora" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

112 (28): 8678– 8683.

Bibcode : 2015PNAS..112.8678Y .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1505596112 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 4507230 .

PMID 26124122 – via ResearchGate.

^ Janssen, R.; Jorgensen, M.; Lagebro, L.; Budd, G. E. (18 March 2015).

"Fate and nature of the onychophoran mouth-anus furrow and its contribution to the blastopore" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

282 (1805): 20142628.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2014.2628 .

PMC 4389607 .

PMID 25788603 .

^ Eriksson, Bo Joakim; Tait, Noel N.; Budd, Graham E.; Janssen, Ralf; Akam, Michael (September 2010).

"Head patterning and Hox gene expression in an onychophoran and its implications for the arthropod head problem" .

Development Genes and Evolution .

220 ( 3– 4): 117– 22.

doi : 10.1007/s00427-010-0329-1 .

PMID 20567844 .

S2CID 6755763 .

^ a b c d e f g Mayer, G.; Oliveira, I. S.; Baer, A.; Hammel, J. U.; Gallant, J.; Hochberg, R. (2015).

"Capture of Prey, Feeding, and Functional Anatomy of the Jaws in Velvet Worms (Onychophora)" .

Integrative and Comparative Biology .

55 (2): 217– 227.

doi : 10.1093/icb/icv004 .

PMID 25829018 .

^ Eriksson, B. Joakim; Tait, Noel N.; Budd, Graham E. (January 2003).

"Head development in the onychophoran Euperipatoides kanangrensis with particular reference to the central nervous system" .

Journal of Morphology .

255 (1): 1– 23.

doi : 10.1002/jmor.10034 .

PMID 12420318 .

S2CID 42865895 .

^ a b Wright, Jonathan C.; Luke, Barbara M. (1989). "Ultrastructural and histochemical investigations of peripatus integument".

Tissue & Cell .

21 (4): 605– 25.

doi : 10.1016/0040-8166(89)90012-8 .

PMID 18620280 .

^ a b Morera-Brenes, B.; Monge-Najera, J. (2010).

"A new giant species of placented worm and the mechanism by which onychophorans weave their nets (onychophora: Peripatidae)" .

Revista de Biología Tropical .

58 (4): 1127– 1142.

arXiv : 1511.00983 .

doi : 10.15517/rbt.v58i4.5398 .

PMID 21246983 . Archived from the original on 2015-04-02.

^ a b c d e f Concha, Andrés; Mellado, Paula; Morera-Brenes, B.; Sampaio Costa, Cristiano; Mahadevan, L.; Monge-Nájera, Julián (17 March 2015).

"Oscillation of the velvet worm slime jet by passive hydrodynamic instability" .

Nature Communications .

6 6292.

Bibcode : 2015NatCo...6.6292C .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms7292 .

PMC 4382676 .

PMID 25780995 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Benkendorff, Kirsten; Beardmore, Kate; Gooley, Andrew A.; Packer, Nicolle H.; Tait, Noel N. (December 1999). "Characterisation of the slime gland secretion from the peripatus, Euperipatoides kanangrensis (Onychophora: Peripatopsidae)".

Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology B .

124 (4): 457– 65.

doi : 10.1016/S0305-0491(99)00145-5 .

^ a b Baer, Alexander; Mayer, Georg (October 2012). "Comparative anatomy of slime glands in onychophora (velvet worms)".

Journal of Morphology .

273 (10): 1079– 1088.

doi : 10.1002/jmor.20044 .

PMID 22707384 .

S2CID 701697 .

^ Baer, A.; de Sena Oliveira, I.; Steinhagen, M.; Beck-Sickinger, A.G.; Mayer, G. (2014).

"Slime protein profiling: A non-invasive tool for species identification in Onychophora (velvet worms)" .

Journal of Zoological Systematics and Evolutionary Research .

52 (4): 265– 272.

doi : 10.1111/jzs.12070 .

^ Morera-Brenes, Bernal; Monge-Nájera, Julián (December 2010). "A new giant species of placented worm and the mechanism by which onychophorans weave their nets (onychophora: Peripatidae)".

Revista Biologìa Tropical .

58 : 1127– 1142.

arXiv : 1511.00983 .

^ Holm, Erik; Dippenaar-Schoeman (2010).

Goggo Guide . LAPA publishers.

ISBN 978-0-7993-4689-3 .

[ page needed ] ^ Harmer, Sidney Frederic; Shipley, Arthur Everett; et al. (1922).

Peripatus, Myriapods, Insects . The Cambridge Natural History. Vol. 5. Macmillan Company.

[ page needed ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u Read, V. M. St J.; Hughes, R. N. (May 22, 1987). "Feeding Behaviour and Prey Choice in Macroperipatus torquatus (Onychophora)".

Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

230 (1261): 483– 506.

Bibcode : 1987RSPSB.230..483R .

doi : 10.1098/rspb.1987.0030 .

JSTOR 36199 .

S2CID 83545214 .

^ Moseley, H.N. (1874).

"On the structure and development of Peripatus capensis " .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London .

164 : 757– 82.

Bibcode : 1874RSPT..164..757M .

doi : 10.1098/rstl.1874.0022 .

JSTOR 109116 .

^ a b c Boudreaux, H. Bruce (1979).

Arthropoda phylogeny with special reference to insects . Wiley.

ISBN 9780471042907 .

^ "cruralis/crurale, cruralis M" .

Latin is Simple . Peter Waldert . Retrieved 2021-02-21 .

^ "Cox, coxae, [f]" .

Latin is Simple . Peter Waldert . Retrieved 2021-02-21 .

^ a b Smith, Martin R.; Ortega-Hernández, Javier (October 2014).

" Hallucigenia 's onychophoran-like claws and the case for Tactopoda" (PDF) .

Nature .

514 (7522): 363– 6.

Bibcode : 2014Natur.514..363S .

doi : 10.1038/nature13576 .

PMID 25132546 .

S2CID 205239797 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-10.

^ a b c Mayer, Georg (December 2006). "Structure and development of Onychophoran eyes: What is the ancestral visual organ in arthropods?".

Arthropod Structure & Development .

35 (4): 231– 45.

Bibcode : 2006ArtSD..35..231M .

doi : 10.1016/j.asd.2006.06.003 .

PMID 18089073 .

^ Eriksson, J. (2003).

Evolution and Development of the Onychophoran Head and Nervous System . Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis.

ISBN 978-91-554-5613-9 .

[ page needed ] ^ Campiglia, Sylvia; Lavallard, Roger (1990).

"On the ecdysis at birth and intermoult period of gravid and young Peripatus acacioi (Onycophora, Peripatidae)" . In Minelli, Alessandro (ed.).

Proceedings of the 7th International Congress of Myriapodology . BRILL. pp.

461– 4.

ISBN 978-90-04-08972-3 .

^ Maas, Andreas; Mayer, Georg; Kristensen, Reinhardt M.; Waloszek, Dieter (December 2007). "A Cambrian micro-lobopodian and the evolution of arthropod locomotion and reproduction".

Chinese Science Bulletin .

52 (24): 3385– 92.

Bibcode : 2007ChSBu..52.3385M .

doi : 10.1007/s11434-007-0515-3 .

S2CID 83993887 .

^ a b Monge-Najera, Julian (May 1995). "Phylogeny, biogeography and reproductive trends in the Onychophora".

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

114 (1): 21– 60.

doi : 10.1111/j.1096-3642.1995.tb00111.x .

^ Manton, S.M. (June 20, 1949).

"Studies on the Onychophora. VII. The early embryonic stages of Peripatopsis , and some general considerations concerning the morphology and phylogeny of the Arthropoda" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

233 (606): 483– 580.

Bibcode : 1949RSPTB.233..483M .

doi : 10.1098/rstb.1949.0003 .

JSTOR 92441 .

^ a b c "Velvet worm" .

The Australian Museum . Retrieved 2024-02-21 .

^ "What is a velvet worm?" .

BBC Science Focus Magazine . July 5, 2022 . Retrieved February 17, 2024 .

^ Sizing Up the Onychophoran Genome: Repeats, Introns, and Gene Family Expansion Contribute to Genome Gigantism in Epiperipatus broadwayi ^ Holt, Jack (2010-02-07).

"Introduction to the Onychophora" . Protostomes > Ecdysozoa > Onychophora. Biol. 202: Systematic Biology. Selinsgrove, PA: Susquehanna University. Archived from the original on Oct 5, 2022 . Retrieved 2022-11-01 .

Excretory system: Pared metanephridia opening by their own ducts at each internal "segment". Anterior nephridia modified to salivary glands; posterior nephridia modified to gonopores.

^ Oliveira, Ivo de Sena; Franke, Franziska Anni; Hering, Lars; Schaffer, Stefan; Rowell, David M.; Weck-Heimann, Andreas; Monge-Nájera, Julián; Morera-Brenes, Bernal; Mayer, Georg (2012-12-17).

"Unexplored Character Diversity in Onychophora (Velvet Worms): A Comparative Study of Three Peripatid Species" .

PLOS ONE .

7 (12): e51220.

Bibcode : 2012PLoSO...751220O .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0051220 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 3524137 .

PMID 23284667 .

^ a b c Oliveira, Ivo de Sena (2023-11-16).

"An updated world checklist of velvet worms (Onychophora) with notes on nomenclature and status of names" .

ZooKeys (1184): 133– 260.

Bibcode : 2023ZooK.1184..133O .

doi : 10.3897/zookeys.1184.107286 .

ISSN 1313-2970 .

PMC 10680090 .

PMID 38023768 .

^ Espinasa, Luis; Garvey, Radha; Espinasa, Jordi; Fratto, Christina; Taylor, Steven; Toulkeridis, Theofilos; Addison, Aaron (2015-01-21).

"Cave dwelling Onychophora from a Lava Tube in the Galapagos Cave dwelling Onychophora from a Lava Tube in the Galapagos" .

Subterranean Biology .

15 : 1– 10.

doi : 10.3897/subtbiol.15.8468 .

^ Thompson, I.; Jones, D. S.; Thompson, I.; Jones, D. S. (1980-01-01).

"A possible onychophoran helenodora inopinata new genus new species from the middle pennsylvanian mazon creek beds of northern illinois usa" .

Journal of Paleontology .

54 (3): 588– 596.

ISSN 0022-3360 .

^ Poinar, G. Jr. (2000).

"Fossil Onychophorans from Dominican and Baltic Amber: Tertiapatus dominicanus n.g., n.sp. (Tertiapatidae n.fam.) and Succinipatopsis balticus n.g., n.sp. (Succinipatopsidae n.fam.) with a Proposed Classification of the Subphylum Onychophora" .

Invertebrate Biology .

119 (1): 104– 9.

Bibcode : 2000InvBi.119..104P .

doi : 10.1111/j.1744-7410.2000.tb00178.x .

^ Garwood, Russell J.; Edgecombe, Gregory D.; Charbonnier, Sylvain; Chabard, Dominique; Sotty, Daniel; Giribet, Gonzalo (2016).

"Carboniferous Onychophora from Montceau-les-Mines, France, and onychophoran terrestrialization" .

Invertebrate Biology .

135 (3): 179– 190.

doi : 10.1111/ivb.12130 .

ISSN 1077-8306 .

PMC 5042098 .

PMID 27708504 .

^ Murdock, Duncan J. E.; Gabbott, Sarah E.; Purnell, Mark A. (2016-01-22).

"The impact of taphonomic data on phylogenetic resolution: Helenodora inopinata (Carboniferous, Mazon Creek Lagerstätte) and the onychophoran stem lineage" .

BMC Evolutionary Biology .

16 (1): 19.

Bibcode : 2016BMCEE..16...19M .

doi : 10.1186/s12862-016-0582-7 (inactive 1 July 2025).

ISSN 1471-2148 .

PMC 4722706 .

PMID 26801389 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ a b Garwood, Russell J.; Edgecombe, Gregory D.; Charbonnier, Sylvain; Chabard, Dominique; Sotty, Daniel; Giribet, Gonzalo (2016).

"Carboniferous Onychophora from Montceau-les-Mines, France, and onychophoran terrestrialization" .

Invertebrate Biology .

135 (3): 179– 190.

doi : 10.1111/ivb.12130 .

ISSN 1077-8306 .

PMC 5042098 .

PMID 27708504 .

^ Giribet, Gonzalo; Buckman-Young, Rebecca S.; Costa, Cristiano Sampaio; Baker, Caitlin M.; Benavides, Ligia R.; Branstetter, Michael G.; Daniels, Savel R.; Pinto-da-Rocha, Ricardo (2018).

"The 'Peripatos' in Eurogondwana? – Lack of evidence that south-east Asian onychophorans walked through Europe" .

Invertebrate Systematics .

32 (4): 840– 863.

doi : 10.1071/IS18007 .

^ Baker, Caitlin M; Buckman-Young, Rebecca S; Costa, Cristiano S; Giribet, Gonzalo (2021-12-01).

"Phylogenomic Analysis of Velvet Worms (Onychophora) Uncovers an Evolutionary Radiation in the Neotropics" .

Molecular Biology and Evolution .

38 (12): 5391– 5404.

doi : 10.1093/molbev/msab251 .

ISSN 1537-1719 .

PMC 8662635 .

PMID 34427671 .

^ Oliveira, Ivo de Sena; Bai, Ming; Jahn, Henry; Gross, Vladimir; Martin, Christine; Hammel, Jörg U.; Zhang, Weiwei; Mayer, Georg (2016-10-10).

"Earliest Onychophoran in Amber Reveals Gondwanan Migration Patterns" .

Current Biology .

26 (19): 2594– 2601.

Bibcode : 2016CBio...26.2594O .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2016.07.023 .

ISSN 0960-9822 .

PMID 27693140 .

^ Espinasa, L.; Garvey, R.; Espinasa, J.; Fratto, C.A.; Taylor, S.; Toulkeridis, T.; Addison, A. (21 January 2015).

"Cave dwelling Onychophora from a Lava Tube in the Galapagos" .

Subterranean Biology .

15 : 1– 10.

doi : 10.3897/subtbiol.15.8468 .

^ Bang to Eternity and Betwixt: Cosmos . John Hussey. 2014-07-31.

^ Zielinska, Teresa (2004).

"Biological Aspects of Locomotion" . In Pfeiffer, Friedrich; Zielinska, Teresa (eds.).

Walking: Biological and Technological Aspects . pp.

1– 29.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-7091-2772-8_1 .

ISBN 978-3-211-22134-1 .

^ a b Manton, S.M. (1950).

"The evolution of arthropodan locomotory mechanisms - Part I. The locomotion of peripatus" .

Journal of the Linnean Society of London, Zoology .

41 (282): 529– 570.

doi : 10.1111/j.1096-3642.1950.tb01699.x .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Reinhard, Judith; Rowell, David M. (September 2005). "Social behaviour in an Australian velvet worm, Euperipatoides rowelli (Onychophora: Peripatopsidae)".

Journal of Zoology .

267 (1): 1– 7.

doi : 10.1017/S0952836905007090 .

^ a b Dias, Sidclay C.; Lo-Man-Hung, Nancy F. (April 2009).

"First record of an onychophoran (Onychophora, Peripatidae) feeding on a theraphosid spider (Araneae, Theraphosidae)" .

Journal of Arachnology .

37 (1): 116– 7.

doi : 10.1636/ST08-20.1 .

S2CID 86820446 .

^ Read, V. M. St. J. (July 1988). "The Onychophora of Trinidad, Tobago, and the Lesser Antilles".

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

93 (3): 225– 57.

doi : 10.1111/j.1096-3642.1988.tb01362.x .

^ Smith, J., & Jones, M. (2022). Maternal care in Peripatus: evidence for a hitherto unknown reproductive strategy in onychophorans. Journal of Zoology, 301 (2), 125–134.

^ Walker, Muriel H.; Tait, Noel N. (December 2004). "Studies of embryonic development and the reproductive cycle in ovoviviparous Australian Onychophora (Peripatopsidae)".

Journal of Zoology .

264 (4): 333– 54.

doi : 10.1017/S0952836904005837 .

^ Mongenajera, J.; Barrientos, Z.; Aguilar, F. (1993). "Behaviour of Epiperipatus-biolleyi (Onychophora, Peripatidae) laboratory conditions".

Revista de Biología Tropical .

41 (3A): 689– 696.

^ a b c Murienne, Jerome; Daniels, Savel R.; Buckley, Thomas R.; Mayer, Georg; Giribet, Gonzalo (2014-01-22).

"A living fossil tale of Pangaean biogeography" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

281 (1775): 20132648.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2013.2648 .

PMC 3866409 .

PMID 24285200 .

^ Baker, Caitlin M; Buckman-Young, Rebecca S; Costa, Cristiano S; Giribet, Gonzalo (2021-12-01).

"Phylogenomic Analysis of Velvet Worms (Onychophora) Uncovers an Evolutionary Radiation in the Neotropics" .

Molecular Biology and Evolution .

38 (12): 5391– 5404.

doi : 10.1093/molbev/msab251 .

ISSN 1537-1719 .

PMC 8662635 .

PMID 34427671 .

^ Giribet, Gonzalo; Buckman-Young, Rebecca S.; Costa, Cristiano Sampaio; Baker, Caitlin M.; Benavides, Ligia R.; Branstetter, Michael G.; Daniels, Savel R.; Pinto-da-Rocha, Ricardo (2018).

"The 'Peripatos' in Eurogondwana? – Lack of evidence that south-east Asian onychophorans walked through Europe" .

Invertebrate Systematics .

32 (4): 840– 863.

doi : 10.1071/IS18007 .

^ Podsiadlowski, L.; Braband. A.; Mayer, G. (January 2008).

"The Complete Mitochondrial Genome of the Onychophoran Epiperipatus biolleyi Reveals a Unique Transfer RNA Set and Provides Further Support for the Ecdysozoa Hypothesis" .

Molecular Biology and Evolution .

25 (1): 42– 51.

doi : 10.1093/molbev/msm223 .

PMID 17934206 .

^ Strausfeld, Nicholas J.; Strausfeld, Camilla Mok; Loesel, Rudi; Rowell, David; Stowe, Sally (August 2006).

"Arthropod phylogeny: onychophoran brain organization suggests an archaic relationship with a chelicerate stem lineage" .

Proceedings: Biological Sciences .

273 (1596): 1857– 1866.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2006.3536 .

PMC 1634797 .

PMID 16822744 .

^ Zhang, Zhi-Qiang (2011).

"Animal biodiversity: An introduction to higher-level classification and taxonomic richness" (PDF) .

Zootaxa .

3148 : 7– 12.

doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.3148.1.3 .

ISBN 978-1-86977-849-1 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-10.

^ a b c Oliveira, Ivo de Sena; Read, V. Morley St. J.; Mayer, Georg (2012).

"A world checklist of Onychophora (velvet worms), with notes on nomenclature and status of names" .

ZooKeys (211): 1– 70.

Bibcode : 2012ZooK..211....1O .

doi : 10.3897/zookeys.211.3463 .

PMC 3426840 .

PMID 22930648 .

^ Monge-Nájera, Julián (1994).

"Reproductive trends, habitat type and body characteristcs in velvet worms (Onychophora)" .

Revista de Biología Tropical .

42 (3): 611– 622.

ISSN 2215-2075 .

^ Sedgwick, A. (1910).

"Peripatus papuensis" .

Nature .

83 (2117): 369– 370.

Bibcode : 1910Natur..83..369S .

doi : 10.1038/083369b0 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

S2CID 45711430 .

^ a b c d Giribet, Gonzalo; Edgecombe, Gregory D. (3 March 2020).

"30. Onychophora" . In Giribet, Gonzalo; Edgecombe, Gregory D. (eds.).

The Invertebrate Tree of Life . Princeton University Press.

doi : 10.1515/9780691197067-032 .

ISBN 978-0-691-19706-7 .

S2CID 240645062 ; chapter doi : 10.1515/9780691197067-032 ;   book doi : 10.1515/9780691197067 .

^ a b Mayer, Georg (5 April 2007).

"Metaperipatus inae sp. nov. (Onychophora: Peripatopsidae) from Chile with a novel ovarian type and dermal insemination" .

Zootaxa .

1440 (1): 21– 37.

doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.1440.1.2 .

ISSN 1175-5334 – via ResearchGate.

^ Kemp, Stanley (1914).

"Onychophora" .

Records of the Indian Museum .

8 : 471– 492.

doi : 10.5962/bhl.part.1194 .

S2CID 88237018 – via Biodiversity Heritage Library.

^ "Euperipatoides rowelli genome assembly Erow_1.0" .

NCBI . Retrieved 2025-02-23 .

^ "Epiperipatus broadwayi genome assembly ASM2802345v1" .

NCBI . Retrieved 2025-02-23 .

^ a b c Sato, Shoyo; Cunha, Tauana J; de Medeiros, Bruno A S; Khost, Danielle E; Sackton, Timothy B; Giribet, Gonzalo (2023-03-01).

"Sizing Up the Onychophoran Genome: Repeats, Introns, and Gene Family Expansion Contribute to Genome Gigantism in Epiperipatus broadwayi" .

Genome Biology and Evolution .

15 (3): evad021.

doi : 10.1093/gbe/evad021 .

ISSN 1759-6653 .

PMC 9985152 .

PMID 36790097 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Murdock, Duncan JE; Gabbott, Sarah E.; Mayer, Georg; Purnell, Mark A. (2014-11-29).

"Decay of velvet worms (Onychophora), and bias in the fossil record of lobopodians" .

BMC Evolutionary Biology .

14 (1): 222.

Bibcode : 2014BMCEE..14..222M .

doi : 10.1186/s12862-014-0222-z .

ISSN 1471-2148 .

PMC 4266977 .

PMID 25472836 .

^ a b c Smith, M.R.; Ortega Hernández, J. (2014).

" Hallucigenia 's onychophoran-like claws and the case for Tactopoda" .

Nature .

514 (7522): 363– 366.

Bibcode : 2014Natur.514..363S .

doi : 10.1038/nature13576 .

PMID 25132546 .

S2CID 205239797 .

^ Aria, Cédric; and Caron, Jean-Bernard (2024-12-31).

"Deep origin of articulation strategies in panarthropods: evidence from a new luolishaniid lobopodian (Panarthropoda) from the Tulip Beds, Burgess Shale" .

Journal of Systematic Palaeontology .

22 (1): 2356090.

doi : 10.1080/14772019.2024.2356090 .

ISSN 1477-2019 .

^ a b Yang, Jie; Ortega-Hernández, Javier; Gerber, Sylvain; Butterfield, Nicholas J.; Hou, Jin-bo; Lan, Tian; Zhang, Xi-guang (2015-07-14).

"A superarmored lobopodian from the Cambrian of China and early disparity in the evolution of Onychophora" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

112 (28): 8678– 8683.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1505596112 .

PMC 4507230 .

PMID 26124122 .

^ Zhang, Xi-Guang; Smith, Martin R.; Yang, Jie; Hou, Jin-Bo (2016-09-01).

"Onychophoran-like musculature in a phosphatized Cambrian lobopodian" .

Biology Letters .

12 (9): 20160492.

doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2016.0492 .

PMC 5046927 .

PMID 27677816 .

^ Murdock, Duncan J. E.; Gabbott, Sarah E.; Purnell, Mark A. (2016-01-22).

"The impact of taphonomic data on phylogenetic resolution: Helenodora inopinata (Carboniferous, Mazon Creek Lagerstätte) and the onychophoran stem lineage" .

BMC Evolutionary Biology .

16 (1): 19.

Bibcode : 2016BMCEE..16...19M .

doi : 10.1186/s12862-016-0582-7 (inactive 1 July 2025).

ISSN 1471-2148 .

PMC 4722706 .

PMID 26801389 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Caron, Jean-Bernard; Aria, Cédric (2017-01-31).

"Cambrian suspension-feeding lobopodians and the early radiation of panarthropods" .

BMC Evolutionary Biology .

17 (1): 29.

Bibcode : 2017BMCEE..17...29C .

doi : 10.1186/s12862-016-0858-y .

ISSN 1471-2148 .

PMC 5282736 .

PMID 28137244 .

^ a b Qiang Ou; Jianni Liu; Degan Shu; Jian Han; Zhifei Zhang; Xiaoqiao Wan; Qianping Lei (2011). "A rare onychophoran-like lobopodian from the Lower Cambrian Chengjiang lagerstätte, southwestern China, and its phylogenetic implications".

Journal of Paleontology .

85 (3): 587– 594.

Bibcode : 2011JPal...85..587O .

doi : 10.1666/09-147R2.1 .

S2CID 53056128 .

^ Ortega-Hernández, Javier; Janssen, Ralf; Budd, Graham E. (2017-05-01).

"Origin and evolution of the panarthropod head – A palaeobiological and developmental perspective" .

Arthropod Structure & Development . Evolution of Segmentation.

46 (3): 354– 379.

Bibcode : 2017ArtSD..46..354O .

doi : 10.1016/j.asd.2016.10.011 .

ISSN 1467-8039 .

PMID 27989966 .

^ Thompson, Ida; Jones, Douglas S. (1980).

"A Possible Onychophoran from the Middle Pennsylvanian Mazon Creek Beds of Northern Illinois" .

Journal of Paleontology .

54 (3): 588– 596.

ISSN 0022-3360 .

JSTOR 1304204 .

^ a b Poinar, George (Winter 2000).

"Fossil onychophorans from Dominican and Baltic amber: Tertiapatus dominicanus n.g., n.sp. (Tertiapatidae n. fam.) and Succinipatopsis balticus n.g., n.sp. (Succinipatopsidae n. fam.) with a Proposed Classification of the Subphylum Onychophora" .

Invertebrate Biology .

119 (1): 104– 109.

Bibcode : 2000InvBi.119..104P .

doi : 10.1111/j.1744-7410.2000.tb00178.x .

JSTOR 3227105 .

^ a b Grimaldi, David A.; Engel, Michael S.; Nascimbene, Paul C. (March 2002).

"Fossiliferous Cretaceous Amber from Myanmar (Burma): Its Rediscovery, Biotic Diversity, and Paleontological Significance" .

American Museum Novitates (3361): 1– 71.

doi : 10.1206/0003-0082(2002)361<0001:FCAFMB>2.0.CO;2 .

hdl : 2246/2914 .

S2CID 53645124 .

^ Murdock, D. J. E.; Gabbott, S. E.; Purnell, M. A. (2016).

"The impact of taphonomic data on phylogenetic resolution: Helenodora inopinata (Carboniferous, Mazon Creek Lagerstätte) and the onychophoran stem lineage" .

BMC Evolutionary Biology .

16 (19): 19.

Bibcode : 2016BMCEE..16...19M .

doi : 10.1186/s12862-016-0582-7 (inactive 12 July 2025).

PMC 4722706 .

PMID 26801389 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Knight, John A.; Cleal, Christopher J.; Álvarez-Vázquez, Carmen (2023-06-14).

"The challenge of relating the Kasimovian to west European chronostratigraphy: a critical review of the Cantabrian and Barruelian substages of the Stephanian Stage" .

Geological Society, London, Special Publications .

535 (1): 31– 71.

doi : 10.1144/SP535-2022-189 .

ISSN 0305-8719 .

^ a b c Giribet, Gonzalo; Buckman-Young, Rebecca S.; Costa, Cristiano Sampaio; Baker, Caitlin M.; Benavides, Ligia R.; Branstetter, Michael G.; Daniels, Savel R.; Pinto-da-Rocha, Ricardo (2018).

"The 'Peripatos' in Eurogondwana? – Lack of evidence that south-east Asian onychophorans walked through Europe" .

Invertebrate Systematics .

32 (4): 840– 863.

doi : 10.1071/IS18007 .

^ a b Baker, Caitlin M; Buckman-Young, Rebecca S; Costa, Cristiano S; Giribet, Gonzalo (2021-12-01).

"Phylogenomic Analysis of Velvet Worms (Onychophora) Uncovers an Evolutionary Radiation in the Neotropics" .

Molecular Biology and Evolution .

38 (12): 5391– 5404.

doi : 10.1093/molbev/msab251 .

ISSN 1537-1719 .

PMC 8662635 .

^ a b c d Oliveira, I. S.; Bai, M; Jahn, H; Gross, V; Martin, C; Hammel, J. U.; Zhang, W; Mayer, G (2016).

"Earliest Onychophoran in Amber Reveals Gondwanan Migration Patterns" .

Current Biology .

26 (19): 2594– 2601.

Bibcode : 2016CBio...26.2594O .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2016.07.023 .

PMID 27693140 .

^ a b c New, Tim R (1995). "Onychophora in invertebrate conservation: priorities, practice and prospects".

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

114 (1): 77– 89.

doi : 10.1006/zjls.1995.0017 .

^ "The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species" .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

External links [ edit ] Wikispecies has information related to Onychophora .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Onychophora .

Flickr I.S. Oliveira; L. Hering; G. Mayer.

"Onychophora Website" . Archived from the original on 14 June 2017.

Youtube , The Slimy, Deadly Velvet Worm , Smithsonian Channel "Peripatus" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

Peripatus discussed on RNZ Critter of the Week , 13 Nov 2015 v t e Onychophora Peripatidae † Cretoperipatus Eoperipatus butleri horsti totoro weldoni Mesoperipatus Typhloperipatus Neopatida Cerradopatus Epiperipatus acacioi adenocryptus barbadensis barbouri beckeri bernali betheli biolleyi brasiliensis broadwayi cratensis diadenoproctus edwardsii evansi hikae hyperbolicus imthurni isthmicola lewisi lucerna machadoi marajoara ohausi paurognostus puri simoni titanicus torrealbai trinidadensis vagans vespucci Heteroperipatus clarki engelhardi Macroperipatus clarki guianensis insularis ohausi perrieri torquatus valerioi Mongeperipatus kekoldi solorzanoi Oroperipatus belzani belli bimbergi bluntschli cameranoi corradoi ecuadoriensis eisenii intermedius koepckei lankesteri multipodes omeyrus peruvianus soratanus tiputini tuberculatus weyrauchi Peripatus basilensis bouvieri brolemanni danicus darlingtoni dominicae evelinae haitiensis heloisae juanensis juliformis lachauxensis manni ruber sedgwicki swainsonae Principapillatus Plicatoperipatus Speleoperipatus Peripatopsidae Acanthokara Aethrikos Aktinothele Anoplokaros Austroperipatus aequabilis eridelos paradoxus superbus Baeothele Centrorumis Cephalofovea cameroni clandestina pavimenta tomahmontis Critolaus Dactylothele Diemenipatus mesibovi taiti Dystactotylos Euperipatoides kanangrensis leuckartii rowelli Florelliceps Hylonomoipos akares brookensis Konothele Kumbadjena extrema kaata karricola occidentalis shannonensis toolbrunupensis Lathropatus Leucopatus Leuropezos Mantonipatus Metaperipatus Minyplanetes Nodocapitus barryi formosus inornatus Occiperipatoides Ooperipatellus decoratus duwilensis insignis nanus nickmayeri parvus spenceri viridimaculatus Ooperipatus birrgus caesius centunculus costatus hispidus lepidus nebulosus oviparus porcatus pulchellus silvanus Opisthopatus amatolensis amaxhosa baziya camdebooi cinctipes drakensbergi herbertorum highveldi kwazululandi laevis natalensis roseus swatii Paraperipatus ceramensis keiensis novaebritanniae papuensis lorentzi vanheurni Paropisthopatus Peripatoides aurorbis indigo kawekaensis morganae novaezealandiae otepoti suteri sympatrica taitonga waikaia Peripatopsis aereus alba balfouri barnardi birgeri bolandi capensis cederbergiensis clavigera collarium edenensis fernkloofi ferox hamerae intermedia janni jonkershoeki kogelbergi landroskoppie lawrencei leonina limietbergi margaritarius mellaria mira moseleyi orientalis overbergiensis palmeri polychroma purpureus sedgwicki storchi tulbaghensis Phallocephale Planipapillus absonus annae berti biacinaces biacinoides bulgensis cyclus gracilis impacris mundus taylori tectus vittatus Regimitra Ruhbergia bifalcata brevicorna rostroides Sphenoparme Tasmanipatus Tetrameraden Vescerro Wambalana Uncertain † Antennipatus † Helenodora † Succinipatopsis † Tertiapatus v t e Extant animal phyla Domain Archaea Bacteria Eukaryota (major groups Metamonada Discoba Diaphoretickes Hacrobia Cryptista Rhizaria Alveolata Stramenopiles Plants Amorphea Amoebozoa Opisthokonta Animals Fungi Mesomycetozoea ) Animalia Porifera (sponges) Ctenophora (comb jellies) ParaHoxozoa ( Planulozoa ) Placozoa ( Trichoplax and relatives) Cnidaria (jellyfish and relatives) Bilateria (Triploblasts) (see below↓) The phylogeny of the animal root is disputed ; see also Eumetazoa Benthozoa Bilateria Bilateria Xenacoelomorpha (acoels and relatives) Chordata (chordates) Ambulacraria Echinodermata (starfish and relatives) Hemichordata (acorn worms and relatives) Protostomia Ecdysozoa Scalidophora Kinorhyncha (mud dragons) Priapulida (penis worms) N+L+P Nematoida Nematoda (roundworms) Nematomorpha (horsehair worms) L+P Loricifera (corset animals) Panarthropoda Onychophora (velvet worms) Arthropoda (arthropods) Tardigrada (waterbears) Spiralia Gnathifera Chaetognatha (arrow worms) Gnathostomulida (jaw worms) M+S Micrognathozoa (Limnognathia) Syndermata Rotifera (wheel animals) Acanthocephala (thorny-headed worms) Platytrochozoa R+M Rouphozoa Platyhelminthes (flatworms) Gastrotricha (hairybacks) Mesozoa Orthonectida Dicyemida or Rhombozoa Monoblastozoa ( Salinella ) † Lophotrochozoa Cycliophora ( Symbion ) Annelida (segmented worms) M+K Mollusca (molluscs) Kryptotrochozoa Nemertea (ribbon worms) Lophophorata Bryozoa s.l.

Entoprocta or Kamptozoa Ectoprocta (moss animals) Brachiozoa Brachiopoda (lamp shells) Phoronida (horseshoe worms) The phylogeny of Bilateria is disputed ; see also Nephrozoa Deuterostomia Xenambulacraria Centroneuralia Major groups within phyla Sponges Demosponges Glass sponges Calcareous sponges Cnidarians Anthozoans inc. corals Medusozoans inc. jellyfish Myxozoans Chordates Lancelets Tunicates Vertebrates Echinoderms Sea lilies Asterozoans inc. starfish Echinozoans inc. sea urchins Hemichordates Acorn worms Pterobranchs Nematodes Chromadorea Enoplea Secernentea Arthropods Chelicerates inc. arachnids Myriapods Crustaceans Hexapods inc. insects Platyhelminths Turbellaria Trematoda Monogenea Cestoda Ectoproctans Phylactolaemata Stenolaemata Gymnolaemata Annelids Polychaetes Clitellata Sipuncula Molluscs Gastropods Cephalopods Bivalves Chitons Tusk shells Phyla with ≥1000 extant species bolded Potentially dubious phyla † v t e Extant life phyla/divisions by domain Bacteria Abditibacteriota Acidobacteriota Actinomycetota Aquificota Armatimonadota Atribacterota Bacillota Bacteroidota Balneolota Caldisericota Calditrichota Chlamydiota Chlorobiota Chloroflexota Chrysiogenota Coprothermobacterota Cyanobacteriota Deferribacterota Deinococcota Dictyoglomerota Elusimicrobiota Fibrobacterota Fidelibacterota Fusobacteriota Gemmatimonadota Kiritimatiellota Lentisphaerota Minisyncoccota Mycoplasmatota Nitrospinota Nitrospirota Planctomycetota Pseudomonadota Rhodothermota Spirochaetota Synergistota Thermodesulfobacteriota Thermomicrobiota Thermotogota Verrucomicrobiota Vulcanimicrobiota " Ca.

Acetithermota " " Ca.

Aerophobota " " Ca.

Auribacterota " " Ca.

Babelota " " Ca.

Binatota " " Ca.

Bipolaricaulota " " Ca.

Caldipriscota " " Ca.

Calescibacteriota " " Ca.

Canglongiota " " Ca.

Cloacimonadota " " Ca.

Cosmopoliota " " Ca.

Cryosericota " " Ca.

Deferrimicrobiota " " Ca.

Dormiibacterota " " Ca.

Effluvivivacota " " Ca.

Electryoneota " " Ca.

Elulimicrobiota " " Ca.

Fermentibacterota " " Ca.

Fervidibacterota " " Ca.

Goldiibacteriota " " Ca.

Heilongiota " " Ca.

Hinthialibacterota " " Ca.

Hydrogenedentota " " Ca.

Hydrothermota " " Ca.

Kapaibacteriota " " Ca.

Krumholzibacteriota " " Ca.

Kryptoniota " " Ca.

Latescibacterota " " Ca.

Lernaellota " " Ca.

Lithacetigenota " " Ca.

Macinerneyibacteriota " " Ca.

Margulisiibacteriota " " Ca.

Methylomirabilota " " Ca.

Moduliflexota " " Ca.

Muiribacteriota " " Ca.

Nitrosediminicolota " " Ca.

Omnitrophota " " Ca.

Parcunitrobacterota " " Ca.

Peregrinibacteriota " " Ca.

Qinglongiota " " Ca.

Rifleibacteriota " " Ca.

Ryujiniota " " Ca.

Spongiamicota " " Ca.

Sumerlaeota " " Ca.

Sysuimicrobiota " " Ca.

Tangaroaeota " " Ca.

Tectimicrobiota " " Ca.

Tianyaibacteriota " " Ca.

Wirthibacterota " " Ca.

Zhuqueibacterota " " Ca.

Zhurongbacterota " Archaea Methanobacteriota Microcaldota Nanobdellota Promethearchaeota Thermoproteota " Ca.

Aenigmatarchaeota " " Ca.

Altarchaeota " " Ca.

Augarchaeota " " Ca.

Geoarchaeota " " Ca.

Hadarchaeota " " Ca.

Hadesarchaeota " " Ca.

Huberarchaeota " " Ca.

Hydrothermarchaeota " " Ca.

Iainarchaeota " " Ca.

Micrarchaeota " " Ca.

Nanohalarchaeota " " Ca.

Nezhaarchaeota " " Ca.

Parvarchaeota " " Ca.

Poseidoniota " " Ca.

Undinarchaeota " Eukaryote Protist Amoebozoa Ancyromonadida Apicomplexa Apusomonadida Aquavolonida Bigyra Breviatea Cercozoa Charophyta Chlorophyta Choanoflagellata Chromerida Ciliophora Collodictyonidea Colponemida Cryptista Developea Dinoflagellata Endomyxa Euglenozoa Filasterea Glaucophyta Glissandrida Gymnosphaerida Haptista Hemimastigophora Ichthyosporea Jakobea Malawimonada Mantamonadea Metamonada Nebulidia Nibbleridia Nucleariidae Ochrophyta Heterolobosea Perkinsozoa Picozoa Pirsonea Pluriformea Pseudofungi Retaria Rhodophyta Rigifilidea Telonemia Fungi Chytridiomycota Blastocladiomycota Neocallimastigomycota Glomeromycota Zygomycota Ascomycota Basidiomycota Land plant Angiospermae Bryophyta Marchantiophyta Anthocerotophyta Lycopodiophyta Pteridophyta Cycadophyta Ginkgophyta Pinophyta Gnetophyta Animal Porifera Ctenophora Placozoa Cnidaria Xenacoelomorpha Chordata Hemichordata Echinodermata Chaetognatha Kinorhyncha Loricifera Priapulida Nematoda Nematomorpha Onychophora Tardigrada Arthropoda Platyhelminthes Gastrotricha Orthonectida Dicyemida Rotifera Acanthocephala Gnathostomulida Micrognathozoa Cycliophora Nemertea Phoronida Bryozoa Entoprocta Brachiopoda Mollusca Annelida Incertae sedis Parakaryon Relate: Extraterrestrial life v t e Tardigrades Taxa Eutardigrada Apochela Parachela Heterotardigrada " Arthrotardigrada " Echiniscoidea Taxonomic history 1773 Johann August Ephraim Goeze : 'Water-bear' 1776 Lazzaro Spallanzani : 'Tardigrade' 1834 C.A.S. Schulze : Macrobiotus 1842 L.M.F. Doyère : Memoire sur les Tardigrades 1926 Ferdinand Richters : Eutardigrada 1927 Ernst Marcus : Heterotardigrada 1937 Gilbert Rahm: Mesotardigrada ?

1962 Giuseppe Ramazzotti : phylum Tardigrada 2019 Noemi Guil: Apotardigrada Physiology Cryptobiosis Environmental tolerance Extremophile Tardigrades in space Related taxa Ecdysozoa Panarthropoda † Luolishaniidae † Sialomorpha Onychophora Arthropoda Taxon identifiers Onychophora Wikidata : Q5191 Wikispecies : Onychophora ADW : Onychophora AFD : Onychophora BOLD : 10 EoL : 6927 EPPO : 1ONYCP GBIF : 62 iNaturalist : 51836 IRMNG : 224 ITIS : 154431 NCBI : 27563 NZOR: e8bf0e6c-7b8d-4804-bc52-2702b40825af Open Tree of Life : 1072433 Paleobiology Database : 67135 Udeonychophora Wikidata : Q7877170 Wikispecies : Udeonychophora IRMNG : 1525 NCBI : 2082881 Paleobiology Database : 226743 Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Onychophora&oldid=1303315636 " Categories : Onychophorans Ecdysozoa phyla Taxa named by Adolph Eduard Grube Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2014 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2014 CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016 Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2021 Commons link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Taxonbars with multiple manual Wikidata items This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 07:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Onychophora 59 languages Add topic

