Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 Additional sources Toggle the table of contents Collectively exhaustive events 3 languages Norsk bokmål 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of events whose union covers the entire sample space This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on statistics Probability theory Probability Axioms Determinism System Indeterminism Randomness Probability space Sample space Event Collectively exhaustive events Elementary event Mutual exclusivity Outcome Singleton Experiment Bernoulli trial Probability distribution Bernoulli distribution Binomial distribution Exponential distribution Normal distribution Pareto distribution Poisson distribution Probability measure Random variable Bernoulli process Continuous or discrete Expected value Variance Markov chain Observed value Random walk Stochastic process Complementary event Joint probability Marginal probability Conditional probability Independence Conditional independence Law of total probability Law of large numbers Bayes' theorem Boole's inequality Venn diagram Tree diagram v t e In probability theory and logic , a set of events is jointly or collectively exhaustive if at least one of the events must occur.  For example, when rolling a six-sided die , the events 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 are collectively exhaustive, because they encompass the entire range of possible outcomes .

Another way to describe collectively exhaustive events is that their union must cover all the events within the entire sample space. For example, events A and B are said to be collectively exhaustive if A ∪ ∪ B = S {\displaystyle A\cup B=S} where S is the sample space .

Compare this to the concept of a set of mutually exclusive events .  In such a set no more than one event can occur at a given time. (In some forms of mutual exclusion only one event can ever occur.) The set of all possible die rolls is both mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive (i.e., " MECE "). The events 1 and 6 are mutually exclusive but not collectively exhaustive.  The events "even" (2,4 or 6) and "not-6" (1,2,3,4, or 5) are also collectively exhaustive but not mutually exclusive. In some forms of mutual exclusion only one event can ever occur, whether collectively exhaustive or not. For example, tossing a particular biscuit for a group of several dogs cannot be repeated, no matter which dog snaps it up.

One example of an event that is both collectively exhaustive and mutually exclusive is tossing a coin. The outcome must be either heads or tails, or p (heads or tails) = 1, so the outcomes are collectively exhaustive. When heads occurs, tails can't occur, or p (heads and tails) = 0, so the outcomes are also mutually exclusive.

Another example of events being collectively exhaustive and mutually exclusive at same time are, event "even" (2,4 or 6) and event "odd" (1,3 or 5) in a random experiment of rolling a six-sided die . These both events are mutually exclusive because even and odd outcome can never occur at same time. The union of both "even" and "odd" events give sample space of rolling the die, hence are collectively exhaustive.

History [ edit ] The term "exhaustive" has been used in the literature since at least 1914. Here are a few examples: The following appears as a footnote on page 23 of Couturat's text, The Algebra of Logic (1914): [ 1 ] "As Mrs. LADD·FRANKLlN has truly remarked (BALDWIN, Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology, article "Laws of Thought" [ 2 ] ), the principle of contradiction is not sufficient to define contradictories; the principle of excluded middle must be added which equally deserves the name of principle of contradiction. This is why Mrs. LADD-FRANKLIN proposes to call them respectively the principle of exclusion and the principle of exhaustion , inasmuch as, according to the first, two contradictory terms are exclusive (the one of the other); and, according to the second, they are exhaustive (of the universe of discourse) ." (italics added for emphasis) In Stephen Kleene 's discussion of cardinal numbers , in Introduction to Metamathematics (1952), he uses the term "mutually exclusive" together with "exhaustive": [ 3 ] "Hence, for any two cardinals M and N, the three relationships M < N, M = N and M > N are 'mutually exclusive', i.e. not more than one of them can hold. ¶ It does not appear till an advanced stage of the theory . . . whether they are 'exhaustive' , i.e. whether at least one of the three must hold". (italics added for emphasis, Kleene 1952:11; original has double bars over the symbols M and N).

See also [ edit ] Event structure MECE principle Probability theory Set theory References [ edit ] ^ Couturat, Louis (1914).

The Algebra of Logic . Translated by Lydia Gillingham Robinson. Chicago and London: The Open Court Publishing Company.

^ Baldwin (1914). "Laws of Thought".

Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology . p. 23.

^ Kleene, Stephen C. (1952).

Introduction to Metamathematics (6th edition 1971 ed.). Amsterdam, NY: North-Holland Publishing Company.

ISBN 0-7204-2103-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Additional sources [ edit ] Kemeny, John G.; et al. (1959).

Finite Mathematical Structures . Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

ASIN B0006AW17Y .

LCCCN: 59-12841 Tarski, Alfred (1941).

Introduction to Logic and to the Methodology of Deductive Sciences (Reprint of 1946 2nd edition (paperback) ed.). New York: Dover Publications, Inc.

ISBN 0-486-28462-X .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Collectively_exhaustive_events&oldid=1258612216 " Category : Probability theory Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 20 November 2024, at 17:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Collectively exhaustive events 3 languages Add topic

