Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and career 2 Prime minister (1966–1977) Toggle Prime minister (1966–1977) subsection 2.1 First year 2.2 1967–1971 2.2.1 Military conflict with China 2.3 1971–1977 2.3.1 War with Pakistan 2.3.2 Verdict on electoral malpractice 2.3.3 State of Emergency (1975–1977) 2.3.4 Rule by decree 2.3.5 Rise of Sanjay Gandhi 3 Opposition leader (1977–1980) Toggle Opposition leader (1977–1980) subsection 3.1 In opposition and return to power 4 Prime minister (1980–1984) Toggle Prime minister (1980–1984) subsection 4.1 Operation Blue Star 5 Assassination Toggle Assassination subsection 5.1 International reaction 6 Foreign policy Toggle Foreign policy subsection 6.1 South Asia 6.2 Middle East 6.3 Asia-Pacific 6.4 Africa 6.5 The Commonwealth 6.6 The Non-Aligned Movement 6.7 Western Europe 6.8 Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc countries 6.8.1 Soviet intelligence in India 6.9 United States 7 Economic policy Toggle Economic policy subsection 7.1 Green Revolution and the Fourth Five-Year Plan 7.2 The Fifth Five-Year Plan 7.3 Operation Forward and the Sixth Five-Year Plan 7.4 Inflation and unemployment 8 Domestic policy Toggle Domestic policy subsection 8.1 Nationalisation 8.2 Administration 8.3 Social reform 8.4 Language policy 8.5 National security 8.6 India's nuclear programme 9 Electoral history Toggle Electoral history subsection 9.1 Parliament: Lok Sabha 10 Personal life 11 Views on women 12 Awards and honours Toggle Awards and honours subsection 12.1 National honours 12.2 Foreign honours 12.3 Posthumous honours 13 Legacy 14 In popular culture 15 Bibliography 16 See also 17 References Toggle References subsection 17.1 Notes 17.2 References 17.3 Sources 18 Bibliography 19 External links Toggle the table of contents Indira Gandhi 129 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch डोटेली Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni Хальмг 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ سرائیکی Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ ತುಳು Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Tolışi ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prime Minister of India (1966–1977, 1980–1984) Indira Gandhi Gandhi in 1983 Prime Minister of India In office 14 January 1980 – 31 October 1984 President Neelam Sanjiva Reddy Zail Singh Vice President Mohammad Hidayatullah Ramaswamy Venkataraman Preceded by Charan Singh Succeeded by Rajiv Gandhi In office 24 January 1966 – 24 March 1977 President Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan Zakir Husain V. V. Giri Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed B. D. Jatti (acting) Vice President Zakir Husain V. V. Giri Gopal Swarup Pathak B. D. Jatti Deputy Morarji Desai (13 March 1967 – 16 July 1969) Preceded by Lal Bahadur Shastri [ a ] Succeeded by Morarji Desai Union Minister of External Affairs In office 19 July 1984 – 31 October 1984 Prime Minister Herself Preceded by P. V. Narasimha Rao Succeeded by Rajiv Gandhi In office 6 September 1967 – 13 February 1969 Prime Minister Herself Preceded by M. C. Chagla Succeeded by Dinesh Singh Union Minister of Defence In office 14 January 1980 – 15 January 1982 Prime Minister Herself Preceded by Chidambaram Subramaniam Succeeded by Ramaswamy Venkataraman In office 1 December 1975 – 20 December 1975 Prime Minister Herself Preceded by Swaran Singh Succeeded by Bansi Lal Union Minister of Home Affairs In office 27 June 1970 – 5 February 1973 Prime Minister Herself Preceded by Yashwantrao Chavan Succeeded by Uma Shankar Dikshit In office 9 November 1966 – 13 November 1966 Prime Minister Herself Preceded by Gulzarilal Nanda Succeeded by Yashwantrao Chavan Union Minister of Finance In office 17 July 1969 – 27 June 1970 Prime Minister Herself Preceded by Morarji Desai Succeeded by Yashwantrao Chavan Union Minister of Information & Broadcasting In office 9 June 1964 – 24 January 1966 Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri Preceded by Satya Narayan Sinha Succeeded by Kodardas Kalidas Shah President of the Indian National Congress In office 1959 Preceded by U. N. Dhebar Succeeded by Neelam Sanjiva Reddy President of the Indian National Congress (I) In office 1978–1984 Preceded by Devakanta Barua ( as INC (R) ) Succeeded by Rajiv Gandhi Member of Parliament , Lok Sabha In office 1980–1984 Preceded by Mallikarjun Mudiraj Succeeded by P. Manik Reddy Constituency Medak , Andhra Pradesh In office 1978–1980 Preceded by D. B. Chandregowda Succeeded by D. M. Puttegowda Constituency Chikmagalur , Karnataka In office 1967–1977 Preceded by Baijnath Kureel Succeeded by Raj Narain Constituency Rae Bareli , Uttar Pradesh Member of Parliament , Rajya Sabha In office 1964–1967 Constituency Uttar Pradesh Personal details Born Indira Nehru ( 1917-11-19 ) 19 November 1917 Allahabad , Agra and Oudh , India Died 31 October 1984 (1984-10-31) (aged 66) New Delhi, India Manner of death Assassination Political party Indian National Congress (1938–1969) Congress (R) (1969–1978) Congress (I) (1978–1984) Spouse Feroze Gandhi ​ ​ ( m.

1942 ; died 1960 ) ​ Children Rajiv Gandhi Sanjay Gandhi Parents Jawaharlal Nehru (father) Kamala Nehru (mother) Relatives Nehru–Gandhi family Education Visva-Bharati University (dropped out) [ 1 ] Somerville College, Oxford (dropped out) [ 1 ] Occupation Politician Awards See below Signature Indira Gandhi's voice Gandhi on India–United States relations Recorded 29 July 1982 Indira Priyadarshini Gandhi [ b ] ( née Nehru ; 19 November 1917 – 31 October 1984) [ 2 ] was an Indian politician and stateswoman who served as the prime minister of India from 1966 to 1977 and again from 1980 until her assassination in 1984. She was India's first and, to date, only female prime minister, and a central figure in Indian politics as the leader of the Indian National Congress (INC). She was the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru , the first prime minister of India , and the mother of Rajiv Gandhi , who succeeded her as prime minister. Her cumulative tenure of 15 years and 350 days makes her the second-longest-serving Indian prime minister after her father.

During her father Jawaharlal Nehru's premiership from 1947 to 1964, Gandhi was his hostess and accompanied him on his numerous foreign trips. In 1959, she played a part in the dissolution of the communist -led Kerala state government as then- president of the Indian National Congress , otherwise a ceremonial position to which she was elected earlier that year.

Lal Bahadur Shastri , who had succeeded Nehru as prime minister upon his death in 1964, appointed her minister of information and broadcasting in his government ; the same year she was elected to the Rajya Sabha , the upper house of the Indian Parliament . After Shastri's sudden death in January 1966, Gandhi defeated her rival, Morarji Desai , in the INC's parliamentary leadership election to become leader and also succeeded Shastri as prime minister. She was the world's second female prime minister after Sirimavo Bandaranaike when she became Prime Minister of India . She led the Congress to victory in two subsequent elections, starting with the 1967 general election , in which she was first elected to the lower house of the Indian parliament, the Lok Sabha . In 1971, her party secured its first landslide victory since her father's sweep in 1962 , focusing on issues such as poverty. But following the nationwide state of emergency she implemented, she faced massive anti-incumbency sentiment causing the INC to lose the 1977 election , the first time in the history of India to happen so. She even lost her own parliamentary constituency. However, due to her portrayal as a strong leader and the weak governance of the Janata Party , her party won the next election by a landslide and she returned to the premiership.

As prime minister, Gandhi was known for her uncompromising political stances and centralization of power within the executive branch . In 1967, she headed a military conflict with China in which India repelled Chinese incursions into the Himalayas .

[ 3 ] In 1971, she went to war with Pakistan in support of the independence movement and war of independence in East Pakistan , which resulted in an Indian victory and the independence of Bangladesh , as well as increasing India's influence to the point where it became the sole regional power in South Asia .

[ 4 ] Another military operation against Pakistan, codenamed Operation Meghdoot , occurred during her tenure in 1984, which led to India expanding the territory it effectively controlled in the disputed Kashmir region.

Gandhi also played a crucial role in initiating India's first successful nuclear weapon test in 1974. Her rule saw India grow closer to the Soviet Union by signing a friendship treaty in 1971 to ward off perceived geopolitical threat as a result of the U.S. warming up to China. India received military, financial, and diplomatic support from the Soviet Union during its conflict with Pakistan in the same year.

[ 5 ] Though India was at the forefront of the Non-Aligned Movement , Gandhi made it one of the Soviet Union's closest allies in Asia, each often supporting the other in proxy wars and at the United Nations .

[ 6 ] Responding to separatist tendencies and a call for revolution, she instituted a state of emergency from 1975 to 1977 , during which she ruled by decree and basic civil liberties were suspended.

[ 7 ] More than 100,000 political opponents, journalists and dissenters were imprisoned.

[ 7 ] She faced the growing Sikh separatism movement throughout her fourth premiership; in response, she ordered Operation Blue Star , which involved military action in the Golden Temple and killed hundreds of Sikhs . On 31 October 1984, she was assassinated by two of her bodyguards, both of whom were Sikh nationalists seeking retribution for the events at the temple.

Gandhi is remembered as the most powerful woman in the world during her tenure.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Her supporters cite her leadership during victories over geopolitical rivals China and Pakistan, the Green Revolution , a growing economy in the early 1980s, and her anti-poverty campaign that led her to be known as "Mother Indira" (a pun on Mother India ) among the country's poor and rural classes.

Henry Kissinger described her as an "Iron Lady", a nickname that became associated with her tough personality. Critics note her cult of personality and authoritarian rule of India during the Emergency. In 1999, she was named "Woman of the Millennium" in an online poll organized by the BBC .

[ 11 ] In 2020, she was named by Time magazine among the 100 women who defined the past century as counterparts to the magazine's previous choices for Man of the Year .

[ 12 ] Early life and career This article is part of a series about Indira Gandhi Prime Minister of India 1966–1977, 1980–1984 Family Early life and education Electoral history Public image Assassination Awards and honours Memorial Eponyms Premiership Rajya Sabha elections 1966 General elections 1967 1971 1977 1980 Union Council of Ministers Indira I Indira II Indira III Indira IV Rajya Sabha Uttar Pradesh Lok Sabha Fourth Fifth Seventh Domestic Policy Economic Policy Foreign Policy International trips Constitutional amendments 21st 22nd 23rd 24th 25th 26th 27th 28th 29th 30th 31st 32nd 33rd 34th 35th 36th 37th 38th 39th 40th 41st 42nd 45th 46th 47th 48th 49th 50th 51st National policy Legislation COFEPOSA Enemy Property Act, 1968 The Gold (Control) Act, 1968 IMDT MISA NPE North-Eastern Reorganisation Act Privy Purse Treaties and accords Delhi Agreement Indira–Sheikh Accord Shimla Agreement Sirima–Gandhi Pact Missions and projects Operation Blue Star Operation Flood Operation Lal Dora Operation Steeplechase Operation Sundown 1975 Sikkimese monarchy referendum Samjhauta Express Smiling Buddha Controversies Emergency Baroda dynamite case State of Uttar Pradesh v. Raj Narain Turkman gate Riots and attacks 1966 anti-cow slaughter agitation 1974 railway strike in India 1975 Sikkimese monarchy referendum 1980 Moradabad riots Insurgency in Punjab Airbus hijacking Gallery : Picture, Sound, Video v t e Indira Gandhi was born Indira Nehru, into a Kashmiri Pandit family on 19 November 1917 in Allahabad (present-day Prayagraj ) in Uttar Pradesh .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Her father, Jawaharlal Nehru , was a leading figure in the Indian movement for independence from British rule , and became the first Prime Minister of the Dominion (and later Republic ) of India.

[ 15 ] Indira was her parents' only surviving child (she had a younger brother who died while young); [ 16 ] she grew up with her mother, Kamala Nehru , at the Anand Bhavan , a large family estate in Allahabad.

[ 17 ] In 1930, the Nehru family donated the mansion to the Indian National Congress and renamed it Swaraj Bhavan (meaning abode of freedom). A new mansion was built nearby to serve as the family residence and given the name of the old Anand Bhavan .

[ 17 ] Indira had a lonely and unhappy childhood.

[ 18 ] Her father was often away, directing political activities or incarcerated, while her mother was frequently bedridden with illness and later suffered an early death from tuberculosis .

[ 19 ] Indira had limited contact with her father, mostly through letters.

[ 20 ] Young Indira with Mahatma Gandhi during his fast in 1924, Indira is dressed in a khadi garment and shown following Gandhi's advocacy that khadi be worn by Indians instead of British-manufactured textiles Indira Nehru was taught mostly at home by tutors and attended school intermittently until matriculation in 1934. She was a student at the Modern School in Delhi , St. Cecilia's and St. Mary's Convent schools in Allahabad, [ 21 ] the International School of Geneva in Geneva , the Ecole Nouvelle in Bex in Vaud, Switzerland , and the Pupils' Own School in Poona in Maharashtra and in Bombay , which is affiliated with the University of Mumbai .

[ 22 ] She and her mother moved to the Belur Math headquarters of the Ramakrishna Mission where Swami Ranganathananda was her guardian.

[ 23 ] Indira then studied at the Vishwa Bharati in Santiniketan , which became Visva-Bharati University in 1951.

[ 24 ] During an interview with Rabindranath Tagore , he named Indira Priyadarshini , which means "looking at everything with kindness" in Sanskrit and she became known as Indira Priyadarshini Nehru.

[ 25 ] A year later, however, she had to leave university to attend to her ailing mother in Lausanne, Switzerland .

[ 26 ] There it was decided that Indira would continue her education at the University of Oxford .

[ 24 ] [ 27 ] After her mother died, Indira attended the Badminton School in Bristol, England for a short time period and then enrolled at Somerville College in Oxford in 1937 to study history.

[ 28 ] She had to take the entrance examination twice, having failed at her first attempt with a poor performance in Latin .

[ 28 ] At Oxford, she excelled in history, political science, and economics but her grades in Latin—a compulsory subject—remained poor.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] However she was active socially at the university and was a member of the Oxford Majlis Asian Society .

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] During her time in Europe, Indira Nehru was plagued with ill health and was constantly attended to by doctors. She had to make repeated trips to Switzerland to recover, disrupting her studies. She was there in 1940, when Germany rapidly conquered Europe. Nehru tried to return to England through Portugal but was left stranded for nearly two months. She managed to enter England in early 1941, and from there returned to India without completing her studies at Oxford. The university later awarded her an honorary degree. In 2010, Oxford honoured her further by selecting her as one of the ten Oxasians, illustrious Asian graduates from the University of Oxford .

[ 33 ] [ 1 ] During her stay in Britain, Nehru frequently met her future husband Feroze Gandhi (no relation to Mahatma Gandhi ). They were married in Allahabad according to Adi Dharm rituals, although Feroze belonged to a Zoroastrian Parsi family of Gujarat .

[ 34 ] The couple had two sons, Rajiv Gandhi (born 1944) and Sanjay Gandhi (born 1946).

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] In September 1942, Indira Gandhi was arrested over her role in the Quit India Movement . She was released from jail in April 1943.

[ 37 ] "Mud entered our souls in the drabness of prison," she later recalled her time in the jail. She added, "When I came out, it was such a shock to see colors again I thought I would go out of my mind." [ 38 ] In the 1950s, Indira, now Indira Gandhi after her marriage, unofficially served her father as a personal assistant during his tenure as the first prime minister of India .

[ 39 ] Near the end of the 1950s, Gandhi served as the president of the Congress . In that capacity, she was instrumental in having the communist -led Kerala state government dismissed in 1959. That government was India's first elected communist government.

[ 40 ] After her father's death in 1964 she was appointed a member of the Rajya Sabha (upper house) and served in Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri 's cabinet as Minister of Information and Broadcasting .

[ 41 ] In January 1966, after Shastri's death, the Congress legislative party elected her over Morarji Desai as their leader. Congress party veteran K. Kamaraj was instrumental in Gandhi achieving victory.

[ 42 ] Because she was a woman, other political leaders in India saw Gandhi as weak and hoped to use her as a puppet once elected: Congress President Kamaraj orchestrated Mrs. Gandhi's selection as prime minister because he perceived her to be weak enough that he and the other regional party bosses could control her, and yet strong enough to beat Desai [her political opponent] in a party election because of the high regard for her father... a woman would be an ideal tool for the Syndicate.

[ 43 ] Prime minister (1966–1977) Gandhi's first eleven years serving as prime minister saw her evolve from the perception of Congress party leaders as their puppet, to a strong leader with the iron resolve to split the party over her policy positions, or to go to war with Pakistan to assist Bangladesh in the 1971 liberation war. At the end of 1977, she was such a dominating figure in Indian politics that Congress party president D. K. Barooah had coined the phrase "India is Indira and Indira is India." [ 44 ] First year Gandhi formed her government with Morarji Desai as deputy prime minister and finance minister. At the beginning of her first term as prime minister, she was widely criticised by the media and the opposition as a " Goongi goodiya " (Hindi for a "dumb doll") of the Congress party bosses who had orchestrated her election and then tried to constrain her.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Indira was a reluctant successor to her famed father, although she had accompanied him on several official foreign visits and played an anchor role in bringing down the first democratically elected communist government in Kerala.

[ 47 ] According to certain sources it was the socialist leader Ram Manohar Lohia that first derided her personality as the "Goongi Goodiya" (Hindi for "dumb doll") that later was echoed by other Congress politicians who were wary of her rise in the party.

[ 48 ] One of her first major actions was to crush the separatist Mizo National Front uprising in Mizoram in 1966.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] 1967–1971 Indira Gandhi with Australian Prime Minister John Gorton in 1968 The first electoral test for Gandhi was the 1967 general elections for the Lok Sabha and state assemblies. The Congress Party won a reduced majority in the Lok Sabha after these elections owing to widespread disenchantment over the rising prices of commodities, unemployment, economic stagnation and a food crisis. Gandhi was elected to the Lok Sabha from the Raebareli constituency . She had a rocky start after agreeing to devalue the rupee which created hardship for Indian businesses and consumers. The importation of wheat from the United States fell through due to political disputes.

[ 51 ] For the first time, the party also lost power or lost its majority in a number of states across the country. After the 1967 elections, Gandhi gradually began to move towards socialist policies. In 1969, she fell out with senior Congress party leaders over several issues. Chief among them was her decision to support V. V. Giri , the independent candidate rather than the official Congress party candidate Neelam Sanjiva Reddy for the vacant position of president of India . The other was the announcement by the prime minister of Bank nationalisation without consulting the finance minister, Morarji Desai. These steps culminated in party president S. Nijalingappa expelling her from the party for indiscipline.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] Gandhi, in turn, floated her own faction of the Congress party and managed to retain most of the Congress MPs on her side with only 65 on the side of the Congress (O) faction. The Gandhi faction, called Congress (R) , lost its majority in the parliament but remained in power with the support of regional parties such as DMK .

[ 55 ] The policies of the Congress under Gandhi, before the 1971 elections, also included proposals for the abolition of the Privy Purse to former rulers of the princely states and the 1969 nationalization of the fourteen largest banks in India.

[ 56 ] Military conflict with China Main article: Nathu La and Cho La clashes In 1967, a military conflict alongside the border of the Himalayan Kingdom of Sikkim , then an Indian protectorate , broke out between India and China. India won by repelling Chinese attacks and forced the subsequent withdrawal of Chinese forces from the region.

[ 3 ] Throughout the conflict, the Indian losses were 88 killed and 163 wounded while Chinese casualties stood at 340 killed and 450 wounded, according to the Indian Defense Ministry.

[ 57 ] Chinese sources made no declarations of casualties but alleged India to be the aggressor.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] In December 1967, Indira Gandhi remarked these developments that "China continues to maintain an attitude of hostility towards us and spares no opportunity to malign us and to carry on anti-Indian propaganda not only against the Indian Government but the whole way of our democratic functioning." [ 60 ] In 1975, Gandhi incorporated Sikkim into India, after a referendum in which a majority of Sikkimese voted to join India.

[ 61 ] The move was condemned as being a "despicable act of the Indian Government" by China. Chinese government mouthpiece China Daily wrote that "the Nehrus, father and daughter, had always acted in this way, and Indira Gandhi had gone further".

[ 62 ] 1971–1977 Garibi Hatao (Remove Poverty) was the resonant theme for Gandhi's 1971 political bid. The slogan was developed in response to the combined opposition alliance's use of the two-word manifesto—"Indira Hatao" (Remove Indira).

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] The Garibi Hatao slogan and the proposed anti-poverty programs that came with it were designed to give Gandhi independent national support, based on the rural and urban poor. This would allow her to bypass the dominant rural castes both in and of state and local governments as well as the urban commercial class. For their part, the previously voiceless poor would at last gain both political worth and political weight.

[ 65 ] The programs created through Garibi Hatao, though carried out locally, were funded and developed by the Central Government in New Delhi. The program was supervised and staffed by the Indian National Congress party. "These programs also provided the central political leadership with new and vast patronage resources to be disbursed ... throughout the country." [ 66 ] The Congress government faced numerous problems during this term. Some of these were due to high inflation which in turn was caused by wartime expenses, drought in some parts of the country and, more importantly, the 1973 oil crisis . Opposition to her in the 1973–75 period, after the Gandhi wave had receded, was strongest in the states of Bihar and Gujarat . In Bihar, Jayaprakash Narayan , the veteran leader came out of retirement to lead the protest movement there.

[ 67 ] War with Pakistan Gandhi's biggest achievement following the 1971 election came in December 1971 with India's decisive victory over Pakistan in the Indo-Pakistani War . That victory occurred in the last two weeks of the Bangladesh Liberation War , which led to the formation of independent Bangladesh . An insurgency in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh ) formed in early 1971, with Bengali's and East Pakistanis revolting against authoritarian rule from the central West Pakistan Government. In response, Pakistani security forces launched the infamous Operation Searchlight, in which Pakistan committed genocide among Bengali Hindus, nationalists and intelligentsia. Gandhi's India was initially restrained from intervening in the insurgency but quickly started to support Bengali rebels through the provision of military supplies. Indian forces clashed multiple times with Pakistani forces in the Eastern border. At one point, Indian forces along with Mukti Bahini rebels allied together and attacked Pakistani forces at Dhalai. The attack, supported and later successfully executed by India, was done to stop Pakistani cross-border shelling. The battle occurred more than a month before India's official intervention in December. Gandhi quickly dispatched more troops to the Eastern border with East Pakistan, hoping to support Mukti Bahini rebels and cease any Pakistani infiltration. Indian forces then clashed again with Pakistani forces after Indian forces crossed the border and secured Garibpur after a one-day battle lasting from 20 November 1971 to the 21st. The next day, on 22 November, Indian and Pakistani aircraft engaged in a dogfight over the Boyra Salient, in which thousands of people watched as 4 Indian Folland Gnats shot down 2 Pakistani Canadair Sabres and damaged another. Both Pakistani pilots that were shot down were captured as prisoners of war. The Battle of Boyra instantly made the 4 Indian pilots celebrities and created large-scale nationalism as the Bangladesh Liberation War saw more and more Indian intervention and escalation. Other clashes also happened on the same day but did not receive as much media attention as did the battle of Boyra and Garibpur. On 3 December 1971, the Pakistan Air Force launched Operation Chengiz Khan , which saw Pakistani aircraft attacking Indian airbases and military installations across the Western border in a pre-emptive strike. The initial night-time attack by Pakistani forces was foiled, failing to inflict any major damage on Indian airbases, allowing Indian aircraft to counterattack into West Pakistan. Gandhi quickly declared a state of emergency and addressed the nation on radio shortly after midnight, stating: "We must be prepared for a long period of hardship and sacrifice." Both countries mobilized for war and Gandhi ordered full-out war, ordering an invasion into East Pakistan. Pakistan's Navy had not improved since the 1965 war, while the Pakistani airforce could not launch attacks on the same scale as the Indian airforce. The Pakistan Army quickly attempted major land operations on the Western border, but most of these attacks besides some in Kashmir stalled, and allowed Indian counterattacks to gain land. The Pakistan Army lacked wide-scale organization which contributed to miscommunication and high casualties in the Western front.

In the Eastern Front of the war, Indian generals opted for a high speed lightning war , using mechanized and airborne units to quickly bypass Pakistani opposition and make quick strides towards the capital of East Pakistan, Dhaka .

Jagjit Singh Aurora (who later became a critic of Gandhi in 1984) led Indian Army's Eastern Command. The Indian Air Force quickly overcame the small contingent of Pakistani aircraft in East Pakistan, allowing for air superiority over the region. Indian forces liberated Jessore and several other towns during the Battle of Sylhet between 7 December and 15 December 1971, which saw India conduct its first heliborne operation. India then conducted another airdrop on 9 December, with Indian forces led by Major General Sagat Singh capturing just under 5,000 Pakistani POWs and also crossing the Meghna River towards Dhaka. Two days later, Indian forces conducted the largest airborne operation since World War II. 750 men of the Army's Parachute Regiment landed in Tangail and defeated the Pakistani forces in the area, securing a direct route to Dhaka. Little Pakistani forces escaped the battle with only 900 out of 7000 soldiers retreating back to Dhaka alive. By 12 December, Indian forces had reached the outskirts of Dhaka and had prepared to besiege the capital. Indian heavy artillery arrived by the 14th, and shelled the city.

As surrender became apparent by 14 December 1971, Pakistani paramilitaries and militia roamed the streets of Dhaka during the night, kidnapping, torturing and then executing any educated Bengali who was viewed as someone who could lead Bangladesh once Pakistan surrendered. Over 200 of these people were killed on the 14th. By 16 December, Pakistani morale had reached a low point, with the Indian Army finally encircling Dhaka and besieging the city. On the 16th, Indian forces issued a 30-minute ultimatum for the city to surrender. Seeing that the city's defences paled in comparison to the Mukti Bahini and Indian forces outside the city, Lt-Gen.

A.A.K. Niazi (Cdr. of Eastern Command) and his deputy, V-Adm.

M.S. Khan surrendered the city without resistance. BBC News captured the moment of surrender as Indian soldiers from the Parachute Regiment streamed into the city. As Indian forces and Mukti Bahini rounded up the remaining Pakistani forces, Lieutenant General Jagjit Singh Aurora of India and A.A.K. Niazi of Pakistan signed the Pakistani Instrument of Surrender at 16:31Hrs IST on 16 December 1971. The surrender signified the collapse of the East Pakistan Government along with the end of the war. 93,000 soldiers of the Pakistani security forces surrendered, the largest surrender since World War II. The entire four-tiered military surrendered to India along with its officers and generals. Large crowds flooded the scenes as anti-Pakistani slogans emerged and Pakistani POWs were beaten by the locals. Eventually, Indian officers formed a human-chain to protect Pakistani POWs and Niazi from being lynched by the belligerent locals. Most of the 93,000 captured were Pakistan Army officers or paramilitary officers, along with 12,000 supporters ( razakars ). Hostilities officially ended on 17 December 1971. 8,000 Pakistani soldiers were killed along with 25,000 wounded; Indian forces suffered only 3,000 dead and 12,000 wounded. India claimed to have captured 3.6k square kilometres of Pakistani land on the Western Front while losing 126 square kilometres of land to Pakistan.

Gandhi was hailed as Goddess Durga by the people as well as the opposition leaders at the time when India defeated Pakistan in the war.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] In the elections held for State assemblies across India in March 1972, the Congress (R) swept to power in most states riding on the post-war "Indira wave".

[ 67 ] Verdict on electoral malpractice Gandhi with U.S.

President Richard Nixon , 1971 On 12 June 1975, the Allahabad High Court declared Indira Gandhi's election to the Lok Sabha in 1971 void on the grounds of electoral malpractice. In an election petition filed by her 1971 opponent, Raj Narain (who later defeated her in the 1977 parliamentary election running in the Raebareli constituency), alleged several major as well as minor instances of the use of government resources for campaigning.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] Gandhi had asked one of her colleagues in government, Ashoke Kumar Sen , to defend her in court.

[ 76 ] She gave evidence in her defence during the trial. After almost four years, the court found her guilty of dishonest election practices, excessive election expenditure, and of using government machinery and officials for party purposes.

[ 74 ] [ 77 ] The judge, however, rejected the more serious charges of bribery, laid against her in the case.

[ 74 ] The court ordered her stripped of her parliamentary seat and banned her from running for any office for six years. As the constitution requires that the Prime Minister must be a member of either the Lok Sabha or the Rajya Sabha, the two houses of the Parliament of India , she was effectively removed from office. However, Gandhi rejected calls to resign. She announced plans to appeal to the Supreme Court and insisted that the conviction did not undermine her position. She said, "There is a lot of talk about our government not being clean, but from our experience the situation was very much worse when [opposition] parties were forming governments." [ 74 ] She dismissed criticism of the way her Congress Party raised election campaign money, saying all parties used the same methods. The prime minister retained the support of her party, which issued a statement backing her.

After news of the verdict spread, hundreds of supporters demonstrated outside her house, pledging their loyalty. Indian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom Braj Kumar Nehru said Gandhi's conviction would not harm her political career. "Mrs Gandhi has still today overwhelming support in the country," he said. "I believe the prime minister of India will continue in office until the electorate of India decides otherwise".

[ 78 ] State of Emergency (1975–1977) Main article: The Emergency (India) Gandhi moved to restore order by ordering the arrest of most of the opposition participating in the unrest. Her Cabinet and government recommended that then President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed declare a state of emergency because of the disorder and lawlessness following the Allahabad High Court decision. Accordingly, Ahmed declared a State of Emergency caused by internal disorder, based on the provisions of Article 352(1) of the Constitution, on 25 June 1975.

[ 79 ] At the time of emergency, there was a widespread rumour that Gandhi had ordered her search guards to eliminate firebrand trade unionist and socialist party leader George Fernandes , while he was on a run. Few International organisations and Government officials issued request letters to Indira Gandhi pleading her to relinquish such decrees. Fernandes had called a nationwide railway strike in 1974, that shut the railways for three weeks and became the largest industrial action in Asia. Ghandhi had turned furious over him and the strike was massively cracked down.

[ 80 ] Rule by decree Within a few months, President's rule was imposed on the two opposition party ruled states of Gujarat and Tamil Nadu thereby bringing the entire country under direct Central rule or by governments led by the ruling Congress party.

[ 81 ] Police were granted powers to impose curfews and detain citizens indefinitely; all publications were subjected to substantial censorship by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting . Finally, the impending legislative assembly elections were postponed indefinitely, with all opposition-controlled state governments being removed by virtue of the constitutional provision allowing for a dismissal of a state government on the recommendation of the state's governor.

[ 82 ] Indira Gandhi used the emergency provisions to change conflicting party members: Unlike her father Jawaharlal Nehru, who preferred to deal with strong chief ministers in control of their legislative parties and state party organizations, Mrs. Gandhi set out to remove every Congress chief minister who had an independent base and to replace each of them with ministers personally loyal to her...Even so, stability could not be maintained in the states...

[ 83 ] President Ahmed issued ordinances that did not require debate in the Parliament, allowing Gandhi to rule by decree .

[ 84 ] Rise of Sanjay Gandhi During the emergency Gandhi's younger son, Sanjay Gandhi , entered into Indian politics. He wielded tremendous power during the emergency without holding any government office. According to Mark Tully , "His inexperience did not stop him from using the Draconian powers his mother, Indira Gandhi, had taken to terrorise the administration, setting up what was in effect a police state." [ 85 ] It was said that during the emergency Sanjay virtually ran India along with his friends, especially Bansi Lal .

[ 86 ] It was also quipped that Sanjay had total control over his mother and that the government was run by the PMH (Prime Minister House) rather than the PMO (Prime Minister Office) .

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] Opposition leader (1977–1980) Gandhi on 21 March 1977 In 1977, after extending the state of emergency twice, Indira Gandhi called elections to give the electorate a chance to vindicate her rule. She may have grossly misjudged her popularity by reading what the heavily censored press wrote about her.

[ 90 ] She was opposed by the Janata alliance of Opposition parties. The alliance was made up of Bharatiya Jana Sangh , Congress (O) , The Socialist parties, and Charan Singh 's Bharatiya Kranti Dal representing northern peasants and farmers. The Janata alliance, with Jai Prakash Narayan as its spiritual guide, claimed the elections were the last chance for India to choose between "democracy and dictatorship". The Congress Party split during the election campaign of 1977; veteran Gandhi supporters like Jagjivan Ram , Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna , and Nandini Satpathy were compelled to part ways and form a new political entity, the CFD ( Congress for Democracy ) due primarily to intra-party politicking and the circumstances created by Sanjay Gandhi. The prevailing rumour was that he intended to dislodge Indira Gandhi, and the trio stood to prevent that. The Gandhi's Congress party was soundly crushed in the elections. The Janata Party's democracy or dictatorship claim seemed to resonate with the public. Indira Gandhi and Sanjay Gandhi lost their seats, and Congress was reduced to 153 seats (compared with 350 in the previous Lok Sabha), 92 of which were in the South. The Janata alliance, under the leadership of Morarji Desai, came to power after the State of Emergency was lifted. The alliance parties later merged to form the Janata Party under the guidance of Gandhian leader, Jayaprakash Narayan. The other leaders of the Janata Party were Charan Singh, Raj Narain, George Fernandes , and Atal Bihari Vajpayee.

[ 91 ] After the humiliating defeat in the election, the king of Nepal , through an intermediatory offered to move her and her family to Nepal . She refused to shift herself, but was open to move her two sons Sanjay Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi. However, after consulting with Kao , she declined the offer altogether keeping in view of her future political career.

[ 92 ] In opposition and return to power 1984 USSR commemorative stamp Since Indira Gandhi had lost her seat in the election, the defeated Congress party appointed Yashwantrao Chavan as their parliamentary party leader. Soon afterwards, the Congress party split again with Gandhi floating her own Congress faction called Congress(I) where I stood for Indira. She won a by-election in the Chikmagalur Constituency and took a seat in the Lok Sabha in November 1978 [ 93 ] [ 94 ] after the Janata Party's attempts to have Kannada matinee idol Rajkumar run against her failed when he refused to contest the election saying he wanted to remain apolitical.

[ 95 ] However, the Janata government's home minister, Charan Singh, ordered her arrest along with Sanjay Gandhi on several charges, none of which would be easy to prove in an Indian court. The arrest meant that Gandhi was automatically expelled from Parliament. The allegations included that she "had planned or thought of killing all opposition leaders in jail during the Emergency".

[ 96 ] However, the strategy backfired disastrously. In response to her arrest, Gandhi's supporters hijacked an Indian Airlines jet and demanded her immediate release.

[ 97 ] Her arrest and long-running trial gained her sympathy from many people. The Janata coalition was only united by its hatred of Gandhi (or "that woman" as some called her). The party included right wing Hindu Nationalists, Socialists, and former Congress party members. With so little in common, the Morarji Desai government was bogged down by infighting. In 1979, the government began to unravel over the issue of the dual loyalties of some members to Janata and the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS)—the Hindu nationalist , [ 98 ] [ 99 ] paramilitary [ 100 ] organisation. The ambitious Union finance minister, Charan Singh, who as the Union home minister during the previous year had ordered the Gandhi's' arrests, took advantage of this and started courting Indira and Sanjay. After a significant exodus from the party to Singh's faction, Desai resigned in July 1979. Singh was appointed prime minister, by President Reddy, after Indira Gandhi and Sanjay Gandhi promised Singh that Congress (I) would support his government from outside on certain conditions.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] The conditions included dropping all charges against Indira and Sanjay. Since Singh refused to drop them, Congress (I) withdrew its support and President Reddy dissolved Parliament in August 1979.

[ 103 ] Before the 1980 elections Indira Gandhi approached the Shahi Imam of Jama Masjid at the time, Syed Abdullah Bukhari and entered into an agreement with him on the basis of 10-point programme to secure the support of the Muslim votes.

[ 104 ] In the elections held in January, Congress (I) under Gandhi's leadership returned to power with a landslide majority.

[ 105 ] Prime minister (1980–1984) Gandhi on the stairs of the National Museum in Helsinki , Finland on 10 June 1983 The Congress Party under Gandhi swept back into power in January 1980.

[ 106 ] In this election, Gandhi was elected by the voters of the Medak constituency .

[ 107 ] On 23 June, Sanjay Gandhi was killed in a plane crash while performing an aerobatic manoeuvre in New Delhi.

[ 108 ] In 1980, as a tribute to her son's dream of launching an indigenously manufactured car, Indira Gandhi nationalized Sanjay's debt-ridden company, Maruti Udyog , for Rs. 43,000,000 (4.34 crore ) and invited joint venture bids from automobile companies around the world.

Suzuki of Japan was selected as the partner. The company launched its first Indian-manufactured car in 1984.

[ 109 ] By the time of Sanjay's death, Indira Gandhi trusted only family members, and therefore persuaded her reluctant son, Rajiv, to enter politics.

[ 36 ] [ 110 ] Her PMO office staff included H. Y. Sharada Prasad as her information adviser and speechwriter.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] Operation Blue Star Main article: Operation Blue Star After the 1977 elections, a coalition led by the Sikh -majority Akali Dal came to power in the northern Indian state of Punjab . In an effort to split the Akali Dal and gain popular support among the Sikhs, Gandhi's Congress Party helped to bring the orthodox religious leader Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale to prominence in Punjab politics.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] Later, Bhindranwale's organisation, Damdami Taksal , became embroiled in violence with another religious sect called the Sant Nirankari Mission and he was accused of instigating the murder of Jagat Narain , the owner of the Punjab Kesari newspaper.

[ 115 ] After being arrested, Bhindranwale disassociated himself from the Congress Party and joined Akali Dal.

[ 116 ] In July 1982, he led the campaign for the implementation of the Anandpur Resolution , which demanded greater autonomy for the Sikh-majority state. Meanwhile, a small group of Sikhs, including some of Bhindranwale's followers, turned to militancy after being targeted by government officials and police for supporting the Anandpur Resolution.

[ 117 ] In 1982, Bhindranwale and approximately 200 armed followers moved into a guest house called the Guru Nanak Niwas near the Golden Temple .

[ 118 ] By 1983, the Temple complex had become a fort for many militants.

[ 119 ] The Statesman later reported that light machine guns and semi-automatic rifles were known to have been brought into the compound.

[ 120 ] On 23 April 1983, the Punjab Police Deputy Inspector General A. S. Atwal was shot dead as he left the Temple compound. The next day, Harchand Singh Longowal (then president of Akali Dal) confirmed the involvement of Bhindranwale in the murder.

[ 121 ] After several futile negotiations, in June 1984, Gandhi ordered the Indian army to enter the Golden Temple to remove Bhindranwale and his supporters from the complex. The army used heavy artillery, including tanks, in the action code-named Operation Blue Star . The operation badly damaged or destroyed parts of the Temple complex, including the Akal Takht shrine and the Sikh library. It led to the deaths of many Sikh fighters and innocent pilgrims. The number of casualties remains disputed, with estimates ranging from many hundreds to many thousands.

[ 122 ] Gandhi was accused of using the attack for political ends. Harjinder Singh Dilgeer stated that she attacked the temple complex to present herself as a great hero in order to win the general elections planned towards the end of 1984.

[ 123 ] There was fierce criticism of the action by Sikhs in India and overseas.

[ 124 ] There were also incidents of mutiny by Sikh soldiers in the aftermath of the attack.

[ 122 ] Assassination Main articles: Assassination of Indira Gandhi and 1984 anti-Sikh riots Shakti Sthal , the place where Indira Gandhi was cremated at New Delhi "I am alive today, I may not be there tomorrow ... I shall continue to serve until my last breath and when I die, I can say, that every drop of my blood will invigorate India and strengthen it  ... Even if I died in the service of the nation, I would be proud of it. Every drop of my blood ... will contribute to the growth of this nation and to make it strong and dynamic." —Gandhi's remarks on her last speech a day before her death (30 October 1984) at the then Parade Ground, Odisha.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] On 31 October 1984, two of Gandhi's Sikh bodyguards, Satwant Singh and Beant Singh , shot her with their service weapons in the garden of the prime minister's residence at 1 Safdarjung Road , New Delhi , allegedly in revenge for Operation Blue Star .

[ 127 ] The shooting occurred as she was walking past a wicket gate guarded by the two men. She was to be interviewed by the British filmmaker Peter Ustinov , who was filming a documentary for Irish television .

[ 128 ] Beant shot her three times using his side-arm; Satwant fired 30 rounds.

[ 129 ] The men dropped their weapons and surrendered. Afterwards, they were taken away by other guards into a closed room where Beant was shot dead.

Kehar Singh was later arrested for being part of the conspiracy in the attack. Satwant and Kehar were sentenced to death and hanged in Delhi's Tihar Jail .

[ 130 ] Gandhi was taken to the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences at 9:30 AM where doctors operated on her. She was declared dead at 2:20 PM. The post-mortem examination was conducted by a team of doctors headed by Tirath Das Dogra . Dogra said that Gandhi had sustained as many as 30 bullet wounds from two sources: a Sten submachine gun [ 131 ] [ 132 ] and a .38 Special revolver. The assailants had fired 31 bullets at her, of which 30 hit her; 23 had passed through her body while seven remained inside her. Dogra extracted bullets to establish the make of the weapons used and to match each weapon with the bullets recovered by ballistic examination. The bullets were matched with their respective weapons at the Central Forensic Science Laboratory (CFSL) Delhi. Subsequently, Dogra appeared in Shri Mahesh Chandra's court as an expert witness (PW-5); he gave his testimony in several sessions. The cross examination was conducted by Shri Pran Nath Lekhi , the defence counsel.

[ 133 ] Salma Sultan provided the first news of her assassination on Doordarshan 's evening news on 31 October 1984, more than 10 hours after she was shot.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] Today, the spot where Gandhi was assassinated is marked by a glass opening in the crystal pathway at the Indira Gandhi Memorial Gandhi was cremated in accordance with Hindu tradition on 3 November near Raj Ghat .

[ 136 ] The site where she was cremated is known today as Shakti Sthal .

[ 137 ] Paying homage, Gandhi's body lay in state at Teen Murti House. Thousands of followers strained for a glimpse of the cremation.

[ 138 ] Her funeral was televised live on domestic and international stations, including the BBC . After her death, the Parade Ground was converted to the Indira Gandhi Park which was inaugurated by her son, Rajiv Gandhi .

Gandhi's assassination dramatically changed the political landscape. Rajiv succeeded his mother as prime minister within hours of her murder and anti-Sikh riots erupted, lasting for several days and killing more than 3,000 Sikhs in New Delhi and an estimated 8,000 across India. Many Congress leaders were believed to be behind the anti-Sikh massacre.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] International reaction Gandhi's death was mourned worldwide. World leaders condemned the assassination and said her death would leave a 'big emptiness' in international affairs. In Moscow , Soviet President Konstantin Chernenko sent condolences, "The Soviet people learned with pain and sorrow about the untimely death in a villainous assassination of the glorious daughter of the great Indian people, a fiery fighter for peace and security of peoples and a great friend of the Soviet Union". President Ronald Reagan , along with Secretary of State George Shultz , visited the Indian Embassy to sign a book of condolences and expressed his 'shock, revulsion, and grief' over the assassination. 42nd vice president of the United States Walter Mondale called Gandhi 'a great leader of a great democracy' and deplored 'this shocking act of violence'.

[ 141 ] Asian, African, and European leaders mourned Gandhi as a great champion of democracy and leader of the Non-Aligned Movement expressed its 'deepest grief' and called the killing a 'terrorist' act.

South Korean President Chun Doo-hwan , said Gandhi's death meant the 'loss of a great leader to the whole world.' Yugoslav President Veselin Đuranović , Pakistani President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq , Italian President Sandro Pertini , Pope John Paul II at the Vatican , and French President François Mitterrand condemned the killing. At the United Nations , the General Assembly paused during its work as shocked delegates mourned the death. Assembly President Paul Lusaka of Zambia postponed a scheduled debate and hastily organized a memorial meeting.

[ 142 ] Foreign policy Gandhi on a visit to Rio de Janeiro , 1968, National Archives of Brazil Main article: Foreign policy of the Indira Gandhi government Gandhi is remembered for her ability to effectively promote Indian foreign policy measures.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] [ 145 ] South Asia Further information: List of state visits made by Indira Gandhi In early 1971, disputed elections in Pakistan led then East Pakistan to declare independence as Bangladesh . Repression and violence by the Pakistani army led to 10 million refugees crossing the border into India over the following months.

[ 146 ] Finally, in December 1971, Gandhi intervened directly in the conflict to liberate Bangladesh. India emerged victorious following the war with Pakistan to become the dominant power of South Asia.

[ 147 ] India had signed a treaty with the Soviet Union promising mutual assistance in the case of war, [ 146 ] while Pakistan received active support from the United States during the conflict.

[ 148 ] U.S. President Richard Nixon disliked Gandhi personally, referring to her as a " bitch " [ 149 ] and a "clever fox" in his private communication with Secretary of State Henry Kissinger .

[ 150 ] Nixon later wrote of the war: "[Gandhi] suckered [America]. Suckered us ... this woman suckered us." [ 151 ] Relations with the U.S. became distant as Gandhi developed closer ties with the Soviet Union after the war. The latter grew to become India's largest trading partner and its biggest arms supplier for much of Gandhi's premiership.

[ 152 ] India's new hegemonic position, as articulated under the "Indira Doctrine", led to attempts to bring the Himalayan states under India's sphere of influence.

[ 153 ] Nepal and Bhutan remained aligned with India, while in 1975, after years of campaigning, Sikkim voted to join India in a referendum .

[ 61 ] [ 154 ] Gandhi with Jacqueline Kennedy , First Lady of the US in New Delhi, 1962 India maintained close ties with neighbouring Bangladesh (formerly East Pakistan) following the Liberation War. Prime Minister Sheikh Mujibur Rahman recognised Gandhi's contributions to the independence of Bangladesh. However, Mujibur Rahman's pro-India policies antagonised many in Bangladeshi politics and the military, which feared that Bangladesh had become a client state of India.

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] The Assassination of Mujibur Rahman in 1975 led to the establishment of Islamist military regimes that sought to distance the country from India.

[ 157 ] Gandhi's relationship with the military regimes was strained because of her alleged support of anti-Islamist leftist guerrilla forces in Bangladesh.

[ 157 ] Generally, however, there was a rapprochement between Gandhi and the Bangladeshi regimes, although issues such as border disputes and the Farakka Dam remained an irritant to bilateral ties.

[ 158 ] In 2011, the Government of Bangladesh conferred its highest state award for non-nationals, the Bangladesh Freedom Honour posthumously on Gandhi for her "outstanding contribution" to the country's independence.

[ 159 ] Gandhi's approach to dealing with Sri Lanka's ethnic problems was initially accommodating. She enjoyed cordial relations with Prime Minister Sirimavo Bandaranaike . In 1974, India ceded the tiny islet of Katchatheevu to Sri Lanka to save Bandaranaike's socialist government from a political disaster.

[ 160 ] However, relations soured over Sri Lanka's movement away from socialism under J. R. Jayewardene , whom Gandhi despised as a "western puppet".

[ 161 ] India under Gandhi was alleged to have supported the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) militants in the 1980s to put pressure on Jayewardene to abide by Indian interests.

[ 162 ] Nevertheless, Gandhi rejected demands to invade Sri Lanka in the aftermath of Black July 1983 , an anti-Tamil pogrom carried out by Sinhalese mobs.

[ 163 ] Gandhi made a statement emphasising that she stood for the territorial integrity of Sri Lanka, although she also stated that India cannot "remain a silent spectator to any injustice done to the Tamil community." [ 163 ] [ 164 ] India's relationship with Pakistan remained strained after the Shimla Accord in 1972. Gandhi's authorisation of the detonation of a nuclear device at Pokhran in 1974 was viewed by Pakistani leader Zulfikar Ali Bhutto as an attempt to intimidate Pakistan into accepting India's hegemony in the subcontinent. However, in May 1976, she and Bhutto both agreed to reopen diplomatic establishments and normalise relations.

[ 165 ] After General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq rose to power in Pakistan in 1978, India's relations with its neighbour reached a nadir. Gandhi accused General Zia of supporting Khalistani militants in Punjab .

[ 165 ] Military hostilities recommenced in 1984 following Gandhi's authorisation of Operation Meghdoot .

[ 166 ] India was victorious in the resulting Siachen conflict against Pakistan.

[ 166 ] In order to keep the Soviet Union and the United States out of South Asia, Gandhi was instrumental in establishing the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation ( SAARC ) in 1983 [ 167 ] Middle East Gandhi remained a staunch supporter of the Palestinians in the Arab–Israeli conflict and was critical of the Middle East diplomacy sponsored by the United States.

[ 161 ] Israel was viewed as a religious state, and thus an analogue to India's archrival Pakistan. Indian diplomats hoped to win Arab support in countering Pakistan in Kashmir . Nevertheless, Gandhi authorised the development of a secret channel of contact and security assistance with Israel in the late 1960s. Her lieutenant, P. V. Narasimha Rao , later became prime minister and approved full diplomatic ties with Israel in 1992.

[ 168 ] Gandhi meeting the Shah of Iran Mohammad Reza Pahlavi and Shahbanu Farah Pahlavi during their state visit to India in 1970 India's pro-Arab policy had mixed success. Establishment of close ties with the socialist and secular Baathist regimes to some extent neutralised Pakistani propaganda against India.

[ 169 ] However, the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 presented a dilemma for the Arab and Muslim states of the Middle East as the war was fought by two states both friendly to the Arabs.

[ 170 ] The progressive Arab regimes in Egypt , Syria , and Algeria chose to remain neutral, while the conservative pro-American Arab monarchies in Jordan , Saudi Arabia , Kuwait , and United Arab Emirates openly supported Pakistan. Egypt's stance was met with dismay by the Indians, who had come to expect close co-operation with the Baathist regimes.

[ 169 ] But, the death of Nasser in 1970 and Sadat 's growing friendship with Riyadh , and his mounting differences with Moscow, constrained Egypt to a policy of neutrality.

[ 169 ] Gandhi's overtures to Muammar Gaddafi were rebuffed.

[ 170 ] Libya agreed with the Arab monarchies in believing that Gandhi's intervention in East Pakistan was an attack against Islam .

[ 170 ] Indira Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru visit Albert Einstein The 1971 war became a temporary stumbling block in growing Indo-Iranian ties .

[ 169 ] Although Iran had earlier characterized the Indo-Pakistani war in 1965 as Indian aggression, the Shah had launched an effort at rapprochement with India in 1969 as part of his effort to secure support for a larger Iranian role in the Persian Gulf .

[ 169 ] Gandhi's tilt towards Moscow and her dismemberment of Pakistan was perceived by the Shah as part of a larger anti-Iran conspiracy involving India, Iraq , and the Soviet Union.

[ 169 ] Nevertheless, Iran had resisted Pakistani pressure to activate the Baghdad Pact and draw the Central Treaty Organisation (CENTO) into the conflict.

[ 169 ] Gradually, Indian and Iranian disillusionment with their respective regional allies led to a renewed partnership between the nations.

[ 171 ] She was unhappy with the lack of support from India's Arab allies during the war with Pakistan, while the Shah was apprehensive at the growing friendship between Pakistan and Arab states of the Persian Gulf , especially Saudi Arabia , and the growing influence of Islam in Pakistani society.

[ 171 ] There was an increase in Indian economic and military co-operation with Iran during the 1970s.

[ 171 ] The 1974 India-Iranian agreement led to Iran supplying nearly 75 percent of India's crude oil demands.

[ 172 ] Gandhi appreciated the Shah's disregard of Pan-Islamism in diplomacy.

[ 171 ] Asia-Pacific One of the major developments in Southeast Asia during Gandhi's premiership was the formation of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 1967. Relations between ASEAN and India were mutually antagonistic. India perceived ASEAN to be linked to the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO) and, therefore, it was seen as a pro-American organisation. On their part, the ASEAN nations were unhappy with Gandhi's sympathy for the Viet Cong and India's strong links with the USSR . Furthermore, they were also apprehensions in the region about Gandhi's plans, particularly after India played a big role in breaking up Pakistan and facilitating the emergence of Bangladesh as a sovereign country in 1971. India's entry into the nuclear weapons club in 1974 also contributed to tensions in Southeast Asia.

[ 173 ] Relations only began to improve following Gandhi's endorsement of the ZOPFAN declaration and the disintegration of the SEATO alliance in the aftermath of Pakistani and American defeats in the region. Nevertheless, Gandhi's close relations with reunified Vietnam and her decision to recognize the Vietnam-installed Government of Cambodia in 1980 meant that India and ASEAN were unable to develop a viable partnership.

[ 173 ] On 26 September 1981, Gandhi was conferred with the honorary degree of Doctor at the Laucala Graduation at the University of the South Pacific in Fiji.

[ 174 ] Africa Although independent India was initially viewed as a champion of various African independence movements, its cordial relationship with the Commonwealth of Nations and its liberal views of British policies in East Africa had harmed its image as a staunch supporter of various independence movements in the third world .

[ 175 ] Indian condemnation of militant struggles in Kenya and Algeria was in sharp contrast to China, who had supported armed struggle to win African independence.

[ 175 ] After reaching a high diplomatic point in the aftermath of Nehru's role in the Suez Crisis , India's isolation from Africa was almost complete when only four nations— Ethiopia , Kenya , Nigeria , and Libya—supported her during the Sino-Indian War in 1962.

[ 175 ] After Gandhi became prime minister, diplomatic and economic relations with the states which had sided with India during the Sino-Indian War were expanded.

[ 175 ] Gandhi began negotiations with the Kenyan government to establish the Africa-India Development Cooperation. The Indian government also started considering the possibility of bringing Indians settled in Africa within the framework of its policy goals to help recover its declining geo-strategic influence. Gandhi declared the people of Indian origin settled in Africa as "Ambassadors of India".

[ 175 ] Efforts to rope in the Asian community to join Indian diplomacy, however, came to naught, in part because of the unwillingness of Indians to remain in politically insecure surroundings, and because of the exodus of African Indians to Britain with the passing of the Commonwealth Immigrants Act in 1968.

[ 175 ] In Uganda , the African Indian community suffered persecution and eventually expulsion under the government of Idi Amin .

[ 176 ] Foreign and domestic policy successes in the 1970s enabled Gandhi to rebuild India's image in the eyes of African states.

[ 175 ] Victory over Pakistan and India's possession of nuclear weapons showed the degree of India's progress.

[ 175 ] Furthermore, the conclusion of the Indo-Soviet treaty in 1971, and threatening gestures by the United States, to send its nuclear-armed Task Force 74 into the Bay of Bengal at the height of the East Pakistan crisis had enabled India to regain its anti-imperialist image.

[ 175 ] Gandhi firmly tied Indian anti-imperialist interests in Africa to those of the Soviet Union.

[ 177 ] Unlike Nehru, she openly and enthusiastically supported liberation struggles in Africa.

[ 177 ] At the same time, Chinese influence in Africa had declined owing to its incessant quarrels with the Soviet Union.

[ 175 ] These developments permanently halted India's decline in Africa and helped to reestablish its geo-strategic presence.

[ 175 ] The Commonwealth Ghandi meeting New Zealand PM Robert Muldoon in New Delhi, 1980 The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of mainly former British colonies. India maintained cordial relations with most of the members during Gandhi's time in power. In the 1980s, she was regarded alongside Canadian prime minister Pierre Trudeau , Zambian president Kenneth Kaunda , Australian prime minister Malcolm Fraser and Singaporean prime minister Lee Kuan Yew as being one of the pillars of the Commonwealth.

[ 178 ] India under Gandhi also hosted the 1983 Commonwealth Heads of Government summit in New Delhi. Gandhi used the meetings as a forum to put pressure on member countries to cut economic, sports, and cultural ties with apartheid South Africa.

[ 179 ] The Non-Aligned Movement Gandhi with Nicolae Ceaușescu in 1969 In the early 1980s under Gandhi, India attempted to reassert its prominent role in the Non-Aligned Movement by focusing on the relationship between disarmament and economic development. By appealing to the economic grievances of developing countries , Gandhi and her successors exercised a moderating influence on the Non-Aligned Movement, diverting it from some of the Cold War issues that marred the controversial 1979 Havana meeting where Cuban leader Fidel Castro attempted to steer the movement towards the Soviet Union.

[ 180 ] Although hosting the 1983 summit at Delhi boosted Indian prestige within the movement, its close relations with the Soviet Union and its pro-Soviet positions on Afghanistan and Cambodia limited its influence.

[ 181 ] Western Europe Gandhi spent a number of years in Europe during her youth and had formed many friendships there. During her premiership she formed friendships with many leaders including West German chancellor, Willy Brandt [ 182 ] and Austrian chancellor Bruno Kreisky .

[ 183 ] She enjoyed a close working relationship with many British leaders including conservative premiers, Edward Heath and Margaret Thatcher .

[ 184 ] Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc countries The relationship between India and the Soviet Union deepened during Gandhi's rule. The main reason was the perceived bias of the United States and China , rivals of the USSR, towards Pakistan. The support of the Soviets with arms supplies and the casting of a veto at the United Nations helped in winning and consolidating the victory over Pakistan in the 1971 Bangladesh liberation war. Before the war, Gandhi signed a treaty of friendship with the Soviets. They were unhappy with the 1974 nuclear test conducted by India but did not support further action because of the ensuing Cold War with the United States. Gandhi was unhappy with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan , but once again calculations involving relations with Pakistan and China kept her from criticising the Soviet Union harshly. The Soviets became the main arms supplier during the Gandhi years by offering cheap credit and transactions in rupees rather than in dollars. The easy trade deals also applied to non-military goods. Under Gandhi, by the early 1980s, the Soviets had become India's largest trading partner.

[ 185 ] Soviet intelligence in India Soviet intelligence was involved in India during Indira Gandhi's administration, sometimes at Gandhi's expense. In the prelude to Operation Blue Star , by 1981, the Soviets had launched Operation Kontakt , which was based on a forged document purporting to contain details of the weapons and money provided by the ISI to Sikh militants who wanted to create an independent country.

[ 186 ] In November 1982, Yuri Andropov , the General Secretary of the Communist Party and leader of the Soviet Union, approved a proposal to fabricate Pakistani intelligence documents detailing ISI plans to foment religious disturbances in Punjab and promote the creation of Khalistan as an independent Sikh state.

[ 187 ] Indira Gandhi's decision to move troops into the Punjab was based on her taking seriously the information provided by the Soviets regarding secret CIA support for the Sikhs.

[ 188 ] According to the Mitrokhin Archive , the Soviets used a new recruit in the New Delhi residency named "Agent S" who was close to Indira Gandhi as a major channel for providing her disinformation.

[ 186 ] Agent S provided Indira Gandhi with false documents purporting to show Pakistani involvement in the Khalistan conspiracy.

[ 186 ] The KGB became confident that it could continue to deceive Indira Gandhi indefinitely with fabricated reports of CIA and Pakistani conspiracies against her.

[ 187 ] The Soviets persuaded Rajiv Gandhi during a visit to Moscow in 1983 that the CIA was engaged in subversion in the Punjab.

[ 187 ] When Rajiv Gandhi returned to India, he declared this to be true.

[ 187 ] The KGB was responsible for Indira Gandhi exaggerating the threats posed by both the CIA and Pakistan.

[ 188 ] This KGB role in facilitating Operation Bluestar was acknowledged by Subramanian Swamy who stated in 1992 "The 1984 Operation Bluestar became necessary because of the vast disinformation against Sant Bhindranwale by the KGB, and repeated inside Parliament by the Congress Party of India." [ 189 ] A report following the Mitrokhin archive also caused some historiographical controversy about Indira Gandhi.

[ 190 ] In India, a senior leader of the Bharatiya Janata Party , L. K. Advani , requested of the Government a white paper on the role of foreign intelligence agencies and a judicial enquiry on the allegations.

[ 191 ] The spokesperson of the Indian Congress party referred to the book as "pure sensationalism not even remotely based on facts or records" and pointed out that the book is not based on official records from the Soviet Union. L.K Advani raised his voice because the book refers to ex-prime minister Indira Gandhi's (Codenamed VANO) relations with the KGB.

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] The KGB was alleged to be directly link to Prime Minister of India, Indira Gandhi (code-named Vano). "Suitcases full of banknotes were said to be routinely taken to the Prime Minister's house. Former Syndicate member S. K. Patil is reported to have said that Mrs. Gandhi did not even return the suitcases".

[ 194 ] [ 195 ] An extensive footprint in the Indian media was also described- "According to KGB files, by 1973 it had ten Indian newspapers on its payroll (which cannot be identified for legal reasons) as well as a press agency under its control. During 1972 the KGB claimed to have planted 3,789 articles in Indian newspapers–probably more than in any other country in the non-Communist world." [ 196 ] According to its files, the number fell to 2,760 in 1973 but rose to 4,486 in 1974 and 5,510 in 1975. Mitrokhin estimated that in some major NATO countries, "despite active-measures campaigns, the KGB was able to plant a little more than 1 per cent of the articles which it placed in the Indian press." [ 197 ] United States Gandhi meeting President Lyndon B. Johnson in the Oval Office on 28 March 1966 When Gandhi came to power in 1966, Lyndon Johnson was the US president. At the time, India was reliant on the US for food aid. Gandhi resented the US policy of food aid being used as a tool to force India to adopt policies favoured by the US. She also resolutely refused to sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Relations with the US were strained badly under President Richard Nixon and his favouring of Pakistan during the Bangladesh liberation war. Nixon despised Gandhi politically and personally.

[ 198 ] In 1981, Gandhi met President Ronald Reagan for the first time at the North–South Summit held to discuss global poverty. She had been described to him as an 'Ogre', but he found her charming and easy to work with and they formed a close working relationship during her premiership in the 1980s.

[ 199 ] Economic policy Further information: Economic policy of the Indira Gandhi government Gandhi presided over three Five-Year Plans as prime minister, two of which succeeded in meeting their targeted growth.

[ 200 ] There is considerable debate whether Gandhi was a socialist on principle or out of political expediency.

[ 55 ] Sunanda K. Datta-Ray described her as "a master of rhetoric ... often more posture than policy", while The Times journalist, Peter Hazelhurst, famously quipped that Gandhi's socialism was "slightly left of self-interest." [ 201 ] Critics have focused on the contradictions in the evolution of her stance towards communism. Gandhi was known for her anti-communist stance in the 1950s, with Meghnad Desai even describing her as "the scourge of [India's] Communist Party." [ 202 ] Yet, she later forged close relations with Indian communists even while using the army to break the Naxalites . In this context, Gandhi was accused of formulating populist policies to suit her political needs. She was seemingly against the rich and big business while preserving the status quo to manipulate the support of the left in times of political insecurity, such as the late 1960s.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] Although in time Gandhi came to be viewed as the scourge of the right-wing and reactionary political elements of India, leftist opposition to her policies emerged. As early as 1969, critics had begun accusing her of insincerity and Machiavellianism.

The Indian Libertarian wrote, "it would be difficult to find a more machiavellian leftist than Mrs Indira Gandhi... for here is Machiavelli at its best in the person of a suave, charming and astute politician." [ 205 ] J. Barkley Rosser Jr.

wrote that "some have even seen the declaration of emergency rule in 1975 as a move to suppress [leftist] dissent against Gandhi's policy shift to the right." [ 55 ] In the 1980s, Gandhi was accused of "betraying socialism" after the beginning of Operation Forward , an attempt at economic reform.

[ 206 ] Nevertheless, others were more convinced of Gandhi's sincerity and devotion to socialism. Pankaj Vohra noted that "even the late prime minister's critics would concede that the maximum number of legislations of social significance was brought about during her tenure... [and that] she lives in the hearts of millions of Indians who shared her concern for the poor and weaker sections and who supported her politics." [ 207 ] In summarising the biographical works on Gandhi, Blema S. Steinberg concludes she was decidedly non-ideological.

[ 208 ] Only 7.4% (24) of the total 330 biographical extractions posit ideology as a reason for her policy choices.

[ 208 ] Steinberg notes Gandhi's association with socialism was superficial. She had only a general and traditional commitment to the ideology by way of her political and family ties.

[ 208 ] Gandhi personally had a fuzzy concept of socialism. In one of the early interviews she gave as prime minister, Gandhi ruminated, "I suppose you could call me a socialist, but you have understand what we mean by that term ... we used the word [socialism] because it came closest to what we wanted to do here–which is to eradicate poverty. You can call it socialism; but if by using that word we arouse controversy, I don't see why we should use it. I don't believe in words at all." [ 208 ] Regardless of the debate over her ideology or lack thereof, Gandhi remains a left-wing icon. She has been described by Hindustan Times columnist, Pankaj Vohra, as "arguably the greatest mass leader of the last century." [ 207 ] Her campaign slogan, Garibi Hatao ('Remove Poverty'), has become an often used motto of the Indian National Congress Party.

[ 209 ] To the rural and urban poor, untouchables, minorities and women in India, Gandhi was "Indira Amma or Mother Indira." [ 210 ] Green Revolution and the Fourth Five-Year Plan Gandhi inherited a weak and troubled economy. Fiscal problems associated with the war with Pakistan in 1965, along with a drought-induced food crisis that spawned famines, had plunged India into the sharpest recession since independence.

[ 51 ] [ 55 ] The government responded by taking steps to liberalise the economy and agreeing to the devaluation of the currency in return for the restoration of foreign aid.

[ 51 ] The economy managed to recover in 1966 and ended up growing at 4.1% over 1966–1969.

[ 203 ] [ 211 ] Much of that growth however, was offset by the fact that the external aid promised by the United States government and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), meant to ease the short-run costs of adjustment to a liberalised economy, never materialised.

[ 51 ] American policy makers had complained of continued restrictions imposed on the economy. At the same time, Indo-US relations were strained because of Gandhi's criticism of the American bombing campaign in Vietnam. While it was thought at the time, and for decades after, that President Johnson's policy of withholding food grain shipments was to coerce Indian support for the war, in fact, it was to offer India rainmaking technology that he wanted to use as a counterweight to China's possession of the atomic bomb.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] In light of the circumstances, liberalisation became politically suspect and was soon abandoned.

[ 51 ] Grain diplomacy and currency devaluation became matters of intense national pride in India. After the bitter experience with Johnson, Gandhi decided not to request food aid in the future. Moreover, her government resolved never again to become "so vulnerably dependent" on aid, and painstakingly began building up substantial foreign exchange reserves.

[ 214 ] When food stocks slumped after poor harvests in 1972, the government made it a point to use foreign exchange to buy US wheat commercially rather than seek resumption of food aid.

[ 215 ] The period of 1967–75 was characterised by socialist ascendency in India, which culminated in 1976 with the official declaration of state socialism . Gandhi not only abandoned the short-lived liberalisation programme but also aggressively expanded the public sector with new licensing requirements and other restrictions for industry. She began a new course by launching the Fourth Five-Year Plan in 1969. The government targeted growth at 5.7% while stating as its goals, "growth with stability and progressive achievement of self-reliance." [ 203 ] [ 216 ] The rationale behind the overall plan was Gandhi's Ten-Point Programme of 1967. This had been her first economic policy formulation, six months after coming to office. The programme emphasised greater state control of the economy with the understanding that government control assured greater welfare than private control.

[ 203 ] Related to this point were a set of policies that were meant to regulate the private sector.

[ 203 ] By the end of the 1960s, the reversal of the liberalisation process was complete, and India's policies were characterised as "protectionist as ever." [ 214 ] To deal with India's food problems, Gandhi expanded the emphasis on production of inputs to agriculture that had already been initiated by her father, Jawaharlal Nehru.

[ 55 ] The Green Revolution in India subsequently culminated under her government in the 1970s. It transformed the country from a nation heavily reliant on imported grains, and prone to famine, to one largely able to feed itself, and becoming successful in achieving its goal of food security. Gandhi had a personal motive in pursuing agricultural self-sufficiency, having found India's dependency on the U.S. for shipments of grains humiliating.

[ 217 ] The economic period of 1967–1975 became significant for its major wave of nationalisation amidst increased regulation of the private sector.

[ 55 ] Some other objectives of the economic plan for that period were providing for the minimum needs of the community through a rural works program and the removal of the privy purses of the nobility.

[ 203 ] Those and many other goals of the 1967 programme were accomplished by 1974–1975. Nevertheless, the success of the overall economic plan was tempered by the fact that annual growth at 3.3–3.4% over 1969–1974 fell short of the targeted figure.

[ 203 ] The Fifth Five-Year Plan The Fifth Five-Year Plan (1974–1979) was enacted with the backdrop of the state of emergency and the Twenty Point Program of 1975.

[ 203 ] It was the economic rationale of the emergency, a political act which has often been justified on economic grounds.

[ 203 ] In contrast to the reception of Gandhi's earlier economic plan, this one was criticised for being a "hastily thrown together wish list." [ 203 ] She promised to reduce poverty by targeting the consumption levels of the poor and enact wide-ranging social and economic reforms. In addition, the government targeted an annual growth rate of 4.4% over the period of the plan.

[ 200 ] The measures of the emergency regime was able to halt the economic trouble of the early to mid-1970s, which had been marred by harvest failures, fiscal contraction, and the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchanged rates. The resulting turbulence in the foreign exchange markets was accentuated further by the oil shock of 1973.

[ 211 ] The government was able to exceed the targeted growth figure with an annual growth rate of 5.0–5.2% over the five-year period of the plan (1974–79).

[ 200 ] [ 203 ] The economy grew at the rate of 9% in 1975–76 alone, and the Fifth Plan, became the first plan during which the per capita income of the economy grew by over 5%.

[ 218 ] Operation Forward and the Sixth Five-Year Plan Gandhi inherited a weak economy when she became prime minister again in 1980.

[ 219 ] The preceding year—1979–80—under the Janata Party government saw the strongest recession (−5.2%) in the history of modern India with inflation rampant at 18.2%.

[ 55 ] [ 218 ] [ 220 ] Gandhi proceeded to abrogate the Janata Party government's Five-Year Plan in 1980 and launched the Sixth Five-Year Plan (1980–85). Her government targeted an average growth rate of 5.2% over the period of the plan.

[ 200 ] Measures to check inflation were also taken; by the early 1980s it was under control at an annual rate of about 5%.

[ 220 ] Although Gandhi continued professing socialist beliefs, the Sixth Five-Year Plan was markedly different from the years of Garibi Hatao. Populist programmes and policies were replaced by pragmatism.

[ 203 ] There was an emphasis on tightening public expenditures, greater efficiency of the state-owned enterprises (SOE), which Gandhi qualified as a "sad thing", and on stimulating the private sector through deregulation and liberation of the capital market.

[ 221 ] The government subsequently launched Operation Forward in 1982, the first cautious attempt at reform.

[ 222 ] The Sixth Plan went on to become the most successful of the Five-Year Plans yet; showing an average growth rate of 5.7% over 1980–85.

[ 200 ] Inflation and unemployment The price of oil during the 1970s energy crisis , the graph shows sharp increases in 1973 and again in 1979 During Lal Bahadur Shastri's last full year in office (1965), inflation averaged 7.7%, compared to 5.2% at the end of Gandhi's first term in office (1977).

[ 223 ] On average, inflation in India had remained below 7% through the 1950s and 1960s.

[ 224 ] It then accelerated sharply in the 1970s, from 5.5% in 1970–71 to over 20% by 1973–74, due to the international oil crisis.

[ 223 ] Gandhi declared inflation the gravest of problems in 1974 (at 25.2%) and devised a severe anti-inflation program. The government was successful in bringing down inflation during the emergency; achieving negative figures of −1.1% by the end of 1975–76.

[ 219 ] [ 223 ] Gandhi inherited a tattered economy in her second term; harvest failures and a second oil shock in the late 1970s had caused inflation to rise again.

[ 219 ] During Charan Singh's short time in office in the second half of 1979, inflation averaged 18.2%, compared to 6.5% during Gandhi's last year in office (1984).

[ 220 ] [ 223 ] General economic recovery under Gandhi led to an average inflation rate of 6.5% from 1981–82 to 1985–86—the lowest since the beginning of India's inflation problems in the 1960s.

[ 224 ] The unemployment rate remained constant at 9% over a nine-year period (1971–80) before declining to 8.3% in 1983.

[ 203 ] [ 225 ] Domestic policy Main article: Domestic policy of the Indira Gandhi government Nationalisation Despite the provisions, control and regulations of the Reserve Bank of India , most banks in India had continued to be owned and operated by private persons.

[ 226 ] Businessmen who owned the banks were often accused of channeling the deposits into their own companies and ignoring priority sector lending . Furthermore, there was a great resentment against class banking in India, which had left the poor (the majority of the population) unbanked .

[ 227 ] After becoming prime minister, Gandhi expressed her intention of nationalising the banks to alleviate poverty in a paper titled, "Stray thoughts on Bank Nationalisation".

[ 228 ] The paper received overwhelming public support.

[ 228 ] In 1969, Gandhi moved to nationalise fourteen major commercial banks. After this, public sector bank branch deposits increased by approximately 800 percent; advances took a huge jump by 11,000 percent.

[ 229 ] Nationalisation also resulted in significant growth in the geographic coverage of banks; the number of bank branches rose from 8,200 to over 62,000, most of which were opened in unbanked, rural areas. The nationalisation drive not only helped to increase household savings, but it also provided considerable investments in the informal sector, in small- and medium-sized enterprises, and in agriculture, and contributed significantly to regional development and to the expansion of India's industrial and agricultural base.

[ 230 ] Jayaprakash Narayan, who became famous for leading the opposition to Gandhi in the 1970s, solidly praised her nationalisation of banks.

[ 227 ] Having been re-elected in 1971 on a nationalisation platform, Gandhi proceeded to nationalise the coal, steel, copper, refining, cotton textiles, and insurance industries.

[ 55 ] Most of this was done to protect employment and the interests of organised labour.

[ 55 ] The remaining private sector industries were placed under strict regulatory control.

[ 55 ] During the Indo-Pakistani war of 1971 , foreign-owned private oil companies had refused to supply fuel to the Indian Navy and the Indian Air Force. In response, Gandhi nationalised some oil companies in 1973.

[ 231 ] However, major nationalisations occurred in 1974 and 1976, forming the oil majors.

[ 232 ] After nationalisation, the oil majors including the Indian Oil Corporation (IOC), the Hindustan Petroleum Corporation (HPCL), and the Bharat Petroleum Corporation (BPCL) had to keep a minimum stock level of oil to be supplied to the military when needed.

[ 233 ] Administration Administrative divisions of India 1961–1975, Gandhi established six states, Haryana (1966), Himachal Pradesh (1971), Meghalaya , Manipur and Tripura (all 1972), and finally Sikkim (1975), bringing the total of states to 22, she also established Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram (1972) as Union Territories In 1966, Gandhi accepted the demands of the Akalis to reorganise Punjab on linguistic lines. The Hindi -speaking southern half of Punjab became a separate state, Haryana , while the Pahari speaking hilly areas in the northeast were joined to Himachal Pradesh .

[ 234 ] By this action she had hoped to ward off the growing political conflict between Hindu and Sikh groups in the region.

[ 234 ] However, a contentious issue that was considered unresolved by the Akalis was the status of Chandigarh , a prosperous city on the Punjab-Haryana border, which Gandhi declared a union territory to be shared as a capital by both the states.

[ 235 ] Victory over Pakistan in 1971 consolidated Indian power in Kashmir . Gandhi indicated that she would make no major concessions on Kashmir. The most prominent of the Kashmiri separatists, Sheikh Abdullah , had to recognise India's control over Kashmir in light of the new order in South Asia . The situation was normalised in the years following the war after Abdullah agreed to an accord with Gandhi, by giving up the demand for a plebiscite in return for a special autonomous status for Kashmir . In 1975, Gandhi declared the state of Jammu and Kashmir as a constituent unit of India. The Kashmir conflict remained largely peaceful if frozen under Gandhi's premiership.

[ 236 ] In 1972, Gandhi granted statehood to Meghalaya , Manipur , and Tripura while the North-East Frontier Agency was declared a union territory and renamed Arunachal Pradesh . The transition to statehood for the territories was successfully overseen by her administration [ 237 ] and it was followed by the annexation of Sikkim in 1975.

[ 154 ] Social reform The principle of equal pay for equal work for both men and women was enshrined in the Indian Constitution under the Gandhi administration.

[ 238 ] Gandhi questioned the continued existence of a privy purse for former rulers of princely states. She argued the case for abolition based on equal rights for all citizens and the need to reduce the government's revenue deficit. The nobility responded by rallying around the Jana Sangh and other right-wing parties that stood in opposition to Gandhi's attempts to abolish royal privileges.

[ 204 ] The motion to abolish privy purses, and the official recognition of the titles, was originally brought before the Parliament in 1970. It was passed in the Lok Sabha but fell short of the two-thirds majority in the Rajya Sabha by a single vote.

[ 239 ] Gandhi responded by having a Presidential proclamation issued; de-recognising the princes; with this withdrawal of recognition, their claims to privy purses were also legally lost.

[ 239 ] However, the proclamation was struck down by the Supreme Court of India .

[ 239 ] In 1971, she again motioned to abolish the privy purse and it was passed successfully as the 26th Amendment to the Constitution of India.

[ 204 ] Gandhi claimed that only "clear vision, iron will and the strictest discipline" can remove poverty.

[ 204 ] She justified the imposition of the state of emergency in 1975 in the name of the socialist mission of the Congress.

[ 204 ] Armed with the power to rule by decree and without constitutional constraints, she embarked on a massive redistribution program.

[ 204 ] The provisions included rapid enforcement of land ceilings, housing for landless labourers, the abolition of bonded labour and a moratorium on the debts of the poor.

[ 204 ] North India was at the centre of the reforms. Millions of hectares of land were acquired and redistributed.

[ 204 ] The government was also successful in procuring houses for landless labourers; According to Francine Frankel , three-fourths of the targeted four million houses was achieved in 1975 alone.

[ 204 ] Nevertheless, others have disputed the success of the program and criticised Gandhi for not doing enough to reform land ownership. The political economist, Jyotindra Das Gupta, cryptically questioned "whether or not the real supporters of land-holders were in jail or in power?" [ 204 ] Critics also accused Gandhi of choosing to "talk left and act right", referring to her concurrent pro-business decisions and endeavours.

[ 204 ] J. Barkley Rosser Jr.

wrote that "some have even seen the declaration of emergency rule in 1975 as a move to suppress dissent against Gandhi's policy shift to the right." [ 55 ] Regardless of the controversy over the nature of the reforms, the long-term effects of the social changes gave rise to the prominence of middle-ranking farmers from intermediate and lower castes in North India.

[ 204 ] The rise of the newly empowered social classes challenged the political establishment of the Hindi Belt in the years to come.

[ 204 ] Language policy Under the 1950 Constitution of India, Hindi was to be the official national language by 1965. That was unacceptable to many non-Hindi-speaking states which wanted the continued use of English in government. In 1967, Gandhi introduced a constitutional amendment that guaranteed the de facto use of both Hindi and English as official languages. It established the official government policy of bilingualism in India and satisfied the non-Hindi-speaking Indian states.

[ 208 ] She thus put herself forward as a leader with a pan-Indian vision.

[ 240 ] Nevertheless, critics alleged that her stance was actually meant to weaken the position of rival Congress leaders from the northern states such as Uttar Pradesh , where there had been strong, sometimes violent, pro-Hindi agitations.

[ 208 ] Gandhi came out of the language conflicts with the strong support of the south Indian populace.

[ 240 ] National security In the late 1960s and 1970s, Gandhi had the Indian army crush militant Communist uprisings in the Indian state of West Bengal .

[ 241 ] The communist insurgency in India was completely suppressed during the state of emergency .

[ 242 ] [ 243 ] [ 244 ] Gandhi considered the north-eastern region important, because of its strategic situation.

[ 245 ] In 1966, the Mizo uprising took place against the government of India and overran almost the whole of the Mizoram region . She ordered the Indian Army to launch massive retaliatory strikes in response. The rebellion was suppressed with the Indian Air Force carrying out airstrikes in Aizawl ; it remains the only instance of India carrying out airstrikes in its own territory.

[ 237 ] [ 246 ] The defeat of Pakistan in 1971 and the secession of East Pakistan as pro-India Bangladesh led to the collapse of the Mizo separatist movement. In 1972, after the less extremist Mizo leaders came to the negotiating table, Gandhi upgraded Mizoram to the status of a union territory. A small-scale insurgency by some militants continued into the late 1970s, but it was successfully dealt with by the government.

[ 237 ] The Mizo conflict was definitively resolved during the administration of Gandhi's son Rajiv. Today, Mizoram is considered one of the most peaceful states in the north-east.

[ 247 ] Responding to the insurgency in Nagaland , Indira Gandhi "unleashed a powerful military offensive" in the 1970s.

[ 248 ] Finally, a massive crackdown on the insurgents took place during the state of emergency ordered by Gandhi. The insurgents soon agreed to surrender and signed the Shillong Accord in 1975.

[ 249 ] While the agreement was considered a victory for the Indian government and ended large-scale conflicts, [ 250 ] there have since been spurts of violence by rebel holdouts and ethnic conflict amongst the tribes .

[ 250 ] India's nuclear programme Main articles: India and weapons of mass destruction and Smiling Buddha Gandhi contributed to and carried out further, the vision of Jawaharlal Nehru , the former premier of India, to develop its nuclear program.

[ 251 ] [ 252 ] Gandhi authorised the development of nuclear weapons in 1967, in response to Test No. 6 by the People's Republic of China. Gandhi saw the test as Chinese nuclear intimidation and promoted Nehru's views to establish India's stability and security interests independent from those of the nuclear superpowers.

[ 253 ] The programme became fully mature in 1974, when Raja Ramanna reported to Gandhi that India had the ability to test its first nuclear weapon. Gandhi gave verbal authorisation for the test , and preparations were made in the Indian Army's Pokhran Test Range .

[ 251 ] In 1974, India successfully conducted an underground nuclear test, unofficially code named " Smiling Buddha ", near the desert village of Pokhran in Rajasthan.

[ 254 ] As the world was quiet about this test, a vehement protest came from Pakistan as its prime minister, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, described the test as "Indian hegemony" to intimidate Pakistan.

[ 255 ] In response to this, Bhutto launched a massive campaign to make Pakistan a nuclear power. Bhutto asked the nation to unite and slogans such as "hum ghaas aur pattay kha lay gay magar nuclear power ban k rhe gay" ("We will eat grass or leaves or even go hungry, but we will get nuclear power") were employed. Gandhi directed a letter to Bhutto, and later to the world, claiming the test was for peaceful purposes and part of India's commitment to develop its programme for industrial and scientific use.

[ 256 ] In spite of intense international criticism and steady decline in foreign investment and trade, the nuclear test was popular domestically. The test caused an immediate revival of Gandhi's popularity, which had flagged considerably from its heights after the 1971 war . The overall popularity and image of the Congress Party was enhanced and the Congress Party was well received in the Indian Parliament .

Electoral history Main article: Electoral history of Indira Gandhi Parliament: Lok Sabha Year Constituency Party Votes % Opponent Opponent Party Opponent Votes % Result Margin % 1967 Rae Bareli INC 143,602 55.19 B. C. Seth IND 51,899 19.95 Won 91,703 35.24 1971 INC(R) 183,309 66.35 Raj Narain SSP 71,499 25.88 Won 111,810 40.47 1977 122,517 36.89 JP 177,719 53.51 Lost -55,202 -16.62 1978 Chikmagalur (by-election) INC(I) 249,376 55.72 Veerendra Patil 172,043 38.44 Won 77,333 17.28 1980 Rae Bareli 223,903 58.27 Vijayaraje Scindia 50,249 12.55 Won 173,654 45.72 Medak 301,577 67.93 S. Jaipal Reddy 82,453 18.57 Won 219,124 49.36 Personal life Indira Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru , Rajiv Gandhi , and Sanjay Gandhi Portrait of Feroze and Indira Gandhi She married Feroze Gandhi at the age of 25, in 1942. Their marriage lasted 18 years until he died of a heart attack in 1960.

[ 257 ] [ 258 ] They had two sons—Rajiv and Sanjay. Initially, her younger son Sanjay had been her chosen heir, but after his death in a flying accident in June 1980, Indira Gandhi persuaded her reluctant elder son Rajiv to quit his job as a pilot and enter politics in February 1981. Rajiv took office as prime minister following his mother's assassination in 1984; he served until December 1989. Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated by a suicide bomber working on behalf of LTTE on 21 May 1991.

[ 259 ] Views on women In 1952 in a letter to her American friend Dorothy Norman, Gandhi wrote: "I am in no sense a feminist, but I believe in women being able to do everything... Given the opportunity to develop, capable Indian women have come to the top at once." While this statement appears paradoxical, it reflects Gandhi's complex feelings toward her gender and feminism.

[ 260 ] Her egalitarian upbringing with her cousins helped contribute to her sense of natural equality. "Flying kites, climbing trees, playing marbles with her boy cousins, Indira said she hardly knew the difference between a boy and a girl until the age of twelve." [ 261 ] [ 262 ] Gandhi did not often discuss her gender but she involved herself in women's issues before becoming the prime minister. Before her election as prime minister, she became active in the organisational wing of the Congress party, working in part in the Women's Department.

[ 263 ] In 1956, she had an active role in setting up the Congress Party's Women's Section.

[ 264 ] Unsurprisingly, a lot of her involvement stemmed from her father. As an only child, Gandhi naturally stepped into the political light. And, as a woman, she naturally helped head the Women's section of the Congress Party. She often tried to organise women to involve themselves in politics.

[ 265 ] Although rhetorically Gandhi may have attempted to separate her political success from her gender, she did involve herself in women's organizations. The political parties in India paid substantial attention to Gandhi's gender before she became prime minister, hoping to use her for political gain.

[ 266 ] [ 267 ] Even though men surrounded her during her upbringing, she still had a female role model as a child. Several books on Gandhi reference her interest in Joan of Arc . In Gandhi's own accounts through her letters, she wrote to her friend Dorothy Norman, in 1952 she wrote: "At about eight or nine I was taken to France ; Jeanne d'Arc became a great heroine of mine. She was one of the first people I read about with enthusiasm." [ 268 ] Another historian recounts Indira's comparison of herself to Joan of Arc: "Indira developed a fascination for Joan of Arc, telling her aunt, 'Someday I am going to lead my people to freedom just as Joan of Arc did'!" [ 269 ] Gandhi's linking of herself to Joan of Arc presents a model for historians to assess Gandhi. As one writer said: "The Indian people were her children; members of her family were the only people capable of leading them." [ 270 ] Gandhi had been swept up in the call for Indian independence since she was born in 1917.

[ 271 ] Thus by 1947, she was already well immersed in politics, and by 1966, when she first assumed the position of prime minister, she had held several cabinet positions in her father's office.

[ 272 ] Her advocacy for women's rights began with her help in establishing the Congress Party's Women's Section.

[ 263 ] In 1956, she wrote in a letter: "It is because of this that I am taking a much more active part in politics. I have to do a great deal of touring in order to set up the Congress Party Women's Section, and am on numerous important committees." [ 264 ] Gandhi spent a great deal of time throughout the 1950s helping to organise women. She wrote to Norman in 1959, irritable that women had organised around the communist cause but had not mobilised for the Indian cause: "The women, whom I have been trying to organize for years, had always refused to come into politics. Now they are out in the field." [ 273 ] Once appointed president in 1959, she "travelled relentlessly, visiting remote parts of the country that had never before received a VIP... she talked to women, asked about child health and welfare, inquired after the crafts of the region" [ 274 ] Her actions throughout her ascent to power clearly reflect a desire to mobilise women [ citation needed ] . Gandhi did not see the purpose of feminism. She saw her own success as a woman, and also noted that: "Given the opportunity to develop, capable Indian women have come to the top at once." [ 260 ] Gandhi felt guilty about her inability to fully devote her time to her children. She noted that her main problem in office was how to balance her political duties with tending to her children, and "stressed that motherhood was the most important part of her life." [ 275 ] At another point, she went into more detail: "To a woman, motherhood is the highest fulfilment ... To bring a new being into this world, to see its perfection and to dream of its future greatness is the most moving of all experiences and fills one with wonder and exaltation." [ 276 ] Her domestic initiatives did not necessarily reflect favourably on Indian women. Gandhi did not make a special effort to appoint women to cabinet positions. She did not appoint any women to full cabinet rank during her terms in office.

[ 143 ] Yet despite this, many women saw Gandhi as a symbol for feminism and an image of women's power.

[ 143 ] Awards and honours National honours India : Bharat Ratna (1971) Foreign honours International Olympic Committee : Gold Olympic Order (1983) [ 277 ] [ 278 ] Soviet Union : Lenin Peace Prize (1985, posthumous) [ 279 ] [ 280 ] Vietnam : Gold Star Order (1985, posthumous) [ 281 ] Bangladesh : Bangladesh Freedom Honour (2011, posthumous) [ 282 ] Posthumous honours The southernmost Indira Point (6.74678°N 93.84260°E) is named after Gandhi.

The international airport at New Delhi is named Indira Gandhi International Airport in her honour.

The Indira Gandhi National Open University , the largest university in the world, is also named after her.

Lokmanya Tilak National Award was posthumously conferred on her in 1985.

Indian National Congress established the annual Indira Gandhi Award for National Integration in 1985, given in her memory on her death anniversary.

The Indira Gandhi Memorial Trust also constituted the annual Indira Gandhi Prize .

Legacy See also: List of things named after Indira Gandhi American veteran politician Henry A. Kissinger had described Indira Gandhi as being an "Iron lady", [ 283 ] [ 284 ] [ 285 ] a nickname that became associated with her tough personality.

[ 284 ] [ 285 ] [ 283 ] After leading India to victory against Pakistan in the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971, President V. V. Giri awarded Gandhi with India's highest civilian honour, the Bharat Ratna .

[ 286 ] [ 287 ] [ 288 ] In 2011, the Bangladesh Freedom Honour , Bangladesh's highest civilian award for foreign nationals, was posthumously conferred on Gandhi for her "outstanding contributions" to Bangladesh's Liberation War.

[ 289 ] Gandhi's wax statue at Madame Tussauds in London Gandhi's main legacy was standing firm in the face of American pressure to defeat Pakistan and turn East Pakistan into independent Bangladesh.

[ 146 ] She was responsible for India joining the group of countries with nuclear weapons .

[ 254 ] Although India being officially part of the Non-Aligned Movement, she gave Indian foreign policy a tilt towards the Soviet bloc .

[ 185 ] In 1999, Gandhi was named "Woman of the Millennium" in an online poll organised by the BBC.

[ 11 ] In 2012, she was ranked number seven on Outlook India's poll of the Greatest Indian .

[ 290 ] Being at the forefront of Indian politics for decades, Gandhi left a powerful legacy on Indian politics. Similarly, some of her actions have also caused controversies. One of the criticisms concerns her rule to have damaged internal party democracy in the Congress party. Her detractors accuse her of weakening State chief ministers and thereby weakening the federal structure, weakening the independence of the judiciary, and weakening her cabinet by vesting power in her secretariat and her sons.

[ 291 ] Gandhi is also associated with fostering a culture of nepotism in Indian politics and in India's institutions.

[ 292 ] She is also almost singularly associated with the period of emergency rule, described by some as a "dark period" in Indian democracy.

[ 293 ] The Forty-second Amendment of the Constitution of India which was adopted during the emergency can also be regarded as part of her legacy. Although judicial challenges and non-Congress governments tried to water down the amendment, the amendment still stands.

[ 294 ] She was the only woman to occupy the office of the prime minister of India [ 295 ] and in 2020, Gandhi was named by Time magazine among the world's 100 powerful women who defined the last century.

[ 296 ] [ 297 ] Shakti Sthal means a place of strength and is a monument to her.

In popular culture See also: Category:Cultural depictions of Indira Gandhi , Category:Works about the Emergency (India) , Category:Films based on the 1984 anti-Sikh riots , and Category:Fiction about the insurgency in Punjab While portrayals of Indira Gandhi by actors in Indian cinema have generally been avoided, with filmmakers using back-shots, silhouettes and voiceovers to give impressions of her character, several films surrounding her tenure, policies or assassination have been made.

[ 298 ] These include Aandhi (1975) by Gulzar , Kissa Kursi Ka (1975) by Amrit Nahata , Nasbandi (1978) by I. S. Johar , Maachis (1996) by Gulzar, Hazaaron Khwaishein Aisi (2003) by Sudhir Mishra , Hawayein (2003) by Ammtoje Mann , Des Hoyaa Pardes (2004) by Manoj Punj , Kaya Taran (2004) by Sashi Kumar , Amu (2005) by Shonali Bose , Kaum De Heere (2014) by Ravinder Ravi, 47 to 84 (2014) by Rajiv Sharma, Punjab 1984 (2014) by Anurag Singh , The Fourth Direction (2015) by Gurvinder Singh , Dharam Yudh Morcha (2016) by Naresh S. Garg, 31 October (2016) by Shivaji Lotan Patil , Baadshaho (2017) by Milan Luthria , Toofan Singh (2017) by Baghal Singh, Sonchiriya (2019) by Abhishek Chaubey , Shukranu (2020) by Bishnu Dev Halder.

[ 298 ] Aandhi , Kissa Kursi Ka and Nasbandi are notable for having been released during Gandhi's lifetime and were subject to censorship on exhibition during the Emergency.

[ 298 ] Indus Valley to Indira Gandhi is a 1970 Indian two-part documentary film by S. Krishnaswamy which traces the history of India from the earliest times of the Indus Valley Civilization to the prime ministership of Indira Gandhi.

[ 299 ] The Films Division of India produced Our Indira , a 1973 short documentary film directed by S.N.S. Sastry showing the beginning of her first tenure as PM and her speeches from the Stockholm Conference .

[ 300 ] Pradhanmantri ( lit.

' Prime Minister ' ), a 2013 Indian documentary television series which aired on ABP News and covers the various policies and political tenures of Indian PMs, includes the tenureship of Gandhi in the episodes "Indira Gandhi Becomes PM", "Split in Congress Party", "Story before Indo-Pakistani War of 1971", "Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 and Birth of Bangladesh", "1975–77 State of Emergency in India", and "Indira Gandhi back as PM and Operation Blue Star" with Navni Parihar portraying the role of Gandhi.

[ 301 ] Parihar also portrays Gandhi in the 2021 Indian film Bhuj: The Pride of India which is based on the 1971 Indo-Pakistani War .

[ 302 ] The taboo surrounding the depiction of Indira Gandhi in Indian cinema has begun to dissipate in recent years with actors portraying her in films. Notable portrayals include: Sarita Choudhury in Midnight's Children (2012); Mandeep Kohli in Jai Jawaan Jai Kisaan (2015); Supriya Vinod in Indu Sarkar (2017), NTR: Kathanayakudu / NTR: Mahanayakudu (2019) and Yashwantrao Chavan – Bakhar Eka Vaadalaachi (2014); Flora Jacob in Raid (2018), Thalaivi (2021) and Radhe Shyam (2022), Kishori Shahane in PM Narendra Modi (2019), Avantika Akerkar in Thackeray (2019) and 83 (2021), Supriya Karnik in Main Mulayam Singh Yadav (2021), Lara Dutta in Bell Bottom (2021), Fatima Sana Shaikh in Sam Bahadur (2023) and Kangana Ranaut in Emergency (2025).

[ 298 ] [ 303 ] The phrase "indiragandi" is used in Turkish slang as a way to convey the action of getting money through corruption or otherwise unethical means. This is largely due to the word "indirmek" (English: take down) being used similarly in slang, although the corruption scandal that Indira Gandhi presided over is also a factor.

[ 304 ] [ 305 ] Bibliography Book written by Indira Gandhi My Truth (1980), Orient Paperback , ISBN 978-81-709446-8-3 Books on Indira Gandhi My Years with Indira Gandhi by P. C. Alexander , Orient Paperbacks, ISBN 978-81-709444-2-3 , ISBN 978-81-709444-2-3 Indira Gandhi by H. Y. Sharada Prasad , Penguin India , ISBN 978-01-433328-8-6 Indira Gandhi – Tryst with Power by Nayantara Sahgal , Penguin India , ISBN 978-01-430673-5-1 Indira: India's Most Powerful Prime Minister by Sagarika Ghose , ISBN 978-93-862283-4-5 See also Biography portal Politics portal India portal Socialism portal List of national presidents of the Indian National Congress List of assassinated Indian politicians List of elected and appointed female heads of state and government List of heads of state and government who suspended the constitution List of heads of state and government who were assassinated or executed List of recipients of the Gold Star Order References Notes ^ Gulzarilal Nanda as acting prime minister for 13 days.

^ Hindi: [ˈɪn̪d̪ɪɾɑː ˈɡɑːn̪d̪ʱiː] ⓘ References ^ a b c "Rahul first in three generations with a world university degree" .

The Tribune .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 18 May 2015 .

^ "Smt. Indira Gandhi" .

pmindia.gov.in . Retrieved 25 January 2025 .

^ a b Brahma Chellaney (2006).

Asian Juggernaut: The Rise of China, India, and Japan .

HarperCollins . p. 195.

ISBN 9788172236502 .

Indeed, Beijing's acknowledgement of Indian control over Sikkim seems limited to the purpose of facilitating trade through the vertiginous Nathu-la Pass, the scene of bloody artillery duels in September 1967 when Indian troops beat back attacking Chinese forces.

^ Jacobsen, K.A. (2023).

Routledge Handbook of Contemporary India . Taylor & Francis. p. 252.

ISBN 978-1-000-98423-1 .

India emerged as the predominant regional power in South Asia after the successful vivisection of Pakistan in 1971 ^ Shrivastava, Sanskar (30 October 2011).

"1971 India Pakistan War: Role of Russia, China, America and Britain" .

The World Reporter . Archived from the original on 1 November 2011 . Retrieved 29 March 2023 .

^ Mehrotra, Santosh K., ed. (1991), "Bilateral trade" , India and the Soviet Union: Trade and Technology Transfer , Cambridge Russian, Soviet and Post-Soviet Studies, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

161– 206, doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511559884.010 , ISBN 978-0-521-36202-3 , archived from the original on 18 June 2018 , retrieved 29 March 2023 ^ a b Bose, Sugata; Jalal, Ayesha (2024), "The Indian Emergency (1975–1977) in Historical Perspective", When Democracy Breaks , Oxford University Press, pp.

221– 236, doi : 10.1093/oso/9780197760789.003.0008 , ISBN 978-0-19-776078-9 ^ Khorana, M. (1991).

The Indian Subcontinent in Literature for Children and Young Adults: An Annotated Bibliography of English-language Books . Bibliographies and indexes in world literature. Greenwood Press. p. 188.

ISBN 978-0-313-25489-5 .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2023 . Retrieved 13 May 2023 .

^ Hampton, W.H.; Burnham, V.S.; Smith, J.C. (2003).

The Two-Edged Sword: A Study of the Paranoid Personality in Action . Sunstone Press. p. 91.

ISBN 978-0-86534-147-0 .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2023 . Retrieved 13 May 2023 .

^ Steinberg, B.S. (2008).

Women in Power: The Personalities and Leadership Styles of Indira Gandhi, Golda Meir, and Margaret Thatcher . Arts Insights Series. McGill-Queen's University Press. p. 75.

ISBN 978-0-7735-7502-8 .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2023 . Retrieved 16 August 2023 .

^ a b "BBC Indira Gandhi 'greatest woman' " .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 19 July 2017 .

^ "Indira Gandhi, Amrit Kaur named by TIME among '100 Women of the Year' " .

The Economic Times .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2020 . Retrieved 24 April 2020 .

^ Frank 2010 , p. 13.

^ Pupul Jayakar (27 November 1992).

Indira Gandhi: A Biography .

Penguin Books India . p. 10.

ISBN 978-0-14-011462-1 .

^ Gupte 2012 , p. 3.

^ Frank 2010 , p. 31.

^ a b Frank 2010 , p. 16.

^ Frank 2010 , p. 25.

^ Frank 2010 , p. 32.

^ Frank 2010 , p. 55.

^ Gupte, Pranay (2011).

Mother India: a political biography of Indira Gandhi / Pranay Gupte (Rev. ed.). New York: Penguin Books . pp.

151– 152.

ISBN 978-0-14-306826-6 . Retrieved 16 August 2016 .

^ Frank 2010 , pp. 29, 75, 83.

^ Dommermuth-Costa, Carol (2002).

Indira Gandhi : daughter of India . Minneapolis: Lerner Publications Co. pp.

42– 43, 45.

ISBN 9780822549635 .

^ a b "Overview of Indira Gandhi" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2019 . Retrieved 15 November 2019 .

^ Frank 2010 , p. 90.

^ Gupte 2012 , p. 170.

^ Gupte 2012 , p. 181.

^ a b Frank 2010 , p. 116.

^ Somervill 2007 , p. 36.

^ Gupte 2012 , p. 184.

^ "Majlis Asian Society" .

oxfordmajilis.wix .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 19 April 2020 .

^ "Oxford Majlis | Making Britain" .

university.open.ac.uk . Retrieved 12 August 2025 .

^ "Exhibit celebrates 120 years of South Asians at Oxford" .

University of Oxford . 22 April 2010. Archived from the original on 2 January 2013 . Retrieved 24 December 2012 .

^ "Sonia assures help for father-in-law's grave" .

archive.indianexpress.com . 21 November 2005.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2016 . Retrieved 19 July 2017 .

^ Iwanek, Krzysztof.

"The End of India's Nehru-Gandhi Dynasty?" .

thediplomat.com .

Archived from the original on 2 January 2020 . Retrieved 2 January 2020 .

^ a b Auerbach, Stuart (1 November 1984).

"Indira Is India" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2020 . Retrieved 2 January 2020 .

^ Duda, P.N. (2006).

Indira Gandhi: Life and Legacy . APH Publishing Corporation. p. 76.

ISBN 978-81-313-0066-4 .

^ " 'Indira Is India' " .

Washington Post . 1 November 1984.

Archived from the original on 3 January 2020 . Retrieved 2 January 2020 .

^ Steinberg, Blema S. (2008).

Women in power : the personalities and leadership styles of Indira Gandhi, Golda Meir, and Margaret Thatcher . Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press . p. 20.

ISBN 978-0-7735-3356-1 .

Archived from the original on 31 March 2024 . Retrieved 2 December 2015 .

^ Upadhyaya, Prakash Chandra (1989). "Review of Marxist State Governments in India, Politics, Economics and Society by T. J. Nossiter".

Social Scientist .

17 (1/2 January – February 1989): 84– 91.

doi : 10.2307/3520112 .

ISSN 0970-0293 .

JSTOR 3520112 .

^ Gandhi, Indira. (1982) My Truth ^ Kochanek, Stanley A. (May 1966). "Post Nehru India: The Emergence of the New Leadership".

Asian Survey .

6 (5): 298.

doi : 10.2307/2642538 .

JSTOR 2642538 .

^ Genovese, Michael A., ed. Women As National Leaders. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE Publications , 1993. Print. 110.

^ Ghosh, P.S., 1999. Whither Indian Polity?.

Economic and Political Weekly , pp.3340–3342.

^ Thompson, Mark R. (2013). Derichs, Claudia (ed.).

Dynasties and female political leaders in Asia: gender, power and pedigree . London: LIT Verlag . pp. 32, 50.

ISBN 978-3-643-90320-4 .

^ Shankar, Kalyani (2013).

Pandora's daughters . London: Bloomsbury Publishing India.

ISBN 978-93-82951-04-9 .

^ Dsouza, Chris Emmanuel (August 2022).

Bandh Samrat: Tales of Eternal Rebel George Fernandes . Bangalore: Cleverfox Publication. pp.

20– 21.

ISBN 978-9356480810 . Archived from the original on 6 May 2023 . Retrieved 6 May 2023 .

^ Singh, Ashok (March 2021).

"Ram Manohar Lohia: The Great Disruptor" .

peepul tree .

Archived from the original on 6 May 2023 . Retrieved 6 May 2023 .

^ Fremont-Barnes, G. (2015).

A History of Counterinsurgency [2 volumes]: [2 volumes] . Praeger Security International. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 267.

ISBN 979-8-216-09731-0 .

^ Guha, R. (2017).

Democrats and Dissenters . Penguin Random House India Private Limited. p. 136.

ISBN 978-93-86057-88-4 .

^ a b c d e Kapila, Raj; Kapila, Uma (2004).

Understanding India's economic Reforms . Academic Foundation. p. 126.

ISBN 978-81-7188-105-5 .

^ "March to socialism under Prime Minister Indira Gandhi offers an interesting parallel" .

The Economic Times . 24 August 2011.

Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 19 July 2017 .

^ "1969: S. Nijalingappa expelled Indira Gandhi from the party" .

indiatoday.com .

Archived from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 19 July 2017 .

^ Singh, Mahendra Prasad (1981).

Split in a Predominant Party: The Indian National Congress in 1969 . New Delhi: Sakti Malik, Abhinav Prakashan.

ISBN 978-81-7017-140-9 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Rosser, J. Barkley; Rosser, Marina V. (2004).

Comparative Economics in Transforming the World Economy .

MIT Press . pp.

468– 470.

ISBN 978-0-262-18234-8 .

^ "Indira Gandhi—the iron-willed stateswoman" .

theweek.in .

Archived from the original on 2 January 2020 . Retrieved 2 January 2020 .

^ India. Parliament. House of the People; India. Parliament. Lok Sabha (1967).

Lok Sabha Debates . Lok Sabha Secretariat. p. 51.

^ Asian Recorder - Volume 13 . 1967. p. 7965.

The New China News Agency report, broadcast by Peking Radio, said that an unspecified number of Chinese soldiers were killed or wounded.

^ Survey of People's Republic of China Press, Issues 4032-4051 . American Consulate General. 1967. p. 24.

^ Rajendra Kumar Jain.

China South Asian Relations, 1947-1980: India . Harvester Press. p. 373.

^ a b James F. Fisher (1978).

Himalayan Anthropology: The Indo-Tibetan Interface .

Walter de Gruyter . p. 225.

^ Bajpai, G. S. (1999).

China's Shadow Over Sikkim: The Politics of Intimidation . Lancer Publishers. p. 210.

ISBN 978-1-897829-52-3 .

^ "General Elections, India, 1971: Statistical report" (PDF) .

eci.nic.in . Commission of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 July 2014 . Retrieved 25 June 2014 .

^ Masani, Zareer (2012).

"The Indira Wave" .

The Hindu . No. 3 March 2012.

Archived from the original on 3 September 2015 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .

^ a b "The Garibi Hatao Programme" .

indiragandhi.in .

Archived from the original on 9 September 2019 . Retrieved 20 April 2020 .

^ Rath, Nilakantha (1985). " 'Garibi Hatao': Can IRDP Do It?".

Economic and Political Weekly .

20 (6): 238– 246.

JSTOR 4374060 .

^ a b Rudolph, Lloyd; Rudolph, Susanne (July 1977). "India's Election: Backing into the future".

Foreign Affairs .

55 (4): 836– 853.

doi : 10.2307/20039739 .

JSTOR 20039739 .

^ Thakur, Janardan (1979).

Indira Gandhi and Her Power Game . Vikas. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-7069-0985-2 .

Wild cheers went up with every hated name that fell by the wayside, reminiscent of that other night in December 1971 when the Lahore skies had belonged to India. Those were the days when so many had hailed Indira Gandhi as Durga.

^ The Calcutta Journal of Political Studies, Volumes 6-7 . University of Calcutta. 1987. p. 12.

astounding victory of India led even the opposition leaders to compare her to such a mythological 'strong personality' as 'Durga' ^ Hellmann-Rajanayagam, D (2013).

Dynasties and Female Political Leaders in Asia: Gender, Power and Pedigree . Vienna, Zurich: LIT Verlag GMBH. p. 27.

ISBN 978-3-643-90320-4 .

^ Puri, Balraj (1993). "Indian Muslims since Partition".

Economic and Political Weekly .

28 (40): 2144.

JSTOR 4400229 .

^ Sanghavi, Nagindas. "From Navnirman to the anti-Mandal riots: the political trajectory of Gujarat (1974–1985)." South Asian History and Culture 1.4 (2010): 480–493.

^ Jaffrelot, Christophe (2012). Copeman, Jacob; Ikegame, Aya (eds.).

The Guru in South Asia: New Interdisciplinary Perspectives Chapter 4 The political guru . London, New York: Routledge . p. 85.

ISBN 978-0-415-51019-6 . Retrieved 30 November 2015 .

^ a b c d "BBC On This Day | 12 | 1975: Gandhi found guilty of corruption" .

news.bbc.co.uk . 12 June 1975.

Archived from the original on 23 June 2017 . Retrieved 19 July 2017 .

^ Priyadarshi, D., 1975. Case Study: Smt. Indira Nehru Gandhi vs. Shri Raj Narain and Anr. on 7 November 1975. Indira Nehru Gandhi vs. Shri Raj Narain and Anr. on, 7.

^ "Indira Gandhi Biography: Birth, Family, Education, Political Career, Posthumus Awards, Legacy and more" .

Jagranjosh.com . 26 June 2020.

Archived from the original on 16 July 2021 . Retrieved 16 July 2021 .

^ Chandra, Bipan (2003).

In the name of democracy : JP movement and the emergency, Chapter 4, Emergency imposed . New Delhi: Penguin Books .

ISBN 978-0-14-302967-0 .

^ 1975: Gandhi found guilty of corruption , BBC , 12 June 1975, archived from the original on 17 December 2008 , retrieved 11 December 2008 ^ "A Page From The Past: All You Need To Know About Emergency Imposed By Indira Gandhi Government" . 25 June 2018.

Archived from the original on 14 April 2020 . Retrieved 20 April 2020 .

^ Dsouza, Chris Emmanuel (August 2022).

Bandh Samrat:Tales of Eternal rebel George Fernandes . Bangalore: Cleverfox Publication. pp.

33– 37.

ISBN 978-9356480810 .

^ Kochanek, Stanely, Mrs. Gandhi's Pyramid: The New Congress , ( Westview Press , Boulder, CO 1976) p. 98 ^ Malhotra, Inder (1 February 2014).

Indira Gandhi: A Personal and Political Biography .

Hay House , Inc.

ISBN 978-93-84544-16-4 .

^ Brass, Paul R., The Politics of India Since Independence , ( Cambridge University Press , England 1995) p. 40 ^ Joseph, P.T. (2007).

Eq And Leadership . Tata McGraw-Hill Educational. p. 225.

ISBN 978-0-07-061794-0 . Retrieved 20 April 2020 .

^ Tully, Mark (1985).

Amritsar: Mrs. Gandhi's Last Battle . New Delhi: Rupa & Co.

p. 55.

ISBN 81-291-0917-4 .

^ Subodh Ghildiyal (29 December 2010).

"Cong blames Sanjay Gandhi for Emergency 'excesses' " .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 8 July 2012 . Retrieved 19 January 2013 .

^ "Mystery Called Sanjay Gandhi" . Scribd. 21 November 2007.

Archived from the original on 25 August 2012 . Retrieved 19 January 2013 .

^ Express News Service (11 June 2013).

"Emergency 'propagandist' who banned Kishore Kumar songs" .

Indian Express .

Archived from the original on 20 February 2014 . Retrieved 17 January 2014 .

^ Dasgupta, Swapan (July 1985). "Sanjay Gandhi".

Third World Quarterly .

7 (3): 731– 778.

doi : 10.1080/01436598508419863 .

^ Derfler, Leslie (2011).

The fall and rise of political leaders Olof Palme, Olusegun Obasanjo, and Indira Gandhi (1st ed.). New York: Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

186– 187.

ISBN 978-0-230-11724-2 . Retrieved 14 September 2017 .

^ Rudolph, Lloyd I.

; Hoeber, Susanne (1989).

In pursuit of Lakshmi: The political economy of the Indian state ([Nachdr.] ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press . pp.

159– 178.

ISBN 978-0-226-73139-1 .

^ Bahukutumbi, Raman (2007).

The Kaoboys of R&AW: down memory lane . Lancer Publishers LLC.

ISBN 978-1-935501-48-0 .

^ Maramkal, M-B (2013).

"Chikmagalur remembers Indira Gandhi" .

Times of India . No. 20 November.

Archived from the original on 30 June 2015 . Retrieved 9 January 2015 .

^ "Mrs. Gandhi is Jeered" .

The Spokesman-Review . 21 November 1978 . Retrieved 9 April 2017 .

^ "How Fernandes ran a high-voltage campaign for Chikkamagaluru bypoll" .

Times of India . 30 January 2019.

Archived from the original on 17 February 2019 . Retrieved 17 February 2019 .

^ Malhotra, Inder .

Indira Gandhi . New York: Coronet Books , 1991.

^ "Tale of two hijackers: One is Congress candidate, other most wanted" .

Times of India . 3 April 2014.

Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 13 June 2017 .

^ Horowitz, Donald L. (2001).

The Deadly Ethnic Riot .

University of California Press . p.

244 .

ISBN 978-0-520-22447-6 .

^ Haynes, Jeff (2 September 2003).

Democracy and Political Change in the Third World .

Routledge . pp. 168–.

ISBN 978-1-134-54184-3 .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2017 . Retrieved 25 September 2016 .

^ McLeod, John (2002).

The history of India .

Greenwood Publishing Group . pp. 209–.

ISBN 978-0-313-31459-9 .

Archived from the original on 24 April 2017 . Retrieved 11 June 2010 .

^ de Mesquita, Bruce Bueno (2010).

The Predictioneer's Game: Using the Logic of Brazen Self-Interest to See and shapte the future . New York: Random House . p. xxiii.

ISBN 978-0-8129-7977-0 .

^ Sanghvi, Vijay (2006).

The Congress, Indira to Sonia Gandhi By . Delhi: Kalpaz. pp.

114– 122.

ISBN 978-81-7835-340-1 .

^ Bhargava, G. S. (2005). Star crossed India: let down by leadership. Gyan Publishing House.|PAGE=108,129,255 ^ S. K. Agnihotri; B. Datta Ray (2002).

Perspective Of Security And Development In North East India . Concept Publishing Company. pp. 106–.

ISBN 978-81-8069-165-2 . Retrieved 28 June 2013 .

^ "1980: Gandhi returned by landslide vote" .

bbc.co.uk . 7 January 1980.

Archived from the original on 23 October 2012 . Retrieved 2 January 2020 .

^ "Indira Gandhi becomes Indian prime minister – Jan 19, 1966 – History.com" .

History.com .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2017 . Retrieved 5 December 2017 .

^ Vadlapatla, Sribala (2 April 2019).

"Congress loses hold on Medak, once won by Indira Gandhi" .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 16 July 2021 . Retrieved 16 July 2021 .

^ Auerbach, Stuart (23 June 1980).

"Sanjay Gandhi Killed in Plane Crash" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Archived from the original on 28 August 2017 . Retrieved 19 July 2017 .

^ Chikermane, Gautam (2018).

70 Policies That Shaped India 1947 to 2017, Independence to $2.5 Trillion (PDF) .

Observer Research Foundation . pp.

69– 70.

ISBN 978-81-937564-8-5 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 August 2018 . Retrieved 24 August 2018 .

^ "Rajiv Gandhi | prime minister of India" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2020 .

^ Baru, Sanjay (11 April 2014).

The Accidental Prime Minister: The Making and Unmaking of Manmohan Singh .

Penguin India .

^ Prasad, Sharada (1 January 2003).

The Book I Won't Be Writing and Other Essays .

Chronicle Books .

^ Gus Martin (15 June 2011).

The SAGE Encyclopedia of Terrorism (Second ed.).

SAGE Publishing . pp.

543– 545.

ISBN 978-1-4129-8016-6 . Retrieved 11 October 2012 .

^ C. Christine Fair; Sumit Ganguly (29 September 2008).

Treading on Hallowed Ground: Counterinsurgency Operations in Sacred Spaces .

Oxford University Press . pp.

39– 40.

ISBN 978-0-19-534204-8 . Retrieved 11 October 2012 .

^ William Gould (30 November 2011).

Religion and Conflict in Modern South Asia .

Cambridge University Press . p. 237.

ISBN 978-0-521-87949-1 . Retrieved 11 October 2012 .

^ Harnik Deol (2 October 2012).

Religion and Nationalism in India: The Case of the Punjab .

Psychology Press . p. 105.

ISBN 978-0-415-20108-7 . Retrieved 11 October 2012 .

^ Martin E. Marty; R. Scott Appleby (1 May 2004).

Fundamentalisms Comprehended .

University of Chicago Press . p. 454.

ISBN 978-0-226-50888-7 . Retrieved 11 October 2012 .

^ Singh, Tavleen.

"Prophet of Hate:J S Bhindranwale" .

India Today . Archived from the original on 20 June 2008 . Retrieved 22 December 2009 .

^ Mark Tully and Satish Jacob, Amritsar – Mrs. Gandhi's Last Battle (Calcutta: Rupa & Co.

by arrangement with Pan Books, London, 1985) ^ Kuldip Nayar and Khushwant Singh, Tragedy of Punjab, Vision Books, New Delhi, 1984, page 79.

^ Longowal said "Whenever the situation becomes ripe for settlement, some violent incident takes place. I know Bhindranwale is behind the murder of the DIG", "(The person behind the murder is) The one who is afraid of losing his seat of power" Indian Express . 27 April 1983. interview with Longowal.

^ a b Guidry, John; Kennedy, Michael D.; Zald, Mayer N., eds. (2000).

Globalizations and social movements : culture, power, and the transnational public sphere (Reprint ed.). Ann Arbor, Michigan: Univ. of Michigan Press . p. 319.

ISBN 978-0-472-06721-3 . Retrieved 14 September 2017 .

^ "Indira Gandhi had since long been planning for an attack on Darbar Sahib..." Harjinder Singh Dilgeer (2012).

Sikh History in 10 Volumes . Vol 7, p. 168; 196–197.

^ Mandair, Arvind-pal Singh; Shackle, Christopher; Singh, Gurharpal, eds. (2001).

Sikh religion, culture and ethnicity .

Routledge . pp.

169– 171.

ISBN 978-1-136-84634-2 .

^ "Remembering Indira Gandhi on her 29th death anniversary" .

dna . 30 October 2013.

Archived from the original on 17 September 2015 . Retrieved 5 June 2016 .

^ "Last speech of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi prior to her assassination" .

India Study Channel . 21 June 2011.

Archived from the original on 9 May 2013 . Retrieved 9 March 2013 .

^ Crossette, Barbara (1989).

"India Hangs Two Sikhs Convicted In Assassination of Indira Gandhi" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 6 December 2017 . Retrieved 5 December 2017 .

^ "32 years of Indira Gandhi assassination, anti-Sikh riots: All you need to know" .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2017 . Retrieved 5 December 2017 .

^ Smith, William E. (12 November 1984).

"Indira Gandhi's assassination sparks a fearful round of sectarian violence" .

Time .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2012 . Retrieved 19 January 2013 .

^ Mudgal, Vipul; Devadas, David (31 January 1989).

"Indira Gandhi assassination trial: Satwant Singh and Kehar Singh hanged" .

India Today .

Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 2 January 2020 .

^ Indira Gandhi: Death in the Garden Archived 3 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine – TIME ^ Fighting for Faith and Nation: Dialogues With Sikh Militants – Cynthia Keppley Mahmood – Google Books ^ T D Dogra's Expert Evidence in trial of assassination of Late Mrs. Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of India (Witness No. PW 5) Raina Anupuma, Lalwani Sanjeev, Dogra TD, Dept. of Forensic Medicine & Toxicology, AIIMS, N. Delhi. Indian Internet Journal of Forensic Medicine & Toxicology, Year: 2009, Volume: 7, Issue: 4 ^ The riots that could not be televised Archived 5 December 2009 at the Wayback Machine .

The Indian Express (3 November 2009). Retrieved on 21 May 2014.

^ We the eyeballs : Cover Story – India Today Archived 15 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine . Indiatoday.intoday.in. Retrieved on 21 May 2014.

^ Claiborne, William; Sun, Lena (4 November 1984).

"Indira Gandhi Cremated in Hindu Ritual" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on 6 December 2017 . Retrieved 5 December 2017 .

^ "Shakti Sthal – Delhi Information" .

www.delhiinformation.in .

Archived from the original on 9 March 2018 . Retrieved 5 December 2017 .

^ "Indira Gandhi Cremated in Hindu Ritual" .

William Claiborne . Washington Post Foreign Service. The Washington Post. 4 November 1984.

Archived from the original on 6 December 2017 . Retrieved 4 April 2020 .

^ "Anti-Sikh riots: What happened in 1984 and after?" .

Karuna Madan . Al Nisr Publishing. 21 November 2018 . Retrieved 4 April 2020 .

^ "Indira Gandhi's death remembered" .

BBC News . 1 November 2009.

Archived from the original on 2 November 2009 . Retrieved 25 June 2012 .

^ Gwertzman, Bernard (November 1984).

"Assassination in India; Anxiety in Washington; Some U.S. Officials India-Pakistan Conflict" .

The New York Times .

^ "World leaders condemned the 'senseless' assassination of Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi" .

VALERIE STRAUSS . United Press International. UPI.COM. 31 October 1984 . Retrieved 4 April 2020 .

^ a b c Genovese, Michael A., ed.

Women As National Leaders (SAGE Publications, 1993).

^ Surjit Mansinghm India′s Search for Power: Indira Gandhi′s Foreign Policy 1966–1982 (1984) ^ Shashi Tharoor, Reasons of state: political development and India's foreign policy under Indira Gandhi, 1966–1977 (1982) online ^ a b c Reynolds, David (2001).

One world divisible : a global history since 1945 . New York: W.W. Norton . pp.

244– 247.

ISBN 978-0-393-32108-1 .

^ Kulke, Hermann (2004).

A History of India .

Routledge . p.

359 .

ISBN 978-0-415-32919-4 .

^ Nixon's dislike of 'witch' Indira, BBC News, 29 June 2005 Archived 12 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine .

BBC News (29 June 2005). Retrieved on 18 June 2011.

^ "Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–7, Documents on South Asia, 1969–1972 – Office of the Historian" .

history.state.gov .

Archived from the original on 26 September 2012 . Retrieved 15 February 2022 .

Nixon: This is just the point when she is a bitch.  Kissinger: Well, the Indians are bastards anyway. They are starting a war there. It's—to them East Pakistan is no longer the issue. Now, I found it very interesting how she carried on to you yesterday about West Pakistan.  Nixon: I think I'll make the meeting today a rather brief—cool. [unclear] I don't mean by that cool in terms of not trying to bring up [unclear] I'll talk to her a little about Vietnam, and–  Kissinger: I'd let her talk a little more, maybe today—  Nixon: Yeah?  Kissinger:—to be a little less forthcoming. But basically, Mr. President—  Nixon: So I was trying to give her no excuses. Now I've talked to her, told her everything we're going to do. Now it's up to her.  Kissinger: While she was a bitch, we got what we wanted too. You very subtly—I mean, she will not be able to go home and say that the United States didn't give her a warm reception and therefore, in despair, she's got to go to war.

^ "BBC NEWS | South Asia | Nixon's dislike of 'witch' Indira" .

news.bbc.co.uk . 29 June 2005.

Archived from the original on 12 August 2011 . Retrieved 19 July 2017 .

^ " 'This woman suckered us', said Nixon of Indira Gandhi" .

www.hindustantimes.com . 2 March 2010.

Archived from the original on 20 July 2017 . Retrieved 19 July 2017 .

^ Racioppi, Linda (1994).

Soviet Policy towards South Asia since 1970 .

Cambridge University Press . p.

65 .

ISBN 978-0-521-41457-9 .

^ Kapur, Harish (2009).

Foreign Policies Of India's Prime Ministers . Lancer Publishers. p. 138.

ISBN 978-0-9796174-8-5 .

^ a b Malik 1988 , pp. 120–121.

^ Nair, P. Sukumaran (2008).

Indo-Bangladesh Relations . APH Publishing. p. 47.

ISBN 978-81-313-0408-2 .

^ "Mujib's downfall" . Countrystudies.us. 15 August 1975.

Archived from the original on 5 August 2011 . Retrieved 31 July 2013 .

^ a b "Bangladesh's relations with India" . Countrystudies.us.

Archived from the original on 28 March 2014 . Retrieved 31 July 2013 .

^ Jayapalan, N (2000).

India And Her Neighbours .

Atlantic Publishers & Dist . p. 134.

ISBN 978-81-7156-912-0 .

^ Former PM Indira Gandhi honoured with Bangladesh's highest award, The Economic Times, 25 July 2011 Archived 10 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine .

The Economic Times (25 July 2011). Retrieved on 25 December 2012.

^ Suryanarayan, Venkateswaran (2005).

Conflict Over Fisheries In The Palk Bay Region . Lancer Publishers & Distributors. p. 65.

ISBN 978-81-7062-242-0 .

^ a b Gupte 2012 , p. 5.

^ "LTTE: the Indian connection" .

The Sunday Times . 1997. Archived from the original on 15 September 2014 . Retrieved 29 December 2012 .

^ a b Bandarage, Asoka (2009).

The Separatist Conflict in Sri Lanka: Terrorism, Ethnicity, Political Economy .

Taylor & Francis . p. 111.

ISBN 978-0-415-77678-3 .

^ Dissanayaka, T.D.S.A. (2005).

War Or Peace in Sri Lanka .

Popular Prakashan . p. 84.

ISBN 978-81-7991-199-0 .

^ a b Grover, Verinder (1999).

Events and Documents of Indo-Pak Relations: Includes Chronology of All Important Events & Documents from 1947 to 1998 . Deep and Deep Publications. pp.

100– 113.

ISBN 978-81-7629-059-3 .

^ a b Kapur, S. Paul (2007).

Dangerous Deterrent: Nuclear Weapons Proliferation and Conflict in South Asia .

Stanford University Press . p. 118.

ISBN 978-0-8047-5550-4 .

^ Gupte, Pranay (2011).

Mother India: a political biography of Indira Gandhi (Rev. ed.). New York: Penguin Books . p. 482.

ISBN 978-0-14-306826-6 .

^ Kapur, Ashok (2006).

India: From Regional to World Power .

Routledge . p.

215 .

ISBN 978-0-415-32804-3 .

^ a b c d e f g Ghosh, Anjali (2009).

India's Foreign Policy .

Pearson . pp.

306– 307.

ISBN 978-81-317-1025-8 .

^ a b c Kaur, Ranjit (1993).

Islamic Co-Operation and Unity . Deep and Deep Publications. pp.

168– 170.

ISBN 978-81-7100-564-2 .

^ a b c d Hunter, Shireen (2010).

Iran's Foreign Policy in the Post-Soviet Era: Resisting the New International Order .

ABC-CLIO . pp.

120– 121.

ISBN 978-0-8047-5550-4 .

^ Pande, Aparna (2011).

Explaining Pakistan's Foreign Policy .

Taylor & Francis , 2011. p. 146.

ISBN 978-1-136-81894-3 .

^ a b Nanda, Prakash (2003).

Rediscovering Asia: Evolution of India's Look-East Policy . Lancer Publishers. pp.

220– 226.

ISBN 978-81-7062-297-0 .

^ "USP: Honorary Degree of Doctor" .

www.usp.ac.fj .

Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 2 January 2020 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Ghosh, Anjali (2009).

India's Foreign Policy .

Pearson . pp.

422– 424.

ISBN 978-81-317-1025-8 .

^ Oonk, Gijsbert (2007).

Global Indian Diasporas: Exploring Trajectories of Migration and Theory .

Amsterdam University Press . p. 189.

ISBN 978-90-5356-035-8 .

^ a b Mawdsley, Emma; Gerard McCann (2011).

India in Africa: Changing Geographies of Power . Fahamu & Pambazuka. pp.

51– 52.

ISBN 978-1-906387-65-5 .

^ Low, D.A. (1984).

The contraction of England : an inaugural lecture delivered before the University of Cambridge on 22 October 1984 . Cambridge [Cambridgeshire]: Cambridge University Press . p. 28.

ISBN 978-0-521-31424-4 .

^ Danilewitz, J., 1998. Athletics & apartheid.

Harvard International Review , 20(4), p.36.

^ Gupte, Pranay (2011).

Mother India : a political biography of Indira Gandhi (Rev. ed.). New York: Penguin Books . pp.

499– 500.

ISBN 978-0-14-306826-6 .

^ "Mamata remembers Indira Gandhi on her death anniversary" .

United News of India .

Archived from the original on 16 July 2021 . Retrieved 16 July 2021 .

^ Brandt, Willy (1987).

Arms and hunger . Translated by Bell, Anthea (1st MIT Press English language pbk. ed.). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press . pp.

43– 44.

ISBN 978-0-262-52127-7 .

^ Kreisky, Bruno; Lewis, Jill; Rathkolb, Oliver (2000).

The struggle for a democratic Austria : Bruno Kreisky on peace and social justice . New York: Berghahn Books . pp.

413– 414.

ISBN 978-1-57181-155-4 .

^ Gupte, Pranay (1992).

Mother India : a political biography of Indira Gandhi . New York: Scribner's . pp.

516– 517.

ISBN 978-0-684-19296-3 .

^ a b Duncan, Peter J.S. (1993). Light, Margot (ed.).

Troubled friendships: Moscow's Third World ventures, Chapter II, Soviet-Indian Model . London [u.a.]: British Academic Press.

ISBN 978-1-85043-649-2 .

^ a b c Christopher Andrew (10 October 2006).

The World Was Going Our Way: The KGB and the Battle for the Third World: Newly Revealed Secrets from the Mitrokhin Archive . Basic Books. p. 152.

ISBN 978-0-465-00313-6 .

Archived from the original on 28 June 2023 . Retrieved 2 April 2022 .

^ a b c d Christopher Andrew (2 January 2014).

The Mitrokhin Archive II: The KGB in the World . Penguin Books Limited. pp. 278–.

ISBN 978-0-14-197798-0 .

Archived from the original on 28 June 2023 . Retrieved 2 April 2022 .

^ a b Christopher Andrew (2 January 2014).

The Mitrokhin Archive II: The KGB in the World . Penguin Books Limited. pp. 279–.

ISBN 978-0-14-197798-0 .

Archived from the original on 28 June 2023 . Retrieved 2 April 2022 .

^ Subramanian Swamy (1992).

Building a New India: An Agenda for National Renaissance . UBS Publishers' Distributors. p. 18.

ISBN 978-81-85674-21-6 .

Archived from the original on 30 March 2023 . Retrieved 2 April 2022 .

^ Bedi, Rahul.

"Book alleges KGB cash trail to India" .

The Irish Times .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2022 . Retrieved 23 April 2022 .

^ "Advani seeks white paper on KGB charges" , The Hindu , 3 October 2005.

^ "रूस के जासूस ने किया बड़ा खुलासा ! इन्दिरा गाँधी थी रसिया की इंटेलिजेंस एजेंसी की जासूस ? – RAJNITI TAK NEWS" .

rajnititak.in . Archived from the original on 23 January 2021.

^ "Allegations in Mitrokhin Archives vague: Congress" .

Rediff News .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2019 . Retrieved 21 June 2015 .

^ Andrew & Mitrokhin, The Mitrokhin Archive II- The KGB and the World, The Special Relationship With India: Part I , p. 311-312.

^ Pubby, Manu.

"USSR supplied clandestine cash to Congress party: CIA" .

The Economic Times .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 28 July 2021 .

^ Lall, Rashmee R. (2005).

" 'KGB moles infiltrated Indira's PMO' " .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 28 July 2021 .

^ Andrew & Mitrokhin, The Mitrokhin Archive II- The KGB and the World, The Special Relationship With India: Part I , p. 323.

^ Van Dijk, Ruud; Glenn Gray, William; Savranskaya, Svetlana; Suri, Jeremi; Zhai, Qiang, eds. (2008).

Encyclopedia of the Cold War . New York: Routledge . pp.

340– 341.

ISBN 978-0-203-88021-0 .

^ Wolfgang, Hoppenstedt, ed. (2005).

Global management . Wien: Lit. pp.

65– 66.

ISBN 978-3-8258-8644-8 .

^ a b c d e L. N. Dash (2000).

World bank and economic development of India . APH Publishing. p. 375.

ISBN 978-81-7648-121-2 .

^ Datta-Ray, Sunanda (7 December 2001).

"Indira – terror personified or goddess?" . Timeshighereducation.co.uk. Archived from the original on 22 July 2012 . Retrieved 31 July 2013 .

^ Desai, Meghnad (2011).

The Rediscovery Of India .

Penguin Books India . p. 346.

ISBN 978-0-14-341735-4 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Malik 1988 , pp. 60–72.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Jaffrelot, Christoph (2003).

India's Silent Revolution: The Rise of the Lower Castes in North India .

C. Hurst & Co. Publishers . pp.

131– 142.

ISBN 978-1-85065-398-1 .

^ The Indian Libertarian, Volume 15–17. 1969.

University of Virginia .

^ Sunanda K. Datta-Ray; "Indira Gandhi: Enigma, Mother-Goddess and Terror Incernate". 3 November 1994.

The Straits Times (Singapore).

^ a b "The original aam aadmi leader" . Hindustantimes.com. 1 November 2009. Archived from the original on 13 May 2013 . Retrieved 31 July 2013 .

^ a b c d e f Steinberg, Blema (2008).

Women in Power: The Personalities and Leadership Styles of Indira Gandhi, Golda Meir, and Margaret Thatcher .

McGill-Queen's Press . pp.

79– 95.

ISBN 978-0-7735-3356-1 .

^ "Top six political slogans and their impact" .

economictimes.indiatimes.com . 6 October 2013.

Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 21 April 2020 .

^ Chandra, Bipan; Aditya Mukherjee; Mridula Mukherjee (2008).

India Since Independence .

Penguin Books India . p. 335.

ISBN 978-0-14-310409-4 .

^ a b Nayak, Pulin; Bishwanath Goldar; Pradeep Agrawal (2010).

India's Economy and Growth .

SAGE Publications . pp.

8– 9.

ISBN 978-81-321-0452-0 .

^ "Prometheus unleashed: Science as A diplomatic weapon in the Lyndon B. Johnson administration" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 February 2017 . Retrieved 3 February 2016 .

^ Oliver, Robert W. (1995).

George Woods and the World Bank . Lynne Rienner Publishers. p. 144.

ISBN 978-1-55587-503-9 .

^ a b Kirk, Jason A. (2011).

India and the World Bank: The Politics of Aid and Influence . Anthem Press. pp.

20– 21.

ISBN 978-0-85728-412-9 .

^ Kux, Dennis (1992).

India and the United States: Estranged Democracies, 1941–1991 . DIANE Publishing. p. 311.

ISBN 978-0-7881-0279-0 .

^ Gupta, K. L.; Harvinder Kaur (2004).

New Indian Economy and Reforms . Deep and Deep Publications. p. 7.

ISBN 978-81-7629-559-8 .

^ Chadda, Maya (2000).

Building Democracy in South Asia . London: Lynne Rienner Publishers . p. 150.

ISBN 978-1-55587-859-7 .

^ a b Kelly, D. David A.; Ramkishen S. Raj; Gillian H. L. Goh (2010).

Managing Globalisation: Lessons from China And India .

World Scientific . p. 62.

ISBN 978-981-256-494-8 .

^ a b c Harley, Keith; Todd Sandler (1990).

The Economics of Defence Spending: An International Survey .

Routledge . p. 192.

ISBN 978-0-415-00161-8 .

^ a b c Lal, Deepak (2004).

The Hindu Equilibrium: India c.1500 B.C. – 2000 A.D.

.

Oxford University Press . p.

314 .

ISBN 978-0-19-927579-3 .

^ Waterbury, John (1993).

Exposed to Innumerable Delusions: Public Enterprise and State Power in Egypt, India, Mexico, and Turkey .

Cambridge University Press . p. 58.

ISBN 978-0-521-43497-3 .

^ Ray, Sunanda K. Datta (12 June 2004).

"Sunanda K Datta Ray: Rendezvous with Ronniel" .

Business Standard India . Business-standard.com . Retrieved 31 July 2013 .

^ a b c d Centre for Monitoring the Indian Economy; Basic Statistics Relating to the Indian Economy . Economic Intelligence Service. August 1993.

^ a b Kapila, Uma (2009).

Indian Economy Since Independence . Academic Foundation. p.

838 .

ISBN 978-81-7188-708-8 .

^ Chandhoke, Neera; Praveen Priyadarshi (2009).

Contemporary India: Economy, Society, Politics .

Pearson . p. 60.

ISBN 978-81-317-1929-9 .

^ Gomez, Clifford (2008).

Financial Markets Institutions And Financial Services . PHI. p. 283.

ISBN 978-81-203-3537-0 .

^ a b Akshat Kaushal (28 May 2011).

"Off the record" .

Business Standard, India . Business-standard.com.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2011 . Retrieved 31 July 2013 .

^ a b Muralidharan (2009).

Modern Banking: Theory And Practice . PHI. p. 364.

ISBN 978-81-203-3655-1 .

^ Muralidharan (2009).

Modern Banking: Theory And Practice . PHI. p. 4.

ISBN 978-81-203-3655-1 .

^ Singh, Kavaljit (2005).

Questioning Globalization .

Zed Books . p. 45.

ISBN 978-1-84277-279-9 .

^ "Energy Geopolitics – An Overview" .

GreatGameIndia Magazine (July–Sept 2015 issue). 4 July 2015.

Archived from the original on 28 June 2016.

^ Chaudhury, Saumitra (1977).

"Nationalisation of Oil Companies in India" .

Economic and Political Weekly .

12 (10): 437– 444.

ISSN 0012-9976 .

JSTOR 4365379 .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 28 July 2021 .

^ Luthra, Ved (2005).

Poverty And Economic Reforms . New Delhi: Sarup & Sons. p. 293.

ISBN 978-81-7890-136-7 .

^ a b Gupte 2012 , p. 302.

^ Pletcher, Kenneth (2010).

The History of India .

The Rosen Publishing Group . p. 315.

ISBN 978-1-61530-201-7 .

^ Kumar Ray, Jayanta (2007).

Aspects of India's International Relations, 1700 to 2000: South Asia and the World .

Pearson plc . p. 493.

ISBN 978-81-317-0834-7 .

^ a b c Chandra, Bipan; Aditya Mukherjee; Mridula Mukherjee (2008).

India Since Independence .

Penguin Books India . pp.

146– 147.

ISBN 978-0-14-310409-4 .

^ Sarkar, Sumit; Tanika Sarkar (2008).

Women and Social Reform in Modern India: A Reader .

Indiana University Press . p. 490.

ISBN 978-0-253-35269-9 .

^ a b c Jayakar 1997 , p. 214.

^ a b Chandra, Bipan; Aditya Mukherjee; Mridula Mukherjee (2008).

India Since Independence .

Penguin Books India . p. 122.

ISBN 978-0-14-310409-4 .

^ "Hamlet and the Naxals" .

Sify . Archived from the original on 5 June 2013 . Retrieved 31 July 2013 .

^ "Naxalites: who are they and what are their demands?" . Archived from the original on 2 June 2013.

^ "History of Naxalism" . Hindustantimes.com. 15 December 2005. Archived from the original on 22 July 2013 . Retrieved 31 July 2013 .

^ "Indira Gandhi used Army to break Naxals: Retired General" .

NDTV.com . 10 June 2010.

Archived from the original on 11 May 2013 . Retrieved 31 July 2013 .

^ Gandhi, Indira (1985).

Selected Thoughts of Indira Gandhi: A Book of Quotes . Mittal Publications. p. 224.

^ "Don't bomb the Naxals!: IAF last strafed Indian territory in 1966" .

Rediff.com . 5 August 2010.

Archived from the original on 17 November 2012 . Retrieved 27 December 2012 .

^ Stepan, Alfred; Juan J. Linz; Yogendra Yadav (2011).

Crafting State-Nations: India and Other Multinational Democracies .

JHU Press . p. 105.

ISBN 978-0-8018-9723-8 .

^ Das, Samir (2005).

Peace Processes and Peace Accords .

SAGE Publishing . p. 207.

ISBN 978-0-7619-3391-5 .

^ "Nagaland Accord – The Shillong Agreement of November 11, 1975" . satp.org/.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2013 . Retrieved 27 December 2012 .

representatives of the underground organisations met the Governor of Nagaland, Shri L.P. Singh representing the Government of India, at Shillong on 10th and 11th November, 1975.

^ a b "Dawn of Peace in Nagaland – SHILLONG ACCORD" . nagaland.nic.in. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012 . Retrieved 27 April 2012 .

the historic "Shillong" signed at Shillong on November 11, 1975, by the Governor of Nagaland Mr. L.P Singh representing the Government of India and the underground leadership represented by Mr. Assa and Mr. Kevi Yalley ^ a b Sublette, Carey.

"Origins of Indian nuclear program" .

Nuclear Weapon Archive .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2019 . Retrieved 13 November 2011 .

^ Perkovich, George (2002).

India's nuclear bomb: the impact on global proliferation .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-23210-5 .

^ Chaudhury, Dipanjan Roy (12 July 2018).

"Nehru's refusal of Kennedy's offer of nuclear detonation kept India out of the NSG" .

The Economic Times .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2019 . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

^ a b "Smiling Buddha, 1974" .

India's Nuclear Weapons Program . Nuclear Weapon Archive.

Archived from the original on 29 August 2019 . Retrieved 26 February 2020 .

^ Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali (18 May 1974), Prime minister Secretariat Press Release , Associated Press of Pakistan (APP) and Pakistan Television (PTV), archived from the original on 18 September 2011, India's so-called Peaceful Nuclear Explosion (PNE) is tested and designed to intimidate and establish "Indian hegemony in the subcontinent", most particularly Pakistan...

^ "WikiLeaks: Indira had offered to share N-tech with Pakistan" .

The Times of India . 10 April 2013.

Archived from the original on 6 April 2019 . Retrieved 13 April 2013 .

^ "Indira Nehru – Feroze Gandhi Wedding (in page 4 bottom/right)" .

Indian Express (27 March 1942).

Archived from the original on 12 September 2022 . Retrieved 19 August 2019 .

^ Invitation Card of the marriage ceremony of Km. Indira D/o J.L. Nehru on 26th March 1942 . New Delhi. 1942.

Archived from the original on 12 September 2022 . Retrieved 12 September 2022 – via National Archives of India .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ State of Tamil Nadu through Superintendent of Police, CBI/SIT vs. Nalini & 25 Ors.

, Death Ref. Case No. 1 of 1998 (@ D.No.1151 of 1998) per K.T. Thomas Archived 2 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine , para. 163 ^ a b Norman, Dorothy. Indira Gandhi, Letters to an American Friend. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich , 1985. Print. 20.

^ Jayakar, Pupul (1995).

Indira Gandhi, a biography (Rev. ed.). New Delhi, India: Penguin Books . p. 265.

ISBN 978-0-14-011462-1 .

^ Jayakar, Pupul. Indira Gandhi: An Intimate Biography. New York: Pantheon, 1992. Print. 64.

^ a b Genovese, Michael A., ed. Women As National Leaders. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE Publications , 1993. Print. 109.

^ a b Norman, Dorothy. Indira Gandhi, Letters to an American Friend. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1985. Print. 30.

^ Srivastava, Shruit (27 March 2019).

"Indian women a step closer to breaking glass ceiling in politics" .

theprint.in .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2020 . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

^ Klemesrud, Judy (23 October 1970).

"Indira Gandhi Has Never Regretted Being a Woman …Well, Almost Never" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2020 . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

^ Moraesnew, Dom (14 February 1971).

"The Indian Prime Minister prepares for an election" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2020 . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

^ Norman, Dorothy. Indira Gandhi, Letters to an American Friend. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1985. Print. 12.

^ Genovese, Michael A., ed. Women As National Leaders. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE Publications , 1993. Print. 107.

^ Genovese, Michael A., ed. Women As National Leaders. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE Publications , 1993. Print. 131.

^ "About Indira Gandhi" .

www.indiragandhi.com . Archived from the original on 13 October 2016.

^ "History" .

indiragandhi.com .

Archived from the original on 4 September 2019 . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

^ Norman, Dorothy. Indira Gandhi, Letters to an American Friend. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich , 1985. Print. 57.

^ Jayakar, Pupul. Indira Gandhi: An Intimate Biography. New York: Pantheon , 1992. Print. 112.

^ Genovese, Michael A., ed. Women As National Leaders. Newbury Park, CA: SAGE Publications , 1993. Print. 127.

^ Malhotra, Inder. Indira Gandhi: A Personal and Political Biography. Boston: Northeastern University Press , 1989. Print. 55.

^ "Opening of the 86th Session (Olympic Review No. 186)" (PDF) . La84foundation.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 December 2010 . Retrieved 15 May 2015 .

^ "FACTS ON INDIAN OLYMPICS" . Facts-about-india.com. Archived from the original on 3 June 2019 . Retrieved 15 May 2015 .

^ Yearbook of the Great Soviet Encyclopedia (in Russian). Moscow: Sovetskaya Enciklopediya. 1985. p. 571.

^ "LENIN PEACE PRIZE AWARDED TO INDIRA GANDHI" .

Associated Press News .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2021 . Retrieved 8 October 2023 .

^ "Rajiv Gandhi, the first Indian prime minister to visit..." 27 November 1985 . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

^ Haroon Habib (25 July 2011).

"Bangladesh honours Indira Gandhi with highest award" .

The Hindu .

Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 28 September 2015 .

^ a b Sharma, R.A. (1988).

Indira Gandhi and Congress Party . Northern Book Centre. p. 190.

ISBN 978-81-85119-44-1 .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2023 . Retrieved 19 November 2023 .

Henry A. Kissinger had described her as an "iron lady" and her personality as "charismatic" and tough.

^ a b Himmat .

R. M. Lala . 1979. p. 8.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2023 . Retrieved 19 November 2023 .

Few cast so low, so ignominiously, have the courage and belief to return. Mrs Gandhi is the real iron lady.

^ a b Asian Studies . Institute of Asian Studies, University of the Philippines. 1982. p. 82.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2023 . Retrieved 19 November 2023 .

Indira Gandhi, is "charismatic" and tough. She is described as an "iron lady".

^ "Padma Awards Directory (1954–2007)" (PDF) . Ministry of Home affairs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2009 . Retrieved 26 November 2010 .

^ Shankar, A. (1987). Indira Priyadarshini. Children's Book Trust, page 95.

^ "Awards earned, awards fixed?" .

The Hindu . 19 January 2003. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015 . Retrieved 24 January 2015 .

^ "Bangladesh honours Indira Gandhi with highest award" .

The Hindu .

Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 21 July 2017 .

^ "A Measure of the Man" . 5 February 2022.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2020 . Retrieved 16 January 2019 .

^ Jannuzi, F. Tomasson (1989).

India in transition : issues of political economy in a plural society . Boulder: Westview Press . p. 9.

ISBN 978-0-8133-7723-0 . Retrieved 14 September 2017 .

^ Câmpu, Adina (2009).

"History as a marker of otherness in Rohinton Mistry's "A fine balance" " (PDF) .

Bulletin of the Transilvania University of Brașov. Series IV: Philology and Cultural Studies .

2 (51): 47. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 August 2011 . Retrieved 27 May 2011 .

^ Rajgarhia, Mahak (25 June 2014).

"40 years on, 7 things you need to know about Emergency imposed by Indira Gandhi" .

Daily News and Analysis .

Archived from the original on 26 June 2015 . Retrieved 1 July 2015 .

^ "New book flays Indira Gandhi's decision to impose Emergency" .

IBN Live News . 30 May 2011. Archived from the original on 23 November 2013 . Retrieved 23 November 2013 .

^ "This day in history: Jan 19 1966 Indira Gandhi becomes Indian prime minister" .

history.com . 9 February 2010.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2015 . Retrieved 1 July 2015 .

^ "Indira Gandhi, Amrit Kaur named by TIME among '100 Women of the Year' " .

The Economic Times . 5 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 5 March 2020 . Retrieved 24 April 2020 .

^ "1976: Indira Gandhi" .

Time . 5 March 2020.

^ a b c d "How Indian cinema's timid portrayal of Indira Gandhi confined her to allusions, voices, silhouettes on screen" .

Firstpost . 2 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 .

^ "INDUS VALLEY TO INDIRA GANDHI (1970)" .

BFI . Archived from the original on 10 June 2021 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 .

^ "Our Indira" . Films Division. 20 March 2013. Archived from the original on 27 October 2021.

^ "Pradhanmantri – Episode 9: Split in Congress – Indira Gandhi and Morarji Desai" . ABP News. 8 September 2013. Archived from the original on 27 October 2021.

^ Bhuj: The Pride Of India – Official Trailer .

Disney+ Hotstar . 12 July 2021. Archived from the original on 27 October 2021.

^ "Playing Indira Gandhi" .

The Asian Age . 5 August 2021.

Archived from the original on 7 August 2021 . Retrieved 7 August 2021 .

^ "İndiragandi Kelimesi Nereden Geliyor? | Kampüste Ne Var" .

www.kampustenevar.com . Retrieved 31 December 2024 .

^ "İndiragandi Kelimesinin Hikayesine İnanamayacaksınız!" .

Ticari Hayat | Güvenilir ve Tarafsız Haber Kaynağınız (in Turkish) . Retrieved 31 December 2024 .

Sources Skard, Torild (2014). "Indira Gandhi".

Women of Power: Half a Century of Female Presidents and Prime Ministers Worldwide . Bristol: Policy Press .

ISBN 978-1-4473-1578-0 .

Barbara Somervill (2007).

Indira Gandhi: Political Leader in India .

Capstone Publishers .

ISBN 978-0-7565-1885-1 .

Katherine Frank (2010).

Indira: the life of Indira Nehru Gandhi .

HarperCollins .

ISBN 978-0-00-737250-8 .

Meena Agrawal (2005).

Indira Gandhi . Diamond Pocket Books.

ISBN 978-81-288-0901-9 .

Pranay Gupte (2012).

Mother India: A Political Biography of Indira Gandhi .

Penguin Books .

ISBN 978-0-14-306826-6 .

Pupul Jayakar (1997).

Indira Gandhi: A Biography .

Penguin Books .

ISBN 978-0-14-011462-1 .

Yogendra Kumar Malik (1988).

India: The Years of Indira Gandhi .

BRILL Publishers .

ISBN 978-90-04-08681-4 .

Bibliography Guha, Ramachandra .

India after Gandhi: The History of the World's Largest Democracy (2007) ISBN 978-0-06-019881-7 Hart, Henry C., ed.

Indira Gandhi's India (Routledge, 2019).

excerpt Archived 21 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine Jaffrelot, Christophe ; Anil, Pratinav (2021).

India's First Dictatorship: The Emergency, 1975-77 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-9390351602 .

Jayakar, Pupul .

Indira Gandhi: An Intimate Biography (1992) ISBN 978-0-679-42479-6 Malhotra, Inder.

Indira Gandhi: A personal and political biography (1991) ISBN 0-340-53548-2 Malone, David M., C. Raja Mohan, and Srinath Raghavan, eds.

The Oxford handbook of Indian foreign policy (2015) excerpt Archived 15 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine pp 104–111.

Mansingh, Surjit.

India′s Search for Power: Indira Gandhi′s Foreign Policy 1966–1982 (1984) online Ved Mehta , A Family Affair: India Under Three Prime Ministers (1982) ISBN 0-19-503118-0 Ramesh, Jairam.

Indira Gandhi: a life in nature (Simon and Schuster, 2017); on environmentalism Sahgal, Nayantara.

Indira Gandhi: Tryst with Power (Penguin Random House India, 2017).

Tharoor, Shashi.

Reasons of state: political development and India's foreign policy under Indira Gandhi, 1966–1977 (1982) online Shourie, Arun (1984). Mrs Gandhi's second reign. New Delhi: Vikas.

Dsouza, Chris Emmanuel.

Bandh Samrat: Tales of Eternal Rebel George Fernandes (Cleverfox Publications, 2022) ISBN 9789356480810 pp 34–42 Indira Gandhi – Iron Lady of India by Sulakshi Thelikorala Thakur, Janadan (1977).

All The Prime Minister’s Men . Vikas Publishing. 1977. ISBN 9780706905663.

External links Indira Gandhi at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Indira Gandhi Meets with Lyndon Baines Johnson from Texas Archive of the Moving Image The Indira Gandhi Memorial Trust Archived 17 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine Works by Indira Gandhi at Open Library Indira Gandhi at IMDb Rare pictures of Indira Gandhi Rare letters by Indira Gandhi Archived 7 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine Famous and Historic speeches given by Indira Gandhi Archived 8 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine Indira Gandhi on global underprivilege at Encyclopaedia Britannica Offices and distinctions Party political offices Preceded by Uchharangrai Navalshankar Dhebar President of the Indian National Congress 1959 Succeeded by Neelam Sanjiva Reddy Preceded by Devakanta Barua President of the Indian National Congress 1978–1984 Succeeded by Rajiv Gandhi Political offices Preceded by B. V. Keskar Union Minister of Information and Broadcasting 9 June 1964 – 11 January 1966 Succeeded by Kodardas Kalidas Shah Preceded by Gulzarilal Nanda Acting Prime Minister of India 24 January 1966 – 24 March 1977 Succeeded by Morarji Desai Chair of the Planning Commission 24 January 1966 – 24 March 1977 Preceded by Mahommedali Currim Chagla Union Minister of External Affairs 6 September 1967 – 13 February 1969 Succeeded by Dinesh Singh Preceded by Morarji Desai Union Minister of Finance 16 January 1969 – 15 March 1971 Succeeded by Yashwantrao Chavan Union Minister of Home Affairs 27 June 1970 – 4 February 1973 Preceded by Swaran Singh Union Minister of Defence 1 December 1975 – 25 December 1975 Succeeded by Bansi Lal Preceded by Charan Singh Prime Minister of India 14 January 1980 – 31 October 1984 Succeeded by Rajiv Gandhi Chair of the Planning Commission 14 January 1980 – 31 October 1984 Preceded by Chidambaram Subramaniam Union Minister of Defence 16 January 1980 – 15 January 1982 Succeeded by Ramaswamy Venkataraman Preceded by Narasimha Rao Union Minister of External Affairs 19 July 1984 – 31 October 1984 Succeeded by Rajiv Gandhi v t e Prime Minister of India List By previous experience Prime ministers Jawaharlal Nehru Lal Bahadur Shastri Premiership Indira Gandhi Morarji Desai Premiership Charan Singh Rajiv Gandhi V. P. Singh Premiership Chandra Shekhar P. V. Narasimha Rao Atal Bihari Vajpayee Premiership H. D. Deve Gowda Inder Kumar Gujral Manmohan Singh Narendra Modi (Incumbent) Premiership Acting Gulzarilal Nanda Eponyms Nehru Shastri Indira Rajiv Vajpayee Modi International trips Nehru Indira Vajpayee Manmohan Modi Office Residence Spouse Category v t e Defence ministers of India Baldev Singh N. Gopalaswami Ayyangar Jawaharlal Nehru Kailash Nath Katju V. K. Krishna Menon Yashwantrao Chavan Swaran Singh Jagjivan Ram Indira Gandhi Bansi Lal Chidambaram Subramaniam Ramaswamy Venkataraman Shankarrao Chavan P. V. Narasimha Rao Rajiv Gandhi V. P. Singh K. C. Pant Chandra Shekhar Sharad Pawar Pramod Mahajan Mulayam Singh Yadav George Fernandes Jaswant Singh Pranab Mukherjee A. K. Antony Arun Jaitley Manohar Parrikar Nirmala Sitharaman Rajnath Singh (incumbent) v t e External affairs ministers of India Jawaharlal Nehru Gulzarilal Nanda Lal Bahadur Shastri Swaran Singh M. C. Chagla Indira Gandhi Dinesh Singh Yashwantrao Chavan Atal Bihari Vajpayee Shyam Nandan Prasad Mishra P. V. Narasimha Rao Rajiv Gandhi Bali Ram Bhagat P. Shiv Shankar N. D. Tiwari V. P. Singh Inder Kumar Gujral Vidya Charan Shukla Madhavsinh Solanki Pranab Mukherjee Sikander Bakht Jaswant Singh Yashwant Sinha Natwar Singh Manmohan Singh S. M. Krishna Salman Khurshid International trips Sushma Swaraj Tenure S. Jaishankar (incumbent) International trips v t e Ministry of Finance Departments Economic Affairs Economic Division: Economic Survey Budget Division: Union budget Expenditure Pay Commission 7th Central Pay Commission (CPC) and Defence Forces Sixth Central Pay Commission Revenue Income Tax Department Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs Financial Services Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana DIPAM Disinvestment in India Disinvestment of Public Sector Units in India DPE Efficient monitoring of the capital expenditure Asset monetisation and financial health of the Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) Secretaries Economic Affairs Rajiv Mehrishi Shaktikanta Das Subhash Chandra Garg Atanu Chakraborty (incumbent) Revenue Shaktikanta Das Ajay Bhushan Pandey Hasmukh Adhia (incumbent) Finance Ratan P. Watal Ashok Lavasa Hasmukh Adhia Ajay Narayan Jha Rajiv Kumar (incumbent) Finance ministers R. K. Shanmukham Chetty John Matthai C. D. Deshmukh T. T. Krishnamachari Jawaharlal Nehru Morarji Desai Sachindra Chaudhuri Indira Gandhi Yashwantrao Chavan Chidambaram Subramaniam Hirubhai M. Patel Charan Singh Hemwati Nandan Bahuguna Ramaswamy Venkataraman Pranab Mukherjee V. P. Singh Rajiv Gandhi N. D. Tiwari Shankarrao Chavan Madhu Dandavate Yashwant Sinha Manmohan Singh Jaswant Singh P. Chidambaram Inder Kumar Gujral Arun Jaitley Piyush Goyal Nirmala Sitharaman (incumbent) Ministers of state for finance Nirmala Sitharaman Jayant Sinha Arjun Ram Meghwal Pon Radhakrishnan Anurag Thakur Bhagwat Karad (incumbent) Pankaj Chaudhary (incumbent) Chief Economic Advisor J. J. Anjaria I. G. Patel I. G. Patel V. K. Ramaswamy Ashok Mitra Manmohan Singh R. M. Honavar Bimal Jalan Nitin Desai Deepak Nayyar Shankar Acharya Rakesh Mohan Ashok K. Lahiri Arvind Virmani Kaushik Basu Raghuram Rajan Arvind Subramanian Krishnamurthy Subramanian V. Anantha Nageswaran (incumbent) Finance commissions 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th v t e Ministry of Home Affairs (India) Departments Department of Internal Security Indian Police Service Intelligence Bureau Central Reserve Police Force Bureau of Police Research and Development Central Industrial Security Force National Security Guard National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Sciences National Crime Records Bureau National Civil Defence College National Investigation Agency National Crime Investigation Bureau North Eastern Council North Eastern Police Academy Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy Assam Rifles Rashtriya Rifles Narcotics Control Bureau Department of Official Language Central Translation Bureau Central Hindi Training Institute Central Armed Police Forces Border Security Force Indo-Tibetan Border Police Sashastra Seema Bal Central Reserve Police Force Central Industrial Security Force National Security Guards Special Frontier Force Assam Rifles Defence Security Corps Bureaus Bureau of Immigration (India) Narcotics Control Bureau National Crime Records Bureau Central Bureau of Investigation National Crime Investigation Bureau Other departments Department of Jammu and Kashmir Affairs Department of Home Department of States Home secretaries R. N.  Banerjee H. V. R. Iyengar A. V. Pai B. N. Jha V. Vishwanathan L. P. Singh Govind Narain N. K. Mukherjee S. L. Khurana T. C. A. Srinivasavaradan S. M. H. Burney T. N. Chaturvedi M. M. K. Wali Prem Kumar R. D. Pradhan C. G. Somiah J. A. Kalyankrishnan Shiromani Sharma Naresh Chandra R. K. Bhargava Madhav Godbole N. N. Vohra K. Padmanabhaiah Balmiki Prasad Singh Kamal Pande N. Gopalaswami Anil Baijal Dhirendra Singh Vinod Kumar Duggal Gopal Krishna Pillai R. K. Singh Anil Goswami L. C. Goyal Rajiv Mehrishi Rajiv Gauba Ajay Kumar Bhalla (incumbent) Home ministers Vallabhbhai Patel Jawaharlal Nehru C. Rajagopalachari Kailash Nath Katju Govind Ballabh Pant Lal Bahadur Shastri Gulzari Lal Nanda Indira Gandhi Yashwantrao Chavan Uma Shankar Dikshit Kasu Brahmananda Reddy Charan Singh Morarji Desai Hirubhai M. Patel Zail Singh R. Venkataraman Prakash Chandra Sethi P. V. Narasimha Rao Shankarrao Chavan Buta Singh Mufti Mohammad Sayeed Chandra Shekhar Murli Manohar Joshi H. D. Deve Gowda Indrajit Gupta L. K. Advani Shivraj Patil P. Chidambaram Sushilkumar Shinde Rajnath Singh Amit Shah (incumbent) Ministers of state for home affairs Ratanjit Pratap  Narain Singh Kiren Rijiju G. Kishan Reddy (incumbent) v t e Energy ministries and departments of India Power Statutory bodies Central Electricity Authority Central Electricity Regulatory Commission Bureau of Energy Efficiency Damodar Valley Corporation Autonomous bodies Central Power Research Institute National Power Training Institute PSUs NTPC Limited NHPC Limited North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Limited Power Finance Corporation REC Limited Power Grid Corporation of India THDC India Limited Power System Operation Corporation New and Renewable Energy Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) Ministry of Coal Coal India Bharat Coking Coal Central Mine Planning and Design Institute NLC India Limited Singareni Collieries Company Coal Mines Provident Fund Organisation Petroleum and Natural Gas Academic Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology Pandit Deendayal Energy University Other Directorate General of Hydrocarbons Oil Industry Safety Directorate Petroleum Conservation Research Association Operational Balmer Lawrie Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited Bharat Petroleum Engineers India Limited Gas Authority of India Limited Indian Oil Corporation Numaligarh Refinery Limited Oil India Limited Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Hindustan Petroleum Defunct Biecco Lawrie Other Strategic Petroleum Reserve Department of Atomic Energy Apex board Atomic Energy Commission Regulatory board Atomic Energy Regulatory Board R&D Bhabha Atomic Research Centre Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research Raja Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technology Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre Global Centre for Nuclear Energy Partnership PSUs Electronics Corporation of India Indian Rare Earths Limited Uranium Corporation of India Nuclear Power Corporation of India Bharatiya Nabhkiya Vidyut Nigam Limited Industrial Heavy Water Board Nuclear Fuel Complex Board of Radiation and Isotope Technology Academic National Institute of Science Education and Research National Board for Higher Mathematics Atomic Energy Education Society Tata Memorial Centre Centre for Excellence in Basic Sciences Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics Institute of Physics Harish-Chandra Research Institute Institute of Mathematical Sciences Institute for Plasma Research v t e Ministry of Commerce and Industry (India) Department of Commerce Divisions Administrative & General Division Finance Division Economic Division Trade Policy Division Foreign Trade Territorial Division Plantation Division Supply Division State Trading & Infrastructure Division Attached & Subordinate Offices Directorate General of Foreign Trade Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals (DGS&D) Directorate General of Anti-Dumping & Allied Duties (DGAD) Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence & Statistics, Kolkata Special Economic Zones Pay & Account Office (Supply, Commerce & Textiles) Autonomous Bodies Commodity Boards Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Export Inspection Council Indian Institute of Foreign Trade Indian Institute of Packaging Marine Products Export Development Authority National Centre for Sustainable Aquaculture (NaCSA) Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Aquaculture (RGCA) Network for Fish Quality Management & Sustainable Fishing (NETFISH) PSUs State Trading Corporation (STC) PEC Limited MMTC Ltd Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India India Trade Promotion Organisation Pay & Account Office (Supply, Commerce & Textiles) Advisory Bodies Board of Trade (BOT) Inter State Trade Council Council for Trade Development & Promotion Export Promotion Councils Engineering Exports Promotion Council Project Export Promotion Council of India (PEPC) Basic Chemicals, Pharmaceuticals & Cosmetics Export Promotion Council (Chemexcil) Chemicals & Allied Products Export Promotion Council (CAPEXIL) Council for Leather Exports Sports Goods Export Promotion Council Gem and Jewellery Export Promotion Council Shellac Export Promotion Council Cashew Export Promotion Council of India Pharmaceutical Export Promotion Council The Plastics Export Promotion Council Indian Oil Seeds & Produce Export Promotion Council (IOPEPC) Services Export Promotion Council Other Organisations Federation of Indian Export Organisations Indian Diamond Institute Footwear Design & Development Institute (FDDI) National Centre for Trade Information India Brand Equity Foundation Price Stabilization Fund Trust DPIIT Statutory Bodies Intellectual Property Appellate Board Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation Copyright Office Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Registry Autonomous Institutions National Council for Cement & Building Materials (NCCBM) Indian Rubber Manufacturers Research Association (IRMRA) National Institute of Design National Productivity Council (NPC) Quality Council of India Central Manufacturing Technology Institute (CMTI) Central Pulp & Paper Research Institute (CPPRI) Attached & Subordinate offices Grievance Offices Controller General of Patents, Designs & Trade Marks Office of Chief Controller of Accounts (Disclosure of Central Government Accounting Data) Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Intellectual Property Management (NIIPM) Principal Account Office Office of Technical Adviser (Boilers) Tariff Commission Office of the Salt Commissioner Office of the Economic Adviser National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council Office of Chief Controller of Accounts Secretaries Guruprasad Mohapatra (incumbent) Ministers Industry Syama Prasad Mukherjee Harekrushna Mahtab Nityanand Kanungo Ram Subhag Singh H. C. Dasappa Tribhuvan Narain Singh Damodaram Sanjivayya F. A. Ahmed (Industrial Development) Dinesh Singh (Industrial Development & Internal Trade) Moinul Hoque Choudhury (Industrial Development) C Subramaniam (Industrial Development) T. A. Pai (Industry) Brij Lal Verma George Fernandes Kasu Brahmananda Reddy T. A. Pai N. D. Tiwari Kotla Vijay Bhaskar Reddy Veerendra Patil N. D. Tiwari J. Vengala Rao K. Karunakaran Suresh Prabhu Murasoli Maran Sikandar Bakht Commerce I. I. Chundrigar Cooverji Hormusji Bhabha (Commerce) Kshitish Chandra Neogy (Commerce) Jawaharlal Nehru (Commerce & Industry) Sri Prakasa (Commerce) Harekrushna Mahtab (Commerce & Industry) T T Krishnamachari (Commerce & Industry) Swaran Singh Morarji Desai (Commerce & Industry) Lal Bahadur Shastri (Commerce & Industry) KC Reddy (Commerce & Industry) Manubhai Shah (As MoS till 24 January 1966) (Commerce)' Dinesh Singh (Commerce) Bali Ram Bhagat (Foreign Trade & Supply) Dinesh Singh (Commerce) Lalit Narayan Mishra (MoS) D. P. Chattopadhyay (Commerce) (as MoS till 23 December 1976)' Morarji Desai (Commerce) Mohan Dharia (Commerce) Charan Singh (Commerce) Hitendra Desai (Commerce) Indira Gandhi Pranab Mukherjee (Commerce) Pranab Mukherjee (Commerce) Rajiv Gandhi Arjun Singh P Shiv Shankar (Commerce) N. D. Tiwari (Commerce) Dinesh Singh (Commerce & Industry) Chandra Shekhar (Commerce) Subramanian Swamy (Commerce) P Chidambaram (MoS, IC) (Commerce) P. V. Narasimha Rao P Chidambaram (MoS, IC) (Commerce) P. V. Narasimha Rao Atal Bihari Vajpayee Atal Bihari Vajpayee Devendra Prasad Yadav (Commerce) Bolla Bulli Ramaiah (Commerce) Ramakrishna Hegde (Commerce) Murasoli Maran (Commerce & Industry) Anand Sharma (Commerce & Industry) Nirmala Sitharaman (Commerce & Industry)' (MoS, IC)' Suresh Prabhu (Commerce & Industry) Piyush Goyal (Commerce and Industry) (incumbent) MOS Hardeep Singh Puri (incumbent) v t e Ministry of Communications (India) Department of Telecommunications Statutory Bodies Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) Attached Offices Controller General of Communication Accounts (CGCA) Director General Telecom (DGT) Telecommunication Engineering Center (TEC) Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) Subordinate Offices National Centre for Communication Security (NCCS) Wireless Monitoring Organisation (WMO) Field Offices Controller of Communication Accounts (CCA) Autonomous Bodies Centre for Development of Telematics (C-DOT) Training Institutes National Telecommunications Institute for Policy Research Innovation Training (NTIPRIT) National Institute of Communication Finance (NICF) Others Centre for Excellence in Telecom Technology and Management Digital Communications Commission Telecom Enforcement Resource and Monitoring (TERM) Telephone Advisory Committees (TAC) Wireless Planning & Coordination Wing (WPC) PSUs Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL) Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) Indian Telephone Industries Limited (ITI) Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (MTNL) Telecommunications Consultants India Limited (TCIL) Civil Service Indian Telecommunication Service Indian Radio Regulatory Service Department of Posts Army Postal Service India Post India Post Payments Bank Legislations The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 The Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1940 The Indian Post Office Act, 1898 The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 Ministers Rafi Ahmed Kidwai Amrit Kaur Jagjivan Ram Raj Bahadur Lal Bahadur Shastri S. K. Patil Jawaharlal Nehru P. Subbarayan Ashoke Kumar Sen Satya Narayan Sinha Ram Subhag Singh Indira Gandhi Sher Singh Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Kasu Brahmananda Reddy Shankar Dayal Sharma Morarji Desai Parkash Singh Badal George Fernandes Brij Lal Varma Charan Singh Shyam Nandan Mishra Bhishma Narain Singh C. M. Stephen Anant Prasad Sharma Rajiv Gandhi V. N. Gadgil Arjun Singh Vasant Sathe Bir Bahadur Singh V. P. Singh K. P. Unnikrishnan Chandra Shekhar Atal Bihari Vajpayee Beni Prasad Verma Buta Singh Sushma Swaraj Jagmohan Ram Vilas Paswan Pramod Mahajan Arun Shourie Dayanidhi Maran A. Raja Manmohan Singh Kapil Sibal Ravi Shankar Prasad Ashwini Vaishnaw (incumbent) Ministers of State Manoj Sinha Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan (incumbent) Preceding Ministry: Ministry of Communications and Information Technology v t e Ministers of information and broadcasting Vallabhbhai Patel R. R. Diwakar B. V. Keskar Satya Narayan Sinha Indira Gandhi Nandini Satpathy Inder Kumar Gujral Vidya Charan Shukla L. K. Advani Purushottam Kaushik Vasant Sathe H. K. L. Bhagat V. N. Gadgil Ajit Kumar Panja P. Upendra Chandra Shekhar Ajit Kumar Panja K. P. Singh Deo P. A. Sangma Jaipal Reddy Arun Jaitley Sushma Swaraj Ravi Shankar Prasad Priya Ranjan Dasmunsi Ambika Soni Manish Tewari Prakash Javadekar Arun Jaitley Venkaiah Naidu Smriti Irani Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore Prakash Javadekar Anurag Thakur (incumbent) v t e Indian National Congress History Electoral history Nehru–Gandhi family The Emergency Breakaway parties Organisation National president State presidents All India Congress Committee Congress Core Committee Congress Working Committee Pradesh Congress Committee States Andhra PCC Arunachal PCC Assam PCC Bihar PCC Chhattisgarh PCC Goa PCC Gujarat PCC Haryana PCC Himachal PCC Jharkhand PCC Karnataka PCC Kerala PCC Madhya Pradesh CC Maharashtra PCC Manipur PCC Meghalaya PCC Mizoram PCC Nagaland PCC Odisha PCC Punjab PCC Rajasthan PCC Sikkim PCC Tamil Nadu CC Telangana PCC Tripura PCC Uttarakhand PCC Uttar Pradesh CC West Bengal PCC Union territories Andaman and Nicobar TCC Chandigarh TCC Dadra and Nagar Haveli Diu and Daman and Diu TCC Delhi PCC Jammu and Kashmir PCC Ladakh TCC Lakshadweep TCC Puducherry PCC Regions Mumbai RCC National presidents Womesh Chunder Bonnerjee Dadabhai Naoroji Badruddin Tyabji George Yule William Wedderburn Pherozeshah Mehta Anandacharlu Womesh Chunder Bonnerjee Dadabhai Naoroji Alfred Webb Surendranath Banerjee Rahimtulla M. Sayani C. Sankaran Nair Anandamohan Bose Romesh Chunder Dutt N. G. Chandavarkar Dinshaw Edulji Wacha Surendranath Banerjee Lalmohan Ghosh Henry Cotton Gopal Krishna Gokhale Dadabhai Naoroji Rash Behari Ghosh Madan Mohan Malaviya William Wedderburn Bishan Narayan Dar Raghunath Narasinha Mudholkar Nawab Syed Muhammad Bahadur Bhupendra Nath Bose Satyendra Prasanna Sinha, 1st Baron Sinha Ambica Charan Mazumdar Annie Besant Madan Mohan Malaviya Syed Hasan Imam Motilal Nehru Lala Lajpat Rai C. Vijayaraghavachariar Hakim Ajmal Khan Chittaranjan Das Mohammad Ali Jauhar Abul Kalam Azad Mahatma Gandhi Sarojini Naidu S. Srinivasa Iyengar Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari Motilal Nehru Jawaharlal Nehru Vallabhbhai Patel Madan Mohan Malaviya Nellie Sengupta Rajendra Prasad Jawaharlal Nehru Subhas Chandra Bose Abul Kalam Azad J. B. Kripalani Bhogaraju Pattabhi Sitaramayya Purushottam Das Tandon Jawaharlal Nehru U. N. Dhebar Indira Gandhi Neelam Sanjiva Reddy K. Kamaraj S. Nijalingappa Jagjivan Ram Shankar Dayal Sharma D. K. Barooah Indira Gandhi Rajiv Gandhi P. V. Narasimha Rao Sitaram Kesri Sonia Gandhi Rahul Gandhi Mallikarjun Kharge Presidential elections 2022 National vice presidents Kamalapati Tripathi Arjun Singh Jitendra Prasada Rahul Gandhi Prime ministers Jawaharlal Nehru Lal Bahadur Shastri Indira Gandhi Rajiv Gandhi P. V. Narasimha Rao Manmohan Singh Deputy prime ministers Vallabhbhai Patel Morarji Desai Leaders Lok Sabha Jawaharlal Nehru Gulzarilal Nanda Lal Bahadur Shastri Satya Narayan Indira Gandhi Yashwantrao Chavan Chembakassery Mathai Stephen Rajiv Gandhi Arjun Singh P. V. Narasimha Rao Sharad Pawar Sonia Gandhi Pranab Mukherjee Sushilkumar Shinde Mallikarjun Kharge Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury Ravneet Singh Bittu Rahul Gandhi Rajya Sabha N. Gopalaswamy Ayyangar Charu Chandra Lal Bahadur Shastri Govind Ballabh Hafiz Mohamad Ibrahim Yashwantrao Chavan Jaisukhlal Hathi M. C. Chagla Jaisukhlal Hathi Kodardas Kalidas Shah Uma Shankar Dikshit Kamalapati Tripathi Pranab Mukherjee V.P. Singh Narayan Dutt Tiwari P. Shiv Shankar Shankarrao Chavan Motilal Vora Ahmed Patel Anand Sharma Jairam Ramesh A. K. Antony Digvijaya Singh P. Chidambaram Abhishek Singhvi Rajeev Shukla Manmohan Singh Ghulam Nabi Azad Mallikarjun Kharge Frontal wings All India Mahila Congress All India Professionals Congress Indian National Trade Union Congress Indian Youth Congress Kisan and Khet Mazdoor Congress National Students' Union of India Seva Dal Chief ministers Current Revanth Reddy Siddaramaiah Sukhvinder Singh Sukhu Revanth Reddy Deputy chief ministers Current Mukesh Agnihotri D. K. Shivakumar Mallu Bhatti Vikramarka Category v t e Recipients of Bharat Ratna Award 1954–1960 C. Rajagopalachari , Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan , and C. V. Raman (1954) Bhagwan Das , M. Visvesvaraya , and Jawaharlal Nehru (1955) Govind Ballabh Pant (1957) Dhondo Keshav Karve (1958) 1961–1980 Bidhan Chandra Roy , and Purushottam Das Tandon (1961) Rajendra Prasad (1962) Zakir Husain , and Pandurang Vaman Kane (1963) Lal Bahadur Shastri (1966) Indira Gandhi (1971) Varahagiri Venkata Giri (1975) K. Kamaraj (1976) Mother Teresa (1980) 1981–2000 Vinoba Bhave (1983) Abdul Ghaffar Khan (1987) M. G. Ramachandran (1988) B. R. Ambedkar , and Nelson Mandela (1990) Rajiv Gandhi , Vallabhbhai Patel , and Morarji Desai (1991) Abul Kalam Azad , J. R. D. Tata and Satyajit Ray (1992) Gulzarilal Nanda , Aruna Asaf Ali , and A. P. J. Abdul Kalam (1997) M. S. Subbulakshmi , and C. Subramaniam (1998) Jayaprakash Narayan , Amartya Sen , Gopinath Bordoloi , and Ravi Shankar (1999) 2001–2020 Lata Mangeshkar , and Bismillah Khan (2001) Bhimsen Joshi (2008) C. N. R. Rao , and Sachin Tendulkar (2014) Atal Bihari Vajpayee , and Madan Mohan Malaviya (2015) Nanaji Deshmukh , Bhupen Hazarika , and Pranab Mukherjee (2019) 2021–2040 Karpoori Thakur , Lal Krishna Advani , Charan Singh , P. V. Narasimha Rao , and M. S. Swaminathan (2024) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indira_Gandhi&oldid=1305757932 " Categories : Indira Gandhi 1917 births 1984 deaths 20th-century Indian women politicians 20th-century prime ministers of India 20th-century women prime ministers India MPs 1967–1970 India MPs 1971–1977 India MPs 1977–1979 India MPs 1980–1984 Assassination of Indira Gandhi Assassinated prime ministers Children of prime ministers of India Deaths by firearm in India Ministers of defence of India Female defence ministers Female finance ministers Female foreign ministers Female interior ministers Ministers of finance of India Heads of government who were later imprisoned Indian Hindus Indian socialists International School of Geneva alumni Kashmiri women Recipients of the Lenin Peace Prize Lok Sabha members from Andhra Pradesh Lok Sabha members from Karnataka Lok Sabha members from Uttar Pradesh Ministers for corporate affairs Ministers for external affairs of India Ministers for information and broadcasting of India Ministers of internal affairs of India Nehru–Gandhi family People associated with Santiniketan People educated at Badminton School People murdered in Delhi People from Raebareli People of the Emergency (India) Presidents of the Indian National Congress Prime ministers of India Rajya Sabha members from Uttar Pradesh Recipients of the Bharat Ratna Victims of Sikh terrorism Women members of the Cabinet of India Women members of the Lok Sabha Women members of the Rajya Sabha Women prime ministers in Asia Asian politicians assassinated in the 1980s Indian politicians assassinated in the 20th century Politicians assassinated in 1984 Kashmiri politicians Indian politicians disqualified from office First women prime ministers Alumni of Somerville College, Oxford Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages with Hindi IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from March 2022 Use Indian English from August 2014 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles with hAudio microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Open Library links This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 23:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Indira Gandhi 129 languages Add topic

