Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Overview 3 Critiques 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Principle of compositionality 9 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Magyar Svenska 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Principle in linguistics about meaning Part of a series on Linguistics Outline History Index General linguistics Diachronic Lexicography Morphology Phonology Pragmatics Semantics Syntax Syntax–semantics interface Typology Applied linguistics Acquisition Anthropological Applied Mathematical Computational Conversation analysis Corpus linguistics Discourse analysis Determinism Distance Documentation Ethnography of communication Ethnomethodology Forensic History of linguistics Interlinguistics Neurolinguistics Philology Philosophy of language Phonetics Psycholinguistics Sociolinguistics Text Translating and interpreting Writing systems Theoretical frameworks Formalist Constituency Dependency Distributionalism Generative Glossematics Functional Cognitive Construction grammar Functional discourse grammar Grammaticalization Interactional linguistics Prague circle Systemic functional Usage-based Structuralism Topics Autonomy of syntax Compositionality Conservative and innovative language Descriptivism Etymology Iconicity Internet linguistics LGBTQ linguistics Origin of language Orismology Orthography Philosophy of linguistics Prescriptivism Second-language acquisition Theory of language Terminology Portal v t e In semantics , mathematical logic and related disciplines, the principle of compositionality is the principle that the meaning of a complex expression is determined by the meanings of its constituent expressions and the rules used to combine them. The principle is also called Frege's principle , because Gottlob Frege is widely credited for the first modern formulation of it. However, the principle has never been explicitly stated by Frege, [ 1 ] and arguably it was already assumed by George Boole [ 2 ] decades before Frege's work.

The principle of compositionality (also known as semantic compositionalism ) is highly debated in linguistics. Among its most challenging problems there are the issues of contextuality , the non-compositionality of idiomatic expressions , and the non-compositionality of quotations .

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Discussion of compositionality started to appear at the beginning of the 19th century, during which it was debated whether what was most fundamental in language was compositionality or contextuality , and compositionality was usually preferred.

[ 4 ] Gottlob Frege never adhered to the principle of compositionality as it is known today (Frege endorsed the context principle instead), and the first to explicitly formulate it was Rudolf Carnap in 1947.

[ 4 ] Overview [ edit ] A common formulation [ 4 ] of the principle of compositionality comes from Barbara Partee , stating: "The meaning of a compound expression is a function of the meanings of its parts and of the way they are syntactically combined." [ 5 ] It is possible to distinguish different levels of compositionality. Strong compositionality refers to compound expressions that are determined by the meaning of its immediate parts and a top-level syntactic function that describes their combination. Weak compositionality refers to compound expressions that are determined by the meaning of its parts as well as their complete syntactic combination.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] However, there can also be further gradations in between these two extremes. This is possible, if one not only allows the meaning of immediate parts but also the meaning of the second-highest parts (third-highest parts, fourth-highest parts, etc.) together with functions that describes their respective combinations.

[ 7 ] On a sentence level, the principle claims that what remains if one removes the lexical parts of a meaningful sentence , are the rules of composition. The sentence "Socrates was a man", for example, becomes "S was a M"  once the meaningful lexical items—"Socrates" and "man"—are taken away. The task of finding the rules of composition, then becomes a matter of describing what the connection between S and M is.

Among the most prominent linguistic problems that challenge the principle of compositionality are the issues of contextuality , the non compositionality of idiomatic expressions , and the non compositionality of quotations .

[ 3 ] It is frequently taken to mean that every operation of the syntax should be associated with an operation of the semantics that acts on the meanings of the constituents combined by the syntactic operation. As a guideline for constructing semantic theories, this is generally taken, as in the influential work on the philosophy of language by Donald Davidson , to mean that every construct of the syntax should be associated by a clause of the T-schema with an operator in the semantics that specifies how the meaning of the whole expression is built from constituents combined by the syntactic rule. In some general mathematical theories (especially those in the tradition of Montague grammar ), this guideline is taken to mean that the interpretation of a language is essentially given by a homomorphism between an algebra of syntactic representations and an algebra of semantic objects.

The principle of compositionality also exists in a similar form in the compositionality of programming languages .

Critiques [ edit ] The principle of compositionality has been the subject of intense debate. Indeed, there is no general agreement as to how the principle is to be interpreted, although there have been several attempts to provide formal definitions of it.

[ 8 ] Scholars are also divided as to whether the principle should be regarded as a factual claim, open to empirical testing; an analytic truth , obvious from the nature of language and meaning; or a methodological principle to guide the development of theories of syntax and semantics. The Principle of Compositionality has been attacked in all three spheres, although so far none of the criticisms brought against it have been generally regarded as compelling.

[ citation needed ] Most proponents of the principle, however, make certain exceptions for idiomatic expressions in natural language.

[ 8 ] The principle of compositionality usually holds when only syntactic factors play in the increased complexity of sentence processing , while it becomes more problematic and questionable when the complexity increase is due to sentence or discourse context , semantic memory , or sensory cues .

[ 9 ] Among the problematic phenomena for traditional theories of compositionality is that of logical metonymy , which has been studied at least since the mid 1990s by linguists James Pustejovsky and Ray Jackendoff .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Logical metonymies are sentences like John began the book , where the verb to begin requires ( subcategorizes ) an event as its argument, but in a logical metonymy an object (i.e.

the book ) is found instead, and this forces to interpret the sentence by inferring an implicit event ("reading", "writing", or other prototypical actions performed on a book).

[ 10 ] The problem for compositionality is that the meaning of reading or writing is not present in the words of the sentence, neither in "begin" nor in "book".

Further, in the context of the philosophy of language, the principle of compositionality does not explain all of meaning. For example, you cannot infer sarcasm purely on the basis of words and their composition, yet a phrase used sarcastically means something completely different from the same phrase uttered straightforwardly. Thus, some theorists argue that the principle has to be revised to take into account linguistic and extralinguistic context , which includes the tone of voice used, common ground between the speakers, the intentions of the speaker, and so on.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Componential analysis Context principle Semantics (computer science) Semantics of logic Garden-path sentence Initial algebra Levels of Processing model Opaque context — another problem for compositionality Referential transparency — in programming languages Semantic decomposition (natural language processing) Notes [ edit ] ^ Pelletier, Francis Jeffry (2001).

"Did Frege Believe Frege's Principle?" .

Journal of Logic, Language and Information .

10 (1): 87– 114.

doi : 10.1023/A:1026594023292 .

^ Boole, G. (1854).

An investigation of the laws of thought: on which are founded the mathematical theories of logic and probabilities . Walton and Maberly.

^ a b Pelletier (2016) section "12 This Chapter" ^ a b c Janssen, Theo (2012).

"Compositionality: Its Historic Context" .

Oxford Handbook of Compositionality : 19– 46.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199541072.013.0001 .

^ Partee, Barbara (1984). "Compositionality".

Varieties of Formal Semantics .

3 : 281– 311.

^ Coopmans, Cas W.; Kaushik, Karthikeya; Martin, Andrea E. (2023).

"Hierarchical structure in language and action: A formal comparison" .

Psychological Review .

130 (4): 935– 952.

doi : 10.1037/rev0000429 .

ISSN 1939-1471 .

PMID 37166848 .

^ a b Pagin, Peter; Westerståhl, Dag (2010).

"Compositionality I: Definitions and Variants" .

Philosophy Compass .

5 (3): 250– 264.

doi : 10.1111/j.1747-9991.2009.00228.x .

^ a b c Szabó, Zoltán Gendler (2012) " Compositionality ". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. First published Thu Apr 8, 2004; substantive revision Fri Dec 7, 2012 ^ Baggio et al. (2012), Conclusions.

^ a b Chersoni, E., Lenci, A., & Blache, P. (2017, August).

Logical metonymy in a distributional model of sentence comprehension . In Sixth Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (* SEM 2017) (pp. 168-177).

^ James Pustejovsky. 1995. The Generative Lexicon. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA ^ Ray Jackendoff. 1997. The Architecture of the Language Faculty. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

References [ edit ] Baggio, G., Van Lambalgen, M., & Hagoort, P. (2012) The processing consequences of compositionality , in M. Werning, W. Hinzen, & E. Machery (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of compositionality (pp. 655–672).

Janssen, T. M. (2012) Compositionality: Its historic context , in M. Werning, W. Hinzen, & E. Machery (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of compositionality , pp. 19–46, Oxford University Press.

Pelletier, Francis Jeffry (2001) Did Frege believe Frege’s principle?

, in Journal of Logic, Language and Information 10:87–114.

Pelletier, Francis Jeffry (2016) Semantic Compositionality in M. Aronoff (ed) The Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Linguistics , Oxford UP.

Further reading [ edit ] Ferreira, F., Bailey, K. G., & Ferraro, V. (2002).

Good-enough representations in language comprehension in Current directions in psychological science , 11(1), 11-15.

Ferreira, F., & Patson, N. D. (2007).

The ‘good enough’approach to language comprehension in Language and Linguistics Compass , 1(1‐2), 71-83.

Szabó, Zoltán Gendler.

"Compositionality" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

(2004) revisions in 2005 , 2007 , 2012 , 2017 , 2020 .

Werning, Markus; & Edouard Machery, & Gerhard Schurz (Eds., 2004) The Compositionality of Meaning and Content , Vol. I & II, Ontos Werning, Markus; & Wolfram Hinzen, & Edouard Machery (Eds., 2012) The Oxford Handbook of Compositionality , Oxford University Press v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Formal semantics (natural language) Central concepts Compositionality Denotation Entailment Extension Generalized quantifier Intension Logical form Presupposition Proposition Reference Scope Speech act Syntax–semantics interface Truth conditions Topics Areas Anaphora Ambiguity Binding Conditionals Definiteness Disjunction Evidentiality Focus Indexicality Lexical semantics Modality Negation Propositional attitudes Tense–aspect–mood Quantification Vagueness Phenomena Antecedent-contained deletion Cataphora Coercion Conservativity Counterfactuals Crossover effects Cumulativity De dicto and de re De se Deontic modality Discourse relations Donkey anaphora Epistemic modality Exhaustivity Faultless disagreement Free choice inferences Givenness Homogeneity (linguistics) Hurford disjunction Inalienable possession Intersective modification Logophoricity Mirativity Modal subordination Opaque contexts Performatives Polarity items Privative adjectives Quantificational variability effect Responsive predicate Rising declaratives Scalar implicature Sloppy identity Subsective modification Subtrigging Telicity Temperature paradox Veridicality Formalism Formal systems Alternative semantics Categorial grammar Combinatory categorial grammar Discourse representation theory (DRT) Dynamic semantics Generative grammar Glue semantics Inquisitive semantics Intensional logic Lambda calculus Mereology Montague grammar Segmented discourse representation theory (SDRT) Situation semantics Supervaluationism Type theory TTR Concepts Autonomy of syntax Context set Continuation Conversational scoreboard Downward entailing Existential closure Function application Meaning postulate Monads Plural quantification Possible world Quantifier raising Quantization Question under discussion Semantic parsing Squiggle operator Strawson entailment Strict conditional Type shifter Universal grinder See also Cognitive semantics Computational semantics Distributional semantics Formal grammar Inferentialism Logic translation Linguistics wars Philosophy of language Pragmatics Semantics of logic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Principle_of_compositionality&oldid=1297157812 " Categories : Semantics Principles Philosophy of language Syntax–semantics interface Formal semantics (natural language) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 13:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Principle of compositionality 9 languages Add topic

