Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Events 3 In myth 4 As a metaphor 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Kamikaze (typhoon) 14 languages Deutsch Eesti فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Монгол 日本語 Polski Português Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Windstorms said to have saved Japan from Mongol invasions (1274, 1281) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Kamikaze" typhoon – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Mongol fleet destroyed in a typhoon, ink and water on paper, by Kikuchi Yōsai , 1847 The kamikaze ( Japanese : 神風 , lit.

' divine wind ' ) were two winds or storms that are said to have saved Japan from two Mongol fleets under Kublai Khan . These fleets attacked Japan in 1274 and again in 1281.

[ 1 ] Due to the growth of Zen Buddhism among Samurai at the time, these were the first events where the typhoons were described as "divine wind" as much by their timing as by their force. Since Man'yōshū , the word kamikaze has been used as a Makurakotoba of waka introducing Ise Grand Shrine .

The term "kamikaze" is the native Japanese kun'yomi reading of the characters , and the main reading of them that was used more throughout history was the on'yomi (Sinitic) "shinpu".

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The latter fleet, composed of "more than four thousand ships bearing nearly 140,000 men", [ 3 ] is said to have been the largest attempted naval invasion in history whose scale was only recently eclipsed in modern times by the D-Day invasion of allied forces into Normandy in 1944.  The size of the fleet is often disputed by modern historians [ who?

] , however.

Events [ edit ] In the first invasion, the Mongols successfully conquered the Japanese settlements on Tsushima and Iki islands. When they landed on Hakata Bay , however, they met fierce resistance by the armies of samurai clans. Despite conquering several miles inland, resistance and/or resupply caused them to withdraw to their ships. In the midst of the withdrawal, they were hit by a typhoon. Most of their ships sank and many soldiers drowned.

[ 4 ] [ better source needed ] The first incident took place in autumn 1274 when a Mongol fleet of 500 to 900 ships carrying 30,000 to 40,000 men attacked Japan. While in Hakata Bay, Kyushu, a typhoon hit the fleet. An estimated 13,000 men drowned, around one-third of the ships sank, and the rest were damaged.

[ 5 ] During the time period between the first and second invasion, the Japanese prudently built two-meter-high walls to protect themselves from future assaults.

Seven years later, the Mongols returned. Unable to find any suitable landing beaches due to the walls, the fleet stayed afloat for months and depleted their supplies as they searched for an area to land. After months of being exposed to the elements, the fleet was destroyed by a great typhoon, which the Japanese called "kamikaze" (divine wind). The Mongols never attacked Japan again, and more than 70,000 men were said to have been captured.

[ 6 ] Illustration by Katsushika Isai(1821-1880), the disciple of Hokusai The second fleet was larger, comprising two forces with an estimated total of 4,400 ships and 140,000 men, greatly outnumbering the Japanese soldiers, who had an estimated 40,000 samurai and other fighting men. The typhoon led to the death of at least half the men, and only a few hundred vessels survived. Following the storm, most survivors were killed by the Japanese. This event is considered "one of the largest and most disastrous attempts at a naval invasion in history." [ 5 ] In myth [ edit ] In popular Japanese myths at the time, the god Raijin was the god who turned the storms against the Mongols. Other variations say that the gods Fūjin , Ryūjin or Hachiman caused the destructive kamikaze.

As a metaphor [ edit ] The name given to the storm, kamikaze , was later used during World War II as nationalist propaganda for suicide attacks by Japanese pilots . The metaphor meant that the pilots were to be the "Divine Wind" that would again sweep the enemy from the seas. This use of kamikaze has come to be the common meaning of the word in the English lexicon.

See also [ edit ] Act of God Battle of Bun'ei Battle of Kōan Boreas Divine providence Miracle of the House of Brandenburg Mongol invasions of Japan Protestant Wind Theodicy Tornado Notes [ edit ] ^ America, Geological Society of.

"The legend of the kamikaze typhoons" .

phys.org . Retrieved 2024-01-20 .

^ Gavin Blair (2022).

An Illustrated Guide to Samurai History and Culture: From the Age of Musashi to Contemporary Pop Culture . Foreword by Alexander Bennett. North Clarendon, Vermont: Tuttle Publishing . p. 38.

ISBN 978-4-8053-1659-7 .

^ McClain 2002 . p. 17.

^ 『 高麗史 』巻一百四 列伝十七 金方慶「諸軍與戰、及暮乃解、方慶謂忽敦茶丘曰、『兵法千里縣軍、其鋒不可當、我師雖少、已入敵境、人自爲戰、即孟明焚船淮陰背水也、請復戰』、忽敦曰、『兵法小敵之堅、大敵之擒、策疲乏之兵、敵日滋之衆、非完計也、不若回軍』復亨中流矢、先登舟、遂引兵還、會夜大風雨、戰艦觸岩多敗、侁堕水死、到合浦、」 ^ a b "Kamikaze of 1274 and 1281 | typhoons, East Asia [1274; 1281]" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ Science HD Channel program "Unearthing Ancient Secrets" first aired: 1/26/2009. Episode named "Khubilai Khan's Lost Fleet" References [ edit ] McClain, James L. (2002).

Japan: A Modern History . New York: W.W. Norton & Company. pp.

724 .

ISBN 0-393-04156-5 .

Wilkinson, Endymion Porter (2015).

Chinese History: a New Manual . Cambridge and London: Harvard University Asia Center.

External links [ edit ] Japan's Kamikaze Winds, the Stuff of Legend, May Have Been Real Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kamikaze_(typhoon)&oldid=1299937659 " Categories : Pre-1940 Pacific typhoon seasons Unknown-strength tropical cyclones Typhoons in Japan 13th century in Japan 1270s in Japan 1274 in Asia 1280s in Japan 1281 in Asia Military history of the Mongol Empire 13th-century natural disasters 13th-century meteorology Hidden categories: Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2011 All articles needing additional references All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2016 This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 08:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kamikaze (typhoon) 14 languages Add topic

