Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Platonic doctrine of recollection 2 Metaphor of the Sun 3 The divided line 4 Allegory of the cave 5 Charioteer myth 6 An example: love and wisdom 7 References Toggle the table of contents Platonic epistemology 6 languages العربية Български Español پښتو Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory of knowledge by Plato This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Platonic epistemology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Plato in the Nuremberg Chronicle Part of a series on Platonism Life Works Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e In philosophy , Plato's epistemology is a theory of knowledge developed by the Greek philosopher Plato and his followers.

Platonic epistemology holds that knowledge of Platonic Ideas is innate, so that learning is the development of ideas buried deep in the soul, often under the midwife-like guidance of an interrogator.  In several dialogues by Plato , the character Socrates presents the view that each soul existed before birth with the Form of the Good and a perfect knowledge of Ideas.  Thus, when an Idea is "learned" it is actually just "recalled".

[ 1 ] Plato drew a sharp distinction between knowledge , which is certain, and mere true opinion , which is not certain.  Opinions derive from the shifting world of sensation; knowledge derives from the world of timeless Forms, or essences .  In The Republic , these concepts were illustrated using the metaphor of the Sun , the analogy of the divided line , and the allegory of the cave .

Platonic doctrine of recollection [ edit ] Main article: Anamnesis (philosophy) The Platonic doctrine of recollection, or anamnesis is the view that we are born possessing all knowledge and our realization of that knowledge is contingent on our discovery of it. Whether the doctrine should be taken literally or not is a subject of debate.

[ citation needed ] The soul is trapped in the body.  The soul was once directly acquainted with the Forms, but it is now embodied.  It once knew all of the Forms, but forgot them. Recollection is the process of bringing to our attention this knowledge that we have forgotten.  This doctrine implies that nothing is ever learned, it is simply recalled or remembered. In short it says that all that we know already comes pre-loaded on birth and our senses enable us to identify and recognize the stratified information in our mind. Recollection involves, on the one hand, overcoming the deceptions and distractions of the body, but, on the other hand, productively using the body's deceptions to occasion or trigger the episodes of recollection. The main texts that develop the theory of recollection are the Phaedo and Meno , although the theory also plays an important role in the Phaedrus .

Metaphor of the Sun [ edit ] Further information: Plato's metaphor of the Sun In the Republic (VI 507b-509c), Plato's character, Socrates, uses the Sun as a metaphor for the source of "intellectual illumination," which he held to be The Form of the Good . The metaphor is about the nature of ultimate reality and how we come to know it. It starts with the eye, which Socrates says is unusual among the sense organs in that it needs a medium, namely light, in order to operate. The strongest and best source of light is the Sun; with it, we can discern objects clearly. Analogously, for intelligible objects The Form of the Good is necessary in order to understand any particular thing. Thus, if we attempt to understand why things are as they are, and what general categories can be used to understand various particulars around us, without reference to any forms (universals) we will fail completely. In contrast, "the domain where truth and reality shine resplendent" is none other than Plato's world of forms, illuminated by the highest of the Forms, that of the Good.

The divided line [ edit ] Further information: Plato's divided line In the sixth book of the Republic , the divided line has two parts that represent the intelligible world and the smaller visible world. Each of those two parts is divided, the segments within the intelligible world represent higher and lower forms and the segments within the visible world represent ordinary visible objects and their shadows, reflections, and other representations.  The line segments are unequal and their lengths represent "their comparative clearness and obscurity" and their comparative "reality and truth," as well as whether we have knowledge or instead mere opinion of the objects.

Allegory of the cave [ edit ] Further information: Plato's allegory of the cave In his best-known dialogue, The Republic , Plato drew an analogy between human sensation and the shadows that pass along the wall of a cave - an allegory known as Plato's allegory of the cave .

Charioteer myth [ edit ] Further information: Chariot Allegory Along with these other allegories, Plato's charioteer myth in the Phaedrus (245c-257b) certainly also deserves mention.  The ascent of the mind to celestial and trans-celestial realms is likened to a charioteer and a chariot drawn by two winged horses, one dark and one white.  Figuratively represented is the famous Platonic tripartite model of the soul:  the charioteer represents reason, or intellect, the dark horse appetitive passions, and the white horse irascible nature.  Only by taming and controlling the two horses can the charioteer ascend to the heavens and enjoy a banquet of divine knowledge.  Key epistemological features of the charioteer myth are (1) an emphasis, as with the cave allegory, upon true knowledge as ascent, (2) and the need to tame one's passionate nature to obtain true knowledge.

An example: love and wisdom [ edit ] A good example of how Plato presents the acquiring of knowledge is contained in the Ladder of Love .  In Symposium (210a-211b), Plato's Socrates cites the priestess Diotima as defining a "lover" as someone who loves and love as a desire for something that one does not have.  According to this ladder model of love, a lover progresses from rung to rung from the basest love to the pure form of love as follows: A beautiful body - The lover begins here at the most obvious form of love.

All beautiful bodies - If the lover examines his love and does some investigating, he/she will find that the beauty contained in this beautiful body is not original, that it is shared by every beautiful body.

Beautiful souls - After most likely attempting to have every beautiful body, the lover should realize that if a single love does not satisfy, there is no reason to think that many ones will satisfy.  Thus, the "lover of every body" must, in the words of Plato, "bring his passion for the one into due proportion by deeming it of little or of no importance."  Instead, the passion is transferred to a more appropriate object: the soul.

The beauty of laws and institutions - The next logical step is for the lover to love all beautiful souls and then to transfer that love to that which is responsible for their existence: a moderate, harmonious and just social order.

The beauty of knowledge - Once proceeding down this path, the lover will naturally long for that which produces and makes intelligible good social institutions: knowledge.

Beauty itself - This is the Form of Beauty.  It is not a particular thing that is beautiful, but is instead the essence of beauty.  Plato describes this level of love as a "wondrous vision," an "everlasting loveliness which neither comes nor ages, which neither flowers nor fades."  It is eternal and isn't "anything that is of the flesh" nor "words" nor "knowledge" but consists "of itself and by itself in an eternal oneness, while every lovely thing partakes of it." Knowledge concerning other things is similarly gained by progressing from a base reality (or shadow) of the thing sought (red, tall, thin, keen, etc.) to the eventual form of the thing sought, or the thing sought itself.  Such steps follow the same pattern as Plato's metaphor of the sun, his allegory of the cave and his divided line; progress brings one closer and closer to reality as each step explains the relative reality of the past.

References [ edit ] ^ Ackrill, J.L. "Anamnēsis in the Phaedo," in E.N. Lee and A.P.D. Mourelatos (eds.) Exegesis and Argument: Studies in Greek Philosophy Presented to Gregory Vlastos. Assen, 1973. 177-95.
On the theory of recollection in Plato's Phaedo(73c-75).

v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐jcp99
Cached time: 20250817011806
Cache expiry: 21600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.329 seconds
Real time usage: 0.441 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 854/1000000
Revision size: 8566/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 50804/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1072/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 31611/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.207/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4000500/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  351.989      1 -total
 32.42%  114.104      1 Template:Platonism
 19.67%   69.238      1 Template:Short_description
 16.80%   59.126      1 Template:Refimprove
 15.24%   53.656      1 Template:Ambox
 12.79%   45.009      3 Template:Navbox
 11.75%   41.348      1 Template:Epistemology
 10.73%   37.766      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.76%   20.274      4 Template:Main_other
  5.72%   20.120      1 Template:Cn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:261450:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817011806 and revision id 1306037244. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Platonic_epistemology&oldid=1306037244 " Categories : Epistemological theories Platonism Ancient Greek epistemology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 15:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Platonic epistemology 6 languages Add topic

