Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In statistics 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Exploratory thought Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Psychology Outline History Subfields Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Psychology portal v t e Exploratory thought is an academic term used in the field of psychology to describe reasoning that neutrally considers multiple points of view and tries to anticipate all possible objections to, or flaws in, a particular position, with the goal of seeking truth. The opposite of exploratory thought is confirmatory thought , which is reasoning designed to construct justification supporting a specific point of view.

Both terms were coined by social psychologist Jennifer Lerner and psychology professor Philip Tetlock in the 2002 book Emerging Perspectives in Judgment and Decision Making.

[ 1 ] The authors argue that most people, most of the time, make decisions based on gut feelings and poor logic, and reason through issues primarily to provide justification, to themselves and to others, of what they already believe.

Lerner and Tetlock say that when people expect to need to justify their position to external parties, and they already know those parties' views, they will tend to adopt a similar position to theirs, and then engage in confirmatory thought with the goal of bolstering their own credibility rather than reaching a good conclusion. However, if the external parties are overly aggressive or critical, people will disengage from thought altogether, and simply assert their personal opinions without justification.

[ 2 ] Lerner and Tetlock say that people only push themselves to think critically and logically when they know in advance they will need to explain themselves to external parties who are well-informed, genuinely interested in the truth, and whose views they don't already know.

[ 3 ] Because those conditions rarely exist, they argue, most people are engaging in confirmatory thought most of the time.

[ 4 ] In statistics [ edit ] Princeton statistician John Tukey wrote about selection between confirmation or rejection of existing hypotheses and exploration of new ones, focusing on how practicing statisticians might decide between the two modes of thought at various junctures.

[ 5 ] Subsequent statisticians, philosophers of science , and organizational psychologists have expanded on the topic.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Empirical research Exploratory research Impartiality Neutrality (philosophy) References [ edit ] ^ Schneider, ed. by Sandra L.; Shanteau, James (2003).

Emerging perspectives on judgment and decision research . Cambridge [u.a.]: Cambridge Univ. Press. pp.

438– 9.

ISBN 052152718X .

{{ cite book }} : |first= has generic name ( help ) ^ Schneider, ed. by Sandra L.; Shanteau, James (2003).

Emerging perspectives on judgment and decision research . Cambridge [u.a.]: Cambridge Univ. Press. p. 445.

ISBN 052152718X .

{{ cite book }} : |first= has generic name ( help ) ^ Haidt, Jonathan (2012).

The Righteous Mind : Why Good People are Divided by Politics and Religion . New York: Pantheon Books. pp.

1473-4 (e-book edition) .

ISBN 978-0307377906 .

^ Lindzey, edited by Susan T. Fiske, Daniel T. Gilbert, Gardner (2010).

The handbook of social psychology (5th ed.). Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley. pp.

811 .

ISBN 978-0470137499 .

{{ cite book }} : |first= has generic name ( help ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Tukey, John W. (1980). "We Need Both Exploratory and Confirmatory".

The American Statistician .

34 (1): 23– 25.

doi : 10.2307/2682991 .

JSTOR 2682991 .

^ Hurley, A. E.

et al.

(1997) "Exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis: guidelines, issues, and alternatives" Journal of Organizational Behavior 18 :667-83 ^ Thompson, B. (2004) Exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis: Understanding concepts and applications (Washington, DC: American Psychological Association) ISBN 1591470935 Further reading [ edit ] Dayton, C.M. (2002) "Some Key Concepts for the Design and Review of Empirical Research" ERIC Digest report no. ED470591 Shields, P. and Tajalli, H. (2006) "Intermediate Theory: The Missing Link in Successful Student Scholarship" Journal of Public Affairs Education 12 (3):313-34 v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Exploratory_thought&oldid=1068696005 " Categories : Reasoning Design of experiments Empiricism Concepts in epistemology Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 29 January 2022, at 21:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Exploratory thought Add languages Add topic

