Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Family 3 Hartlib correspondence 4 Works 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents John Worthington (academic) 4 languages Deutsch Français Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English academic (1618–1671) John Worthington (1618–1671) was an English academic. He was closely associated with the Cambridge Platonists .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] He did not in fact publish in the field of philosophy, and is now known mainly as a well-connected diarist.

Life [ edit ] He was born in Manchester , and educated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge .

[ 3 ] At Emmanuel he was taught by Joseph Mead ; he described Mead's teaching methods, and later edited his works.

[ 4 ] Another teacher was Benjamin Whichcote .

[ 5 ] He was Master of Jesus College, Cambridge , from 1650 to 1660, and Vice-Chancellor in 1657.

[ 6 ] At the English Restoration he was replaced by Richard Sterne , apparently willingly.

[ 7 ] Subsequently he held various church positions, being lecturer at St Benet Fink in London until burnt out in the Great Fire of London in 1666. He then was given a living at Ingoldsby . At the end of his life he was a lecturer in Hackney .

[ 8 ] He died in London in 1671 and he left his books on Jakob Boehme and Hendrik Niclaes to the philosopher Elizabeth Foxcroft and to her son the alchemist Ezechial Foxcroft .

[ 9 ] Family [ edit ] He married Mary Whichcote, in 1657. She was niece to both Benjamin Whichcote [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] and Elizabeth Foxcroft (née Whichcote), mother of Ezechiel Foxcroft .

[ 13 ] : 197 Hartlib correspondence [ edit ] Worthington was an active correspondent of Samuel Hartlib , the "intelligencer", in the period 1655 to 1662.

[ 5 ] At Worthington's request, Hartlib's close collaborator John Dury searched in the Netherlands for the lost papers of Henry Ainsworth .

[ 14 ] He shared with Hartlib and Dury (and both Henry More and John Covel ) an interest in the Karaites .

[ 15 ] He was also involved in the connections between Hartlib and Dury with Adam Boreel in Amsterdam, including the Boreel project to translate the Hebrew Mishnah into Latin and Spanish.

[ 16 ] After Hartlib's death, Worthington took on the task of organising his archive of correspondence, which had been bought by William Brereton, 2nd Baron Brereton .

[ 17 ] After a period of nearly 300 years, the bundles into which he sorted it were rediscovered, and his system for the archive persists.

[ 18 ] Works [ edit ] The Christian's Pattern: a translation of the De Imitatione of Thomas à Kempis (1654) John Smith , Selected Discourses (London, 1660) editor Life of Joseph Mede with third edition of Mede's Works (1672) The Great Duty of Self-Resignation to the Divine Will (1675) The Diary and Correspondence of Dr. John Worthington , 2 vols. (1847–86, Chetham Society), editor James Crossley Notes [ edit ] ^ Hutton, Sarah (1 August 2013). "The Cambridge Platonists". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ http://www.oxforddnb.com/public/themes/94/94274-content.html [ dead link ] ^ "Worthington, John (WRTN632J)" .

A Cambridge Alumni Database . University of Cambridge.

^ "The University of Cambridge: The early Stuarts and Civil War | British History Online" .

www.british-history.ac.uk .

^ a b Andrew Pyle (editor), Dictionary of Twentieth-Century British Philosophers (2000), pp. 914-5.

^ "Vice-Chancellor's Office: Cambridge Vice-Chancellors" . Archived from the original on 21 February 2008 . Retrieved 8 June 2016 .

^ "The University of Cambridge: The age of Newton and Bentley (1660-1800) | British History Online" .

www.british-history.ac.uk .

^ "Hackney | British History Online" .

www.british-history.ac.uk .

^ Matthew, H. C. G.; Harrison, B., eds. (23 September 2004).

"Elizabeth Foxcroft" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/53695 . Retrieved 21 August 2023 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Betty Jo Teeter Dobbs.The Foundations of Newton's Alchemy: Or "The Hunting of the Greene Lyon" (1983), p. 112.

^ Robert Crocker, Henry More, 1614-1687: A Biography of the Cambridge Platonist (2003), note p. 260.

^ "Masters of Jesus College" .

www.jesus.cam.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 5 July 2009.

^ Crocker, R. (2003).

Henry More, 1614-1687: A Biography of the Cambridge Platonist . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 9781402015021 . Retrieved 20 January 2018 .

^ "Biblical Criticism Catalogue Number 70" .

www.mhs.ox.ac.uk .

^ Matt Goldish, Judaism in the Theology of Sir Isaac Newton: International Archives of the History of Ideas (1998), p. 23.

^ see Popkin, Richard H., “Hartlib, Dury and the Jews,” in M. Greengrass, M. Leslie, and T. Raylor, eds., Samuel Hartlib and Universal Reformation: Studies in Intellectual Communication , Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1994, pp. 118-136; cf.

pp. 122-123.

^ Michael Hunter , Archives of the Scientific Revolution: The Formation and Exchange of Ideas in Seventeenth-century Europe (1998), p. 40.

^ Sheffield, University of (10 January 2018).

"Hartlib Papers - Special Collections - The University Library - The University of Sheffield" .

www.sheffield.ac.uk .

References [ edit ] Attribution This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Mullinger, James Bass (1900). " Worthington, John ". In Lee, Sidney (ed.).

Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 63. London: Smith, Elder & Co.

External links [ edit ] "Worthington, John (1662–1670)" .

The Clergy of the Church of England Database 1540–1835 . CCEd Person ID 14184 . Retrieved 28 October 2024 .

Academic offices Preceded by Thomas Young Master of Jesus College, Cambridge 1650–1660 Succeeded by Richard Sterne v t e Masters of Jesus College, Cambridge William Chubbes Thomas Alcock William Capon John Reston Edmund Pierpoint John Fuller Thomas Redman Edward Gascoyne John Lakin John Bell John Duport Roger Andrewes William Beale Richard Sterne Thomas Young John Worthington Richard Sterne John Pearson Joseph Beaumont Edmund Boldero Humphrey Gower William Saywell Charles Ashton Philip Yonge Lynford Caryl Richard Beadon William Pearce William French George Corrie Henry Morgan Arthur Gray Wynfrid Duckworth E. M. W. Tillyard Denys Page Alan Cottrell Colin Renfrew David Crighton Robert Mair Ian H. White Sonita Alleyne v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Worthington_(academic)&oldid=1292074183 " Categories : 1618 births 1671 deaths Cambridge Platonists Academics from Greater Manchester Alumni of Emmanuel College, Cambridge Masters of Jesus College, Cambridge Vice-chancellors of the University of Cambridge Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2022 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2019 Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Articles incorporating DNB text with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 02:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Worthington (academic) 4 languages Add topic

