Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Middle years 1.3 Kinematics 2 Bibliography 3 Notes 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Franz Reuleaux 19 languages Bosanski Català Deutsch Español Français Hrvatski Interlingua Italiano עברית Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German mechanical engineer (1829–1905) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Franz Reuleaux" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Franz Reuleaux Reuleaux in 1877 Born 30 September 1829 Eschweiler , Prussia (now Germany) Died 20 August 1905 Known for Reuleaux triangle father of kinematics Academic background Alma mater Karlsruhe Polytechnic School Doctoral advisor Ferdinand Redtenbacher Academic work Discipline mechanical engineering kinematics Institutions Technische Hochschule Berlin Swiss Federal Institute Doctoral students Carl von Linde Notable works Kinematics of Machinery Signature Franz Reuleaux ( French: [ʁœlo] ; German: [ʁøˈloː] ; 30 September 1829 – 20 August 1905) was a German mechanical engineer and a lecturer at Technische Hochschule Berlin (today Technische Universität Berlin ), later appointed as the president of the academy. He was often called the father of kinematics . He was a leader in his profession, contributing to many important domains of science and knowledge.

Today, he may be best remembered for the Reuleaux triangle , a curve of constant width that he helped develop as a useful mechanical form.

Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Reuleaux was born in Eschweiler in Germany (at the time part of Prussia ). His father and grandfather were both mechanical engineers. His technical training was at the Karlsruhe Polytechnic School . He then studied at universities in Berlin and Bonn.

Middle years [ edit ] After a time spent in the family business he became a professor at the Swiss Federal Institute in Zürich . Eventually, in 1879 he became Rector at the Königs Technischen Hochschule Berlin – Charlottenburg. This was a major technical institute, with about 300 professors. He became widely known as an engineer-scientist — a professor and industrial consultant, education reformer and leader of the technical elite of Germany.

Reuleaux was the appointed chairman of the German panel of judges for the Sixth World Industrial Fair opened in Philadelphia on 10 May 1876. He admitted that German-made goods were far inferior to those of other countries and that German industry's guiding principle was “billig und schlecht” ( English : cheap and shoddy).

[ 1 ] This shook business and evoked wide comment in the press.

Reuleaux was a consultant to the development of the Otto-Langen internal combustion engine, winner of the 1867 World's Fair in Paris, France, based on efficiency.

[ 2 ] Reuleaux served on several international juries and commissions and considerably involved in formation of a patent system, as he was active in German politics.

In 1877, he was elected as a member of the American Philosophical Society .

[ 3 ] He was a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences from 1882.

Kinematics [ edit ] Reuleaux believed that machines could be abstracted into chains of elementary links called kinematic pairs . Constraints on the machine are described by constraints on each kinematic pair, and the sequence of movements of pairs produces a kinematic chain .

He developed a compact symbolic notation to describe the topology of a very wide variety of mechanisms, and showed how it could be used to classify them and even lead to the invention of new useful mechanisms. At the expense of the German government, he directed the design and manufacture of over 300 beautiful models of simple mechanisms, such as the four-bar linkage and the crank . These were sold to universities for pedagogical purposes. Today, the most complete set are at Cornell University College of Engineering.

[ 4 ] Using his notation and methods for systematically varying the elements (e.g. inversions, changing relative sizes of the links, etc.) he showed how the four-bar linkage could be mutated into 54 mechanisms, which fall within 12 classes.

Bibliography [ edit ] Kinematics of Machinery (1875), ebook The Constructor (1861) Kurzgefasste Geschichte der Dampfmaschine (1891) Thomassche Rechenmaschine (2d ed. 1892) Notes [ edit ] ^ Andrew Bonnell (August 2001). " 'Cheap and Nasty': German Goods, Socialism, and the 1876 Philadelphia World Fair".

International Review of Social History .

46 (2): 207– 226.

doi : 10.1017/S002085900100013X .

PMID 18574918 .

^ Moon, Francis .

Franz Reuleaux: Contributions to 19th Century Kinematics and Theory of Machines . Cornell University. p. 7.

^ "APS Member History" .

search.amphilsoc.org . Retrieved 2021-05-10 .

^ The kinematic models for design digital library References [ edit ] Bragastini, Roberto Contributo per una interpretazione filosofica dell'opera di Franz Reuleaux , Università degli Studi di Milano (Milan, 2003).

Moon, Francis "Franz Reuleaux: Contributions to 19th Century Kinematics and Theory of Machines".

Moon, Francis C. (2007).

The Machines of Leonardo Da Vinci and Franz Reuleaux, Kinematics of Machines from the Renaissance to the 20th Century . Springer.

ISBN 978-1-4020-5598-0 .

Gilman, D. C.

; Peck, H. T.; Colby, F. M., eds. (1905).

"Reuleaux, Franz" .

New International Encyclopedia (1st ed.). New York: Dodd, Mead.

Further reading [ edit ] Müller-Sievers, Helmut (2012).

The Cylinder: Kinematics of the Nineteenth Century . Berkeley: University of California Press .

ISBN 9780520270770 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Franz Reuleaux .

Kinematic Models for Design Digital Library (KMODDL) Movies and photos of hundreds of working mechanical-systems models at Cornell University. Also includes an e-book library of classic texts on mechanical design and engineering.

Reproductions of Franz Reuleaux's Kinematic Models Modern reproductions of the kinematic models as originally produced.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Latvia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Franz_Reuleaux&oldid=1296428316 " Categories : 1829 births 1905 deaths People from Eschweiler German mechanical engineers Engineers from the Kingdom of Prussia Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Academic staff of ETH Zurich Academic staff of Technische Universität Berlin Engineers from North Rhine-Westphalia International members of the American Philosophical Society Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2013 All articles needing additional references Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA Pages with German IPA Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 23:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Franz Reuleaux 19 languages Add topic

