Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Consortium members 2 Offices 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents University Press of Kentucky 7 languages Deutsch Français Italiano Bahasa Melayu Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scholarly publisher for Kentucky This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "University Press of Kentucky" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) University Press of Kentucky Parent company University of Kentucky Office of the Provost Founded 1949 Founder Thomas D. Clark Country of origin United States Headquarters location Lexington, Kentucky Distribution Hopkins Fulfillment Services (US) [ 1 ] Oxbow Books (UK, Europe, Africa, the Middle East, Asia, the Pacific, Australia and New Zealand) Key people Ashley Runyon, Director Official website kentuckypress.com The University Press of Kentucky ( UPK ) is the scholarly publisher for the Commonwealth of Kentucky , and was organized in 1969 as successor to the University of Kentucky Press. The university had sponsored scholarly publication since 1943. In 1949, the press was established as a separate academic agency under the university president, and the following year Bruce F. Denbo, then of Louisiana State University Press , was appointed as the first full-time professional director. Denbo served as director of UPK until his retirement in 1978, building a small but distinguished list of scholarly books with emphasis on American history and literary criticism.

Since its reorganization, the Press has represented a consortium that now includes all of Kentucky's state universities, seven of its private colleges, and two historical societies. UPK joined the Association of University Presses in 1947.

The press is supported by the Thomas D. Clark Foundation, a private nonprofit foundation established in 1994 for the sole purpose of providing financial support for The University Press of Kentucky. It is named in honor of Thomas D. Clark , Kentucky's historian laureate and the founder of The University Press of Kentucky.

Consortium members [ edit ] Bellarmine University Berea College Centre College Eastern Kentucky University The Filson Historical Society Georgetown College Kentucky Historical Society Kentucky State University Morehead State University Murray State University Northern Kentucky University Spalding University Transylvania University University of Kentucky University of Louisville University of Pikeville Western Kentucky University Each constituent institution is represented on a statewide editorial board, which determines editorial policy.

Offices [ edit ] Offices for the Administrative, Editorial, Production, and Marketing departments are found at the University of Kentucky, which is responsible for the overhead cost of the publishing operation. In 2012, UPK was moved under the aegis of the University of Kentucky Libraries , headed by Dean Terry Birdwhistell.

Bruce F. Denbo, UPK's first director, was succeeded by Kenneth H. Cherry, who came to UPK from the University of Tennessee Press . During his tenure, the size of the press more than quadrupled. Ken Cherry retired in the Fall of 2001, and his successor, Stephen Wrinn, formerly of Rowman & Littlefield Publishers , began as new director in April 2002.

[ 2 ] In August 2016, Leila Salisbury took over as director of the Press.

[ 3 ] Salisbury, who began her career at UPK, had served as director of the University Press of Mississippi since 2008. In 2020, Ashley Runyon, former director of trade publications at Indiana University Press, was named director.

UPK's editorial program focuses on the humanities and the social sciences. Its commitment to film and military studies has earned it a national reputation in recent years. Since the formation of the consortium, the press has broadened its appeal to readers in Kentucky and Appalachia with publications of special regional interest. During the 1970s, it produced the Kentucky Nature Series and the 47-volume Kentucky Bicentennial Bookshelf.

The press publishes classic novels by Kentucky authors including Harriet Arnow , Janice Holt Giles , John Fox, Jr.

, James Still , and Jesse Stuart .

See also [ edit ] Literature portal Kentucky portal List of English-language book publishing companies List of university presses References [ edit ] ^ "For Booksellers" . Retrieved April 11, 2021 .

^ "Notre Dame Newswire" . Retrieved August 18, 2016 .

^ "Leila Salisbury to Lead University Press of Kentucky | UKNow" .

uknow.uky.edu . Retrieved 2016-08-18 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=University_Press_of_Kentucky&oldid=1230278425 " Categories : University presses of the United States Publishing companies established in 1949 Publishing companies established in 1969 1949 establishments in Kentucky 1969 establishments in Kentucky Publishing companies based in Kentucky Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2016 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 21 June 2024, at 19:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents University Press of Kentucky 7 languages Add topic

