Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Upper mevalonate pathway 2 Lower mevalonate pathway 3 Regulation and feedback 4 Pharmacology 5 Diseases 6 Alternative pathway 7 Enzymatic reactions 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Mevalonate pathway 22 languages Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Монгол 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Cholesterol synthesis ) Series of interconnected biochemical reactions Mevalonate pathway diagram showing the conversion of acetyl-CoA into isopentenyl pyrophosphate, the essential building block of all isoprenoids. The eukaryotic variant is shown in black. Archaeal variants are shown in red and blue.

The mevalonate pathway , also known as the isoprenoid pathway or HMG-CoA reductase pathway is an essential metabolic pathway present in eukaryotes , archaea , and some bacteria .

[ 1 ] The pathway produces two five-carbon building blocks called isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAPP), which are used to make isoprenoids , a diverse class of over 30,000 biomolecules such as cholesterol , vitamin K , coenzyme Q10 , and all steroid hormones .

[ 2 ] The mevalonate pathway begins with acetyl-CoA and ends with the production of IPP and DMAPP.

[ 3 ] It is best known as the target of statins , a class of cholesterol lowering drugs. Statins inhibit HMG-CoA reductase within the mevalonate pathway.

Upper mevalonate pathway [ edit ] The mevalonate pathway of eukaryotes, archaea, and eubacteria all begin the same way. The sole carbon feed stock of the pathway is acetyl-CoA. The first step condenses two acetyl-CoA molecules to yield acetoacetyl-CoA . This is followed by a second condensation to form HMG-CoA (3-hydroxy-3- methyl-glutaryl-CoA). Reduction of HMG-CoA yields (R)- mevalonate . These first 3 enzymatic steps are called the upper mevalonate pathway.

[ 4 ] Lower mevalonate pathway [ edit ] The lower mevalonate pathway which converts (R)- mevalonate into IPP and DMAPP has 3 variants. In eukaryotes , mevalonate is phosphorylated twice in the 5-OH position, then decarboxylated to yield IPP.

[ 4 ] In some archaea such as Haloferax volcanii , mevalonate is phosphorylated once in the 5-OH position, decarboxylated to yield isopentenyl phosphate (IP), and finally phosphorylated again to yield IPP (Archaeal Mevalonate Pathway I).

[ 5 ] A third mevalonate pathway variant found in Thermoplasma acidophilum , phosphorylates mevalonate at the 3-OH position followed by phosphorylation at the 5-OH position. The resulting metabolite, mevalonate-3,5-bisphosphate, is decarboxylated to IP, and finally phosphorylated to yield IPP (Archaeal Mevalonate Pathway II).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Regulation and feedback [ edit ] Several key enzymes can be activated through DNA transcriptional regulation on activation of SREBP (sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1 and -2). This intracellular sensor detects low cholesterol levels and stimulates endogenous production by the HMG-CoA reductase pathway, as well as increasing lipoprotein uptake by up-regulating the LDL-receptor . Regulation of this pathway is also achieved by controlling the rate of translation of the mRNA, degradation of reductase and phosphorylation.

[ 1 ] Pharmacology [ edit ] A number of drugs target the mevalonate pathway : Statins (used to decrease cholesterol levels ); Bisphosphonates (used to treat various bone-degenerative diseases such as osteoporosis [ 8 ] ) Diseases [ edit ] A number of diseases affect the mevalonate pathway : Mevalonate Kinase Deficiency Mevalonic Aciduria Hyperimmunoglobulinemia D Syndrome (HIDS).

Alternative pathway [ edit ] Plants , most bacteria , and some protozoa such as malaria parasites have the ability to produce isoprenoids using an alternative pathway called the methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) or non-mevalonate pathway .

[ 9 ] The output of both the mevalonate pathway and the MEP pathway are the same, IPP and DMAPP; however, the enzymatic reactions to convert acetyl-CoA into IPP are entirely different. Interaction between the two metabolic pathways can be studied by using 13 C-glucose isotopomers .

[ 10 ] In higher plants, the MEP pathway operates in plastids while the mevalonate pathway operates in the cytosol .

[ 9 ] Examples of bacteria that contain the MEP pathway include Escherichia coli and pathogens such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis .

Enzymatic reactions [ edit ] Enzyme Reaction Description Acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase Acetyl-CoA ( citric acid cycle ) undergoes condensation with another acetyl-CoA molecule to form acetoacetyl-CoA HMG-CoA synthase Acetoacetyl-CoA condenses with another Acetyl-CoA molecule to form 3- h ydroxy-3- m ethyl g lutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA).

HMG-CoA reductase HMG-CoA is reduced to mevalonate by NADPH . This is the rate limiting step in cholesterol synthesis, which is why this enzyme is a good target for pharmaceuticals ( statins ).

mevalonate-5-kinase Mevalonate is phosphorylated at the 5-OH position to yield mevalonate-5-phosphate (also called phosphomevalonic acid ).

mevalonate-3-kinase Mevalonate is phosphorylated at the 3-OH position to yield mevalonate-3-phosphate . 1 ATP is consumed.

mevalonate-3-phosphate-5-kinase Mevalonate-3-phosphate is phosphorylated at the 5-OH position to yield mevalonate-5-phosphate (also called phosphomevalonic acid ). 1 ATP is consumed.

phosphomevalonate kinase mevalonate-5-phosphate is phosphorylated to yield mevalonate-5-pyrophosphate . 1 ATP is consumed.

mevalonate-5-pyrophosphate decarboxylase Mevalonate-5-pyrophosphate is decarboxylated to yield isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP). 1 ATP is consumed.

isopentenyl pyrophosphate isomerase isopentenyl pyrophosphate is isomerized to dimethylallyl pyrophosphate .

References [ edit ] ^ a b Buhaescu I, Izzedine H (2007) Mevalonate pathway: areview of clinical and therapeutical implications. ClinBiochem 40:575–584.

^ Holstein, S. A., and Hohl, R. J. (2004) Isoprenoids: Remarkable Diversity of Form and Function. Lipids 39, 293−309 ^ Goldstein, J. L., and Brown, S. B. (1990) Regulation of the mevalonate pathway. Nature 343, 425−430 ^ a b Miziorko H (2011) Enzymes of the mevalonate pathway of isoprenoid biosynthesis. Arch Biochem Biophys 505:131-143.

^ Dellas, N., Thomas, S. T., Manning, G., and Noel, J. P. (2013) Discovery of a metabolic alternative to the classical mevalonate pathway. eLife 2, e00672 ^ Vinokur JM, Korman TP, Cao Z, Bowie JU (2014) Evidence of a novel mevalonate pathway in archaea. Biochemistry 53:4161–4168.

^ Azami Y, Hattori A, Nishimura H, Kawaide H, YoshimuraT, Hemmi H (2014) (R)-mevalonate-3-phosphate is an intermediate of the mevalonate pathway in Thermoplasma acidophilum. J Biol Chem 289:15957–15967.

^ Lewiecki, E. Michael (May 2010).

"Bisphosphonates for the treatment of osteoporosis: insights for clinicians" .

Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease .

1 (3): 115– 128.

doi : 10.1177/2040622310374783 .

ISSN 2040-6223 .

PMC 3513863 .

PMID 23251734 .

^ a b Banerjee A, Sharkey TD. (2014) Methylerythritol 4-phosphate (MEP) pathway metabolic regulation. Nat Prod Rep 31:10431055 ^ Orsi E, Beekwilder J, Peek S, Eggink G, Kengen SW, Weusthuis RA (2020).

"Metabolic flux ratio analysis by parallel 13C labeling of isoprenoid biosynthesis in Rhodobacter sphaeroides " .

Metabolic Engineering .

57 : 228– 238.

doi : 10.1016/j.ymben.2019.12.004 .

PMID 31843486 .

External links [ edit ] Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute page on cholesterol synthesis (including regulation) v t e Metabolism : lipid metabolism – ketones / cholesterol synthesis enzymes / steroid metabolism Mevalonate pathway To HMG-CoA Acetyl-Coenzyme A acetyltransferase HMG-CoA synthase (regulated step) Ketogenesis HMG-CoA lyase 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase Thiophorase To Mevalonic acid HMG-CoA reductase To DMAPP Mevalonate kinase Phosphomevalonate kinase Pyrophosphomevalonate decarboxylase Isopentenyl-diphosphate delta isomerase Geranyl- Dimethylallyltranstransferase Geranyl pyrophosphate To cholesterol To lanosterol Farnesyl-diphosphate farnesyltransferase Squalene monooxygenase Lanosterol synthase 7-Dehydrocholesterol path Lanosterol 14α-demethylase Sterol-C5-desaturase-like 7-Dehydrocholesterol reductase Desmosterol path 24-Dehydrocholesterol reductase To Bile acids Cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase Sterol 27-hydroxylase Steroidogenesis To pregnenolone Cholesterol side-chain cleavage To corticosteroids aldosterone : 18-Hydroxylase cortisol / cortisone : 17α-Hydroxylase 11β- HSD 1 2 both: 3β- HSD 1 2 21-Hydroxylase 11β-Hydroxylase To sex hormones To androgens 17α-Hydroxylase 17,20-Lyase 3β- HSD 17β- HSD 5α-Reductase 1 2 To estrogens Aromatase 17β- HSD Other/ungrouped Steroid metabolism : sulfatase Steroid sulfatase sulfotransferase SULT1A1 SULT2A1 Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein Cholesterol total synthesis Reverse cholesterol transport v t e Metabolism map Carbon fixation Photo- respiration Pentose phosphate pathway Citric acid cycle Glyoxylate cycle Urea cycle Fatty acid synthesis Fatty acid elongation Beta oxidation Peroxisomal beta oxidation Glyco- genolysis Glyco- genesis Glyco- lysis Gluconeo- genesis Pyruvate decarb- oxylation Fermentation Keto- lysis Keto- genesis feeders to gluconeo- genesis Direct / C4 / CAM carbon intake Light reaction Oxidative phosphorylation Amino acid deamination Citrate shuttle Lipogenesis Lipolysis Steroidogenesis MVA pathway MEP pathway Shikimate pathway Transcription & replication Translation Proteolysis Glycosyl- ation Sugar acids Double / multiple sugars & glycans Simple sugars Inositol-P Amino sugars & sialic acids Nucleotide sugars Hexose-P Triose-P Glycerol P-glycerates Pentose-P Tetrose-P Propionyl -CoA Succinate Acetyl -CoA Pentose-P P-glycerates Glyoxylate Photosystems Pyruvate Lactate Acetyl -CoA Citrate Oxalo- acetate Malate Succinyl -CoA α-Keto- glutarate Ketone bodies Respiratory chain Serine group Alanine Branched-chain amino acids Aspartate group Homoserine group & lysine Glutamate group & proline Arginine Creatine & polyamines Ketogenic & glucogenic amino acids Amino acids Shikimate Aromatic amino acids & histidine Ascorbate ( vitamin C ) δ-ALA Bile pigments Hemes Cobalamins ( vitamin B 12 ) Various vitamin Bs Calciferols ( vitamin D ) Retinoids ( vitamin A ) Quinones ( vitamin K ) & tocopherols ( vitamin E ) Cofactors Vitamins & minerals Antioxidants PRPP Nucleotides Nucleic acids Proteins Glycoproteins & proteoglycans Chlorophylls MEP MVA Acetyl -CoA Polyketides Terpenoid backbones Terpenoids & carotenoids ( vitamin A ) Cholesterol Bile acids Glycero- phospholipids Glycerolipids Acyl-CoA Fatty acids Glyco- sphingolipids Sphingolipids Waxes Polyunsaturated fatty acids Neurotransmitters & thyroid hormones Steroids Endo- cannabinoids Eicosanoids Major metabolic pathways in metro-style map . Click any text (name of pathway or metabolites) to link to the corresponding article.

Single lines: pathways common to most lifeforms. Double lines: pathways not in humans (occurs in e.g. plants, fungi, prokaryotes).

Orange nodes: carbohydrate metabolism .

Violet nodes: photosynthesis .

Red nodes: cellular respiration .

Pink nodes: cell signaling .

Blue nodes: amino acid metabolism .

Grey nodes: vitamin and cofactor metabolism.

Brown nodes: nucleotide and protein metabolism.

Green nodes: lipid metabolism .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mevalonate_pathway&oldid=1301640329 " Category : Metabolic pathways Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 23:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mevalonate pathway 22 languages Add topic

