Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Education 3 Later life 4 Philosophical work and publications 5 Legacy 6 In popular culture 7 Awards 8 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 8.1 Posthumous edited/selected works 8.2 The Works of George Santayana 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents George Santayana 46 languages Afrikaans العربية অসমীয়া Беларуская Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gàidhlig 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Latviešu Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish-American philosopher (1863–1952) "Santayana" redirects here. For the surname, see Santayana (surname) .

In this Spanish name , the first or paternal surname is Ruiz de Santayana and the second or maternal family name is Borrás .

George Santayana Santayana on the cover of a 1936 issue of Time magazine Born Jorge Agustín Nicolás Ruiz de Santayana y Borrás ( 1863-12-16 ) December 16, 1863 Madrid , Spain Died September 26, 1952 (1952-09-26) (aged 88) Rome , Italy Education Education Harvard University ( AB , PhD ) King's College, Cambridge Doctoral advisor Josiah Royce Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Pragmatism naturalism Notable students Jacob Loewenberg , [ 1 ] Conrad Aiken , T. S. Eliot , Horace Kallen , Walter Lippmann , W. E. B. Du Bois , Edward Rand , Alain Locke , Van Wyck Brooks , Learned Hand , Felix Frankfurter , Max Eastman , Gertrude Stein , Wallace Stevens Main interests Moral philosophy political philosophy epistemology metaphysics philosophy of religion Notable ideas Lucretian materialism Skepticism Natural aristocracy Realms of Being Signature This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Part of a series on Conservatism in Spain Ideologies Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism Sociological National Catholicism Integrism Maurism Mellismo Neocatólicos Noucentisme Spanish nationalism Traditionalism Principles Anti-communism Anti-Masonry Authority Familialism Family values Hispanidad Honour Spain Monarchy Patriotism Social hierarchy Spanish unionism Tradition History Spanish Empire Carlist Wars Bourbon Restoration 1923 Spanish coup d'état Dictatorship of Primo de Rivera Spanish Civil War Bando nacional White Terror Francoist Spain Búnker 20-N Intellectuals Albiñana Balmes Bleiberg Cela Donoso Cortés Entralgo Gonzalo Fernández de la Mora Gambra Gambra Gutiérrez Gaos Gil Robles Hervás de Maeztu Maravall Marías Menéndez d'Ors (Álvaro) Ortega y Gasset Panero Pradera Roca Barea Santayana de Tejada de Unamuno Vigón Vidal Vázquez de Mella Zubiri Literature Liberalism Is a Sin (1884) The Dehumanization of Art (1925) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The New State (1935) Manifesto Against the Death of the Spirit and the Earth (2002) Politicians Abascal Ayuso Aznar Casado Carrero Donoso Cortés Cosidó Fal Fernández-Miranda Fraga Franco Gambra Gil-Robles Girón Goicoechea González-Camino Marhuenda Maura Navarro Pérez Piñar Pradera Rajoy de Rivera Rodezno Ruiz-Jarabo Serrano Solana González-Camino de Tejada Tejero Utrera Valiente Vázquez de Mella Commentators Aznar Zubigaray Franco (Carmen) Losantos Marhuenda Torres d'Ors (Eugenio) Pemán Dalí Parties Active' Navarrese People's Union (UPN) People's Party (PP) Spanish Catholic Movement (MCE) Vox Workers' Front Defunct CEDA Conservative Party Democratic Union of Catalonia FET y de las JONS (factions) Liberal Republican Right New Force Patriotic Union People's Alliance Popular Action Regionalist League of Catalonia Spanish Renovation Traditionalist Communion Organisations Acción Española CitizenGo FAES Francisco Franco National Foundation Madrid Forum Movimiento Nacional (factions) Requeté Media ABC Arriba Época El Alcázar Heraldo de Aragón La Razón Revista Contemporánea Revista de Occidente Telva Trece Related topics Art and culture Immigration and crime Peronism Politics of Spain Liberalism Spanish irredentism Iberism Conservatism portal Spain portal v t e George Santayana (born Jorge Agustín Nicolás Ruiz de Santayana y Borrás , December 16, 1863 – September 26, 1952) was a Spanish philosopher , essayist , poet , and novelist .

[ 2 ] Born in Spain , he moved to the United States at the age of eight.

As a philosopher, Santayana is known for aphorisms , such as "Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it", [ 3 ] and "Only the dead have seen the end of war", [ 4 ] and his definition of beauty as " Pleasure objectified ".

[ 5 ] Although an atheist , Santayana valued the culture of the Spanish Catholic values, practices, and worldview, in which he was raised.

[ 6 ] As an intellectual , George Santayana was a broad-range cultural critic in several academic disciplines.

At the age of 48, he left his academic position at Harvard University and permanently returned to Europe; his last will was to be buried in the Spanish Pantheon in the Campo di Verano , Rome.

Early life [ edit ] George Santayana was born on December 16, 1863, in Calle de San Bernardo of Madrid and spent his early childhood in Ávila , Spain. His mother Josefina Borrás was the daughter of a Spanish official in the Philippines and he was the only child of her second marriage.

[ 7 ] Josefina Borrás' first husband was George Sturgis, a Boston merchant with the Manila firm Russell & Sturgis. She had five children with him; two of them died in infancy. She lived in Boston for a few years following her husband's death in 1857; in 1861, she moved with her three surviving children to Madrid. There she encountered Agustín Ruiz de Santayana, an old friend from her years in the Philippines. They married in 1862. A colonial civil servant , Ruiz de Santayana was a painter and minor intellectual . The family lived in Madrid and Ávila, and Jorge was born in Spain in 1863.

In 1869, Josefina Borrás de Santayana returned to Boston with her three Sturgis children, because she had promised her first husband to raise the children in the US. She left the six-year-old Jorge with his father in Spain. Jorge and his father followed her to Boston in 1872. His father, finding neither Boston nor his wife's attitude to his liking, soon returned alone to Ávila, and remained there the rest of his life. Jorge did not see him again until he entered Harvard College and began to take his summer vacations in Spain. Although Santayana was raised and educated in the United States from the age of eight and identified as an American, he always retained a valid Spanish passport .

[ 8 ] Sometime during this period, his first name Jorge was anglicized to its English equivalent: George.

Education [ edit ] Santayana lived in Hollis Hall as a student at Harvard .

Santayana attended Boston Latin School and Harvard College , where he studied under the philosophers William James and Josiah Royce and was involved in eleven clubs.

[ 9 ] He was founder and president of the Philosophical Club, a member of the literary society known as the O.K., an editor and cartoonist for The Harvard Lampoon , he joined one of Harvard's "Final Clubs" , the Delphic Club , and co-founded the literary journal The Harvard Monthly .

[ 10 ] In December, 1885, he played the role of Lady Elfrida in the Hasty Pudding theatrical Robin Hood , followed by the production Papillonetta in the spring of his senior year.

[ 11 ] He received his A.B.

summa cum laude in 1886 and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa student fraternity.

[ 9 ] [ 12 ] In 1886, Santayana studied for two years in Berlin .

[ 13 ] He then returned to Harvard to write his dissertation on Hermann Lotze (1889).

[ 14 ] He was a professor at Harvard from 1889 to 1912, [ 7 ] becoming part of the Golden Age of The Harvard University Department of Philosophy . Some of his Harvard students became famous in their own right, including Conrad Aiken , W. E. B. Du Bois , T. S. Eliot , Robert Frost , Horace Kallen , Walter Lippmann and Gertrude Stein .

Wallace Stevens was not among his students but became a friend.

[ 15 ] From 1896 to 1897, Santayana studied at King's College, Cambridge .

[ 16 ] Later life [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "George Santayana" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Santayana early in his career Santayana never married. His romantic life, if any, is not well understood. Some evidence, including a comment Santayana made late in life comparing himself to A. E. Housman , and his friendships with people who were openly homosexual and bisexual , has led scholars to speculate that Santayana was perhaps homosexual or bisexual, but it remains unclear whether he had any actual heterosexual or homosexual relationships.

[ 17 ] Some historians would disagree with this assessment. For example, Santayana's biographer concluded that he had "an intense physical affair" with Frank Russell, 2nd Earl Russell , older brother to philosopher Bertrand Russell .

[ 18 ] The historian Douglass Shand-Tucci included an extensive discussion of Santayana's sexuality in his book on Boston's homosexual subculture in the late 19th century.

[ 19 ] In 1912, Santayana resigned his position at Harvard to spend the rest of his life in Europe.

[ 9 ] He had saved money and been aided by a legacy from his mother. After some years in Ávila , Paris and Oxford , after 1920, he began to winter in Rome , eventually living there year-round until his death. During his 40 years in Europe, he wrote 19 books and declined several prestigious academic positions. Many of his visitors and correspondents were Americans, including his assistant and eventual literary executor, Daniel Cory . In later life, Santayana was financially comfortable, in part because his 1935 novel, The Last Puritan , had become an unexpected best-seller . In turn, he financially assisted a number of writers, including Bertrand Russell , with whom he was in fundamental disagreement, philosophically and politically.

Santayana's one novel, The Last Puritan , is a Bildungsroman , centering on the personal growth of its protagonist , Oliver Alden. His Persons and Places is an autobiography . These works also contain many of his sharper opinions and bons mots . He wrote books and essays on a wide range of subjects, including philosophy of a less technical sort, literary criticism , the history of ideas , politics, human nature , morals, the influence of religion on culture and social psychology , all with considerable wit and humour.

While his writings on technical philosophy can be difficult, his other writings are more accessible and pithy. He wrote poems and a few plays, and left ample correspondence, much of it published only since 2000. Like Alexis de Tocqueville , Santayana observed American culture and character from a foreigner's point of view. Like William James , his friend and mentor, he wrote philosophy in a literary way.

Ezra Pound includes Santayana among his many cultural references in The Cantos , notably in " Canto LXXXI" and "Canto XCV". Santayana is usually considered an American writer, although he declined to become an American citizen, resided in Fascist Italy for decades, and said that he was most comfortable, intellectually and aesthetically , at Oxford University . Although an atheist , Santayana considered himself an " aesthetic Catholic " and spent the last decade of his life in Rome under the care of Catholic nuns .

[ 9 ] In 1941, he entered a hospital and convent run by the Little Company of Mary (also known as the Blue Nuns ) on the Celian Hill at 6 Via Santo Stefano Rotondo in Rome, where he was cared for by the sisters until his death in September 1952.

[ 20 ] Upon his death, he did not want to be buried in consecrated land, which made his burial problematic in Italy. Finally, the Spanish consulate in Rome agreed that he be buried in the Pantheon of the Obra Pía Española, in the Campo Verano cemetery in Rome.

[ 9 ] Philosophical work and publications [ edit ] Santayana's main philosophical work consists of The Sense of Beauty (1896), his first book-length monograph and perhaps the first major work on aesthetics written in the United States; The Life of Reason (5 vols., 1905–06), the high point of his Harvard career; Scepticism and Animal Faith (1923); and The Realms of Being (4 vols., 1927–1940). Although Santayana was not a pragmatist in the mold of William James , Charles Sanders Peirce , Josiah Royce , or John Dewey , The Life of Reason arguably is the first extended treatment of pragmatism written.

Like many of the classical pragmatists, Santayana was committed to metaphysical naturalism . He believed that human cognition , cultural practices, and social institutions have evolved so as to harmonize with the conditions present in their environment. Their value may then be adjudged by the extent to which they facilitate human happiness. The alternate title to The Life of Reason , "the Phases of Human Progress", is indicative of this metaphysical stance.

Santayana was an early adherent of epiphenomenalism , but also admired the classical materialism of Democritus and Lucretius . (Of the three authors on whom he wrote in Three Philosophical Poets , Santayana speaks most favorably of Lucretius). He held Spinoza 's writings in high regard, calling him his "master and model".

[ 21 ] Although an atheist , [ 22 ] [ 23 ] he held a fairly benign view of religion and described himself as an "aesthetic Catholic". Santayana's views on religion are outlined in his books Reason in Religion , The Idea of Christ in the Gospels , and Interpretations of Poetry and Religion .

He held racial supremacist and eugenic views. He believed superior races should be discouraged from "intermarriage with inferior stock".

[ 24 ] Legacy [ edit ] Santayana's famous aphorism "Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it" is inscribed on a plaque at the Auschwitz concentration camp in Polish translation and English back-translation (above), and on a subway placard in Germany (below).

Santayana is remembered in large part for his aphorisms , many of which have been so frequently used as to have become clichéd . His philosophy has not fared quite as well. He is regarded by most as an excellent prose stylist, and John Lachs (who is sympathetic with much of Santayana's philosophy) writes, in On Santayana , that his eloquence may ironically be the very cause of this neglect.

Santayana influenced those around him, including Bertrand Russell , whom Santayana single-handedly steered away from the ethics of G. E. Moore .

[ 25 ] He also influenced many prominent people such as Harvard students T. S. Eliot , Robert Frost , Gertrude Stein , Horace Kallen , Walter Lippmann , W. E. B. Du Bois , Conrad Aiken , Van Wyck Brooks , Felix Frankfurter , Max Eastman , and Wallace Stevens . Stevens was especially influenced by Santayana's aesthetics and became a friend even though Stevens did not take courses taught by Santayana.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Santayana is quoted by the Canadian-American sociologist Erving Goffman as a central influence in the thesis of his famous book The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (1959). Religious historian Jerome A. Stone credits Santayana with contributing to the early thinking in the development of religious naturalism .

[ 29 ] English mathematician and philosopher Alfred North Whitehead quotes Santayana extensively in his magnum opus Process and Reality (1929).

[ 30 ] Chuck Jones used Santayana's description of fanaticism as "redoubling your effort after you've forgotten your aim" to describe his cartoons starring Wile E. Coyote and Road Runner .

[ 31 ] Along with Wendell Phillips and John F. Kennedy , Santayana is quoted on a military plaque at Veterans Memorial Park in Rhome , Texas .

In popular culture [ edit ] Santayana's passing is referenced in the lyrics to singer-songwriter Billy Joel 's 1989 single " We Didn't Start the Fire ".

[ 32 ] Santayana’s quotes about fanaticism and forgetting the past are mentioned in the Batman: The Animated Series episode “Appointment in Crime Alley.” The quote "Only the dead have seen the end of war" is frequently attributed or misattributed to Plato ; an early example of this misattribution (if it is indeed misattributed) is found in General Douglas MacArthur 's Farewell Speech given to the Corps of Cadets at West Point in 1962.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Awards [ edit ] Royal Society of Literature Benson Medal , 1925.

[ 35 ] Columbia University Butler Gold Medal, 1945.

[ 36 ] Honorary degree from the University of Wisconsin, 1911.

[ 37 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Santayana's Reason in Common Sense was published in five volumes between 1905 and 1906 (this edition is from 1920).

Although schooled in German idealism , Santayana was critical of it and made an effort to distance himself from its epistemology .

1894.

Sonnets and Other Verses .

1896.

The Sense of Beauty: Being the Outline of Aesthetic Theory .

1899.

Lucifer: A Theological Tragedy .

1900.

Interpretations of Poetry and Religion .

1901.

A Hermit of Carmel and Other Poems .

1905–1906.

The Life of Reason: The Phases of Human Progress , 5 vols.

1910.

Three Philosophical Poets: Lucretius, Dante, and Goethe .

1913.

Winds of Doctrine: Studies in Contemporary Opinion .

1915.

Egotism in German Philosophy .

1920.

Character and Opinion in the United States: With Reminiscences of William James and Josiah Royce and Academic Life in America .

1920.

Little Essays, Drawn From the Writings of George Santayana, by Logan Pearsall Smith, with the Collaboration of the Author .

1922.

Soliloquies in England and Later Soliloquies .

1922.

Poems .

1923.

Scepticism and Animal Faith: Introduction to a System of Philosophy .

1926.

Dialogues in Limbo 1927.

Platonism and the Spiritual Life .

1927–40.

The Realms of Being , 4 vols.

1931.

The Genteel Tradition at Bay .

1933.

Some Turns of Thought in Modern Philosophy: Five Essays 1935.

The Last Puritan: A Memoir in the Form of a Novel .

1936.

Obiter Scripta: Lectures, Essays and Reviews .

Justus Buchler and Benjamin Schwartz, eds.

1944.

Persons and Places .

1945.

The Middle Span .

1946.

The Idea of Christ in the Gospels; or, God in Man: A Critical Essay .

1948.

Dialogues in Limbo, With Three New Dialogues .

1951.

Dominations and Powers: Reflections on Liberty, Society, and Government .

1953.

My Host The World Posthumous edited/selected works [ edit ] 1955.

The Letters of George Santayana . Daniel Cory, ed. Charles Scribner's Sons. New York. (296 letters) 1956.

Essays in Literary Criticism of George Santayana .

Irving Singer , ed.

1957.

The Idler and His Works, and Other Essays . Daniel Cory, ed.

1967.

The Genteel Tradition: Nine Essays by George Santayana . Douglas L. Wilson, ed.

1967.

George Santayana's America: Essays on Literature and Culture . James Ballowe, ed.

1967.

Animal Faith and Spiritual Life: Previously Unpublished and Uncollected Writings by George Santayana With Critical Essays on His Thought . John Lachs, ed.

1968.

Santayana on America: Essays, Notes, and Letters on American Life, Literature, and Philosophy . Richard Colton Lyon, ed.

1968.

Selected Critical Writings of George Santayana , 2 vols. Norman Henfrey, ed.

1969.

Physical Order and Moral Liberty: Previously Unpublished Essays of George Santayana . John and Shirley Lachs, eds.

1979.

The Complete Poems of George Santayana: A Critical Edition . Edited, with an introduction, by W. G. Holzberger. Bucknell University Press.

1995.

The Birth of Reason and Other Essays . Daniel Cory, ed., with an Introduction by Herman J. Saatkamp, Jr. Columbia Univ. Press.

2009.

The Essential Santayana. Selected Writings Edited by the Santayana Edition, Compiled and with an introduction by Martin A. Coleman. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

2009.

The Genteel Tradition in American Philosophy and Character and Opinion in the United States (Rethinking the Western Tradition) , Edited and with an introduction by James Seaton and contributions by Wilfred M. McClay , John Lachs , Roger Kimball and James Seaton Yale University Press.

2021.

Recently Discovered Letters of George Santayana / Cartas recién descubiertas de George Santayana , Edited and with an introduction by Daniel Pinkas translated by Daniel Moreno , and a Prologue by José Beltrán .

The Works of George Santayana [ edit ] Unmodernized, critical editions of George Santayana's published and unpublished writing.

The Works is edited by the Santayana Edition and published by The MIT Press.

1986.

Persons and Places . Santayana's autobiography, incorporating Persons and Places , 1944; The Middle Span , 1945; and My Host the World , 1953.

1988 (1896).

The Sense of Beauty: Being the Outline of Aesthetic Theory .

1990 (1900).

Interpretations of Poetry and Religion .

1994 (1935).

The Last Puritan: A Memoir in the Form of a Novel .

The Letters of George Santayana . Containing over 3,000 of his letters, many discovered posthumously, to more than 350 recipients.

2001.

Book One, 1868–1909 .

2001.

Book Two, 1910–1920 .

2002.

Book Three, 1921–1927 .

2003.

Book Four, 1928–1932 .

2003.

Book Five, 1933–1936 .

2004.

Book Six, 1937–1940 .

2006.

Book Seven, 1941–1947 .

2008.

Book Eight, 1948–1952 .

2011.

George Santayana's Marginalia: A Critical Selection , Books 1 and 2. Compiled by John O. McCormick and edited by Kristine W. Frost.

The Life of Reason in five books.

2011 (1905).

Reason in Common Sense .

2013 (1905).

Reason in Society .

2014 (1905).

Reason in Religion .

2015 (1905).

Reason in Art .

2016 (1906).

Reason in Science .

2019 (1910).

Three Philosophical Poets: Lucretius, Dante, and Goethe, Critical Edition , Edited by Kellie Dawson and David E. Spiech, with an introduction by James Seaton 2023 (1913).

Winds of Doctrine, Critical Edition , Edited by David E Spiech, Martin A. Coleman and Faedra Lazar Weiss, with an introduction by Paul Forster See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Poetry portal Biography portal American philosophy List of American philosophers Scientistic materialism References [ edit ] ^ Shook, John R. (ed.), The Dictionary of Modern American Philosophers , Continuum, 2005, p. 1499.

^ "the definition of Santayana" . dictionary.com.

Archived from the original on November 23, 2018 . Retrieved May 7, 2016 .

^ Santayana, George (1905) Reason in Common Sense , p. 284, volume 1 of The Life of Reason .

^ Santayana, George (1922) Soliloquies in England and Later Soliloquies , number 25.

^ "Beauty as Intrinsic Pleasure by George Santayana" . Archived from the original on April 26, 2018 . Retrieved June 15, 2016 .

^ Lovely, Edward W. (September 28, 2012).

George Santayana's Philosophy of Religion: His Roman Catholic Influences and Phenomenology . Lexington Books. pp. 1, 204– 206.

^ a b "George Santayana" at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Archived February 16, 2018, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved April 25, 2021 ^ Santayana, George, "Apologia Pro Mente Sua", in P. A. Schilpp, The Philosophy of George Santayana (1940), 603.

^ a b c d e "George Santayana | Spanish-American Philosopher & Poet | Britannica" .

Archived from the original on August 29, 2019 . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Parri, Alice Two Harvard Friends: Charles Loeser and George Santayana [1] Archived September 25, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ Garrison, Lloyd McKim, An Illustrated History of the Hasty Pudding Club Theatricals , Cambridge, Hasty Pudding Club, 1897.

^ Who Belongs To Phi Beta Kappa Archived January 3, 2012, at the Wayback Machine , Phi Beta Kappa website, accessed October 4, 2009 ^ "Santayana, George" .

Who's Who . Vol. 59. 1907. p. 1555.

^ George Santayana, Lotze's system of philosophy , Ph.D., 1889 ^ Lensing, George S. (1986). Wallace Stevens: A Poet's Growth. LSU Press. 313 pp.

ISBN 0807112976 . pp. 12–13.

^ "Santayana, George (SNTN896G)" .

A Cambridge Alumni Database . University of Cambridge.

^ Saatkamp, Herman; Coleman, Martin (January 1, 2014). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on March 18, 2019 . Retrieved April 8, 2017 – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ John McCormick (1987).

George Santayana . Paragon, NY. p. 119.

^ Douglass Shand-Tucci (1995).

Boston Bohemia:1881-1900 . University of Massachusetts Press. p. 210.

^ "George Santayana, 88, Dies in Rome" .

Harvard Crimson death notice of September 29, 1952.

Archived November 16, 2016, at the Wayback Machine . See also Harold Kirker (Fall 1990), "Santayana in Rome", Bulletin of the Santayana Society , pp. 35–37 for Kirker's wartime visit with Santayana in Rome.

^ George Santayana (1948–1952), The Letters of George Santayana , Book Eight, p. 8:39 ^ "My atheism, like that of Spinoza, is true piety towards the universe, and denies only gods fashioned by men in their own image, to be servants of their human interests." George Santayana, "On My Friendly Critics", in Soliloquies in England and Later Soliloquies , 1922 (from Rawson's Dictionary of American Quotations via credoreference.com). Accessed August 1, 2008.

^ "Santayana playfully called himself 'a Catholic atheist', but in spite of the fact that he deliberately immersed himself in the stream of Catholic religious life, he never took the sacraments. He neither literally regarded himself as a Catholic nor did Catholics regard him as a Catholic." Kai Nielsen (July 1974), " Empiricism , Theoretical Constructs, and God", The Journal of Religion , Vol. 54, No. 3, pp. 199–217 (p. 205), published by The University of Chicago Press.

^ Santayana, George (November 26, 2015).

"The Life of Reason: Human Understanding" .

^ Michael K. Potter.

Bertrand Russell's Ethics . London and New York: Continuum, 2006. Pp. xiii, 185.

ISBN 0826488102 , p.4 ^ Lensing, George S. (1986).

Wallace Stevens: A Poet's Growth . LSU Press. 313 pp.

ISBN 0807112976 . p.12-23.

^ "Stevens, Wallace" . Archived from the original on July 25, 2013 . Retrieved January 7, 2014 .

^ Saatkamp, Herman, " George Santayana Archived December 2, 2013, at the Wayback Machine " The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2010 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.) ^ Religious Naturalism Today , pp. 21–37 ^ Whitehead, A.N. (1929).

Process and Reality. An Essay in Cosmology. Gifford Lectures Delivered in the University of Edinburgh During the Session 1927–1928 , Macmillan, New York, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.

^ See the sixth paragraph, That's Not All, Folks! "Of course you know this means war." Who said it?

, by Terry Teachout, The Wall Street Journal, November 25, 2003, (Archived at WebCite ).

^ We Didn't Start the Fire Archived May 6, 2021, at the Wayback Machine . BillyJoel.com. Retrieved September 25, 2016.

^ SUZANNE, Bernard F.

"Plato FAQ: Did Plato write :"Only the dead have seen the end of war"?" .

plato-dialogues.org .

Archived from the original on October 18, 2018 . Retrieved April 29, 2018 .

^ "Who Really Said That?" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . September 16, 2013.

Archived from the original on June 25, 2018 . Retrieved April 29, 2018 .

^ "The Benson Medal" . Archived from the original on September 18, 2013 . Retrieved January 7, 2014 .

^ George Santayana; William G. Holzberger (Editor). (2006).

The Letters of George Santayana, Book Seven, 1941–1947 . (MIT Press (MA), Hardcover, 9780262195560, 569pp.) (p. 143).

^ "University Lectures – Secretary of the Faculty" . Archived from the original on September 28, 2013.

Further reading [ edit ] W. Arnett, 1955.

Santayana and the Sense of Beauty , Bloomington, Indiana University Press.

H. T. Kirby-Smith , 1997.

A Philosophical Novelist: George Santayana and the Last Puritan . Southern Illinois University Press.

Jeffers, Thomas L., 2005.

Apprenticeships: The Bildungsroman from Goethe to Santayana . New York: Palgrave: 159–84.

Lamont, Corliss (ed., with the assistance of Mary Redmer), 1959.

Dialogue on George Santayana . New York: Horizon Press.

McCormick, John, 1987.

George Santayana: A Biography . Alfred A. Knopf.

The biography.

Padrón, Charles and Skowroński, Krzysztof Piotr, eds. 2018.

The Life of Reason in an Age of Terrorism Archived December 3, 2024, at the Wayback Machine , Leiden-Boston: Brill.

Saatkamp, Herman 2021, A Life of Scholarship with Santayana Archived July 13, 2024, at the Wayback Machine , edited by Charles Padrón and Krzysztof Piotr Skowroński, Leiden-Boston: Brill.

Singer, Irving , 2000.

George Santayana, Literary Philosopher . Yale University Press.

Skowroński, Krzysztof Piotr, 2007.

Santayana and America: Values, Liberties, Responsibility Archived February 12, 2023, at the Wayback Machine , Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.

Flamm, Matthew Caleb and Skowroński, Krzysztof Piotr (eds), 2007.

Under Any Sky: Contemporary Readings of George Santayana Archived February 12, 2023, at the Wayback Machine . Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.

Miguel Alfonso, Ricardo (ed.), 2010, La estética de George Santayana , Madrid: Verbum.

Patella, Giuseppe, Belleza, arte y vida. La estética mediterranea de George Santayana , Valencia, PUV, 2010, pp. 212.

ISBN 978-84-370-7734-5 .

Pérez Firmat, Gustavo .

Tongue Ties: Logo-Eroticism in Anglo-Hispanic Literature . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.

Moreno, Daniel .

Santayana the Philosopher: Philosophy as a Form of Life . Lewisburg: Bucknell University Press, 2015. Translated by Charles Padron.

Kremplewska, Katarzyna.

George Santayana's Political Hermeneutics . Brill, 2022.

External links [ edit ] George Santayana at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Critical Edition of the Works of George Santayana Works by George Santayana at Project Gutenberg Works by George Santayana at Faded Page (Canada) Works by or about George Santayana at the Internet Archive Saatkamp, Herman.

"George Santayana" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Includes a complete bibliography of the primary literature, and a fair selection of the secondary literature Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy : "George Santayana" by Matthew C. Flamm The Santayana Edition Archived June 29, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Works by George Santayana at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Overheard in Seville Archived December 11, 2013, at the Wayback Machine : Bulletin of the Santayana Society On George Santayana Archived August 18, 2011, at the Wayback Machine : Spanish-English Blog about Santayana.

LIMBO. BOLETÍN INTERNACIONAL SOBRE SANTAYANA Spanish-English Bulletin about Santayana Archived August 18, 2011, at the Wayback Machine "George Santayana: Catholic Atheist" by Richard Butler in Spirituality Today , Vol. 38 (Winter 1986), p. 319 George Santayana at Find a Grave George Santayana, "Many Nations in One Empire" (1934) v t e George Santayana Works The Sense of Beauty (1896) The Life of Reason (1905–1906) Scepticism and Animal Faith (1923) The Last Puritan (1935) The Realms of Being (1942) v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=George_Santayana&oldid=1304914408 " Categories : 1863 births 1952 deaths 19th-century atheists 19th-century American essayists 19th-century American male writers 19th-century American non-fiction writers 19th-century American novelists 19th-century American philosophers 19th-century American poets 19th-century Spanish male writers 19th-century Spanish novelists 19th-century Spanish poets 20th-century atheists 20th-century American essayists 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American novelists 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century American poets 20th-century male writers 20th-century Spanish male writers 20th-century Spanish novelists 20th-century Spanish philosophers 20th-century Spanish poets Alumni of King's College, Cambridge American atheists American autobiographers American ethicists American logicians American male essayists American male non-fiction writers American male novelists American male poets American memoirists American people of Catalan descent American skeptics Aphorists Atheist philosophers Boston Latin School alumni Deaths from cancer in Lazio Deaths from stomach cancer in Italy Epistemologists Former Roman Catholics Harvard College alumni The Harvard Lampoon alumni Harvard University Department of Philosophy faculty Materialists Metaphilosophers Metaphysicians Metaphysics writers Novelists from Massachusetts Ontologists Writers from Rome Phenomenologists Philosophers of art Philosophers of culture American philosophers of education Philosophers of history Philosophers of literature Philosophers of logic Philosophers of mind Philosophers of religion Philosophers of sexuality Spanish political philosophers Pragmatists Rationalists Social philosophers Spanish atheists Spanish autobiographers Spanish emigrants to the United States Spanish essayists Spanish ethicists Spanish male non-fiction writers Spanish male novelists Spanish male poets Spanish memoirists Spanish people of Catalan descent Spanish poets Writers from Boston Writers from Madrid Burials at Campo Verano Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2023 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Articles needing additional references from May 2022 All articles needing additional references Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 23:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents George Santayana 46 languages Add topic

