Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Leadership 2 Past presidents 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organization of private US colleges and universities This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities Formation 1976 ; 49 years ago ( 1976 ) Type Education policy nonprofit Tax ID no.

52-1125164 Legal status 501(c)(3) Headquarters 1025 Connecticut Avenue , N.W., Suite 700, Washington D.C.

, U.S.

Location United States Membership 1000+ Key people Barbara K. Mistick , president Staff 20 Website https://www.naicu.edu The National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities ( NAICU ) is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) located in Washington D.C. It is an organization of private American colleges and universities. Founded in 1976, [ 1 ] it is made up of over 1,000 independent higher education institutions.

NAICU staff meets with policymakers, helps coordinate the joint activities of state-level private college associations, and advises members of legislative and regulatory developments with potential impact on their institutions.

NAICU has three main federal advocacy goals.

[ 2 ] First, to ensure that federal student aid programs help to provide all Americans with access to the college of their choice. Second, to seek appropriate regulation of private colleges and universities that is sensitive to their diversity and independence while addressing society's needs. And third, to promote tax policies that help families pay for college and also helps private colleges fulfill their distinctive missions.

In addition, NAICU works cooperatively with its fellow presidential associations, as well as the many other specialized higher education associations, in spearheading major public initiatives. Such projects include: the Student Aid Alliance, an effort to enhance funding for existing student aid programs; the non-partisan National Campus Voter Registration Project that helps colleges and universities encourage voter registration and increase voter education in presidential and congressional elections; and CampusCares, a national campaign to recognize the community service performed by millions of students, faculty and staff.

NAICU developed the University and College Accountability Network (U-CAN), a tool for prospective students and their parents to complement guides like U.S. News & World Report , which has been the focus of criticism . U-CAN allows parents and students to compare characteristics of private colleges and universities based on what students and parents actually want to know.

Leadership [ edit ] Barbara K. Mistick became president of NAICU on September 1, 2019.

[ 3 ] Prior to that, she was the president of Wilson College in Pennsylvania.

Past presidents [ edit ] David L. Warren (1993 - 2019). Dr. Warren was presented with the Benjamin Franklin Medal for Distinguished Achievement by the Association of Independent Colleges and Universities of Pennsylvania (AICUP).

[ 4 ] Richard Rosser (1986 - 1993) John Phillips (1976 - 1986) - Founding President See also [ edit ] Association of Independent Colleges and Universities of Pennsylvania (AICUP) References [ edit ] ^ "NAICU About" .

^ "NAICU Issues & Advocacy" .

^ Jaschik, Scott (April 3, 2019).

"New Leader for Private College Group" .

Inside Higher Ed . Retrieved August 10, 2022 .

^ "AICUP Honors David L. Warren, Ph.D. for Distinguished Achievement" .

NAICU News . April 11, 2019.

External links [ edit ] Official website U-CAN Network Student Aid Alliance National Campus Voter Registration Project Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Association_of_Independent_Colleges_and_Universities&oldid=1275900616 " Categories : 1976 establishments in Washington, D.C.

College and university associations and consortia in the United States Educational organizations established in 1976 Private and independent school organizations in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2022 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 15 February 2025, at 19:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities Add languages Add topic

