Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Proposal and establishment 2 Activities Toggle Activities subsection 2.1 Sound off ritual 2.2 Fire prevention 3 Symbols Toggle Symbols subsection 3.1 Red and blue ribbon 3.2 Saint Florian 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents International Firefighters' Day 13 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা Català Deutsch Français 한국어 Polski Português Română کوردی Српски / srpski தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Observance (May 4) Red and blue ribbon, a symbol of International Firefighters Day International Firefighters' Day ( IFFD ) is observed on May 4 , in order to honour firefighters for their service internationally, remember firefighters who lost their lives during service and to commemorate firefighters killed in the September 11 attacks . It was established after a proposal by female Australian firefighter, JJ Edmondson, was made on January 4, 1999, following the deaths of five firefighters fighting a bushfire in Australia on 2 December, 1998.

[ 1 ] Proposal and establishment [ edit ] On December 2 1998, firefighters of the Geelong West Fire Brigade responded to a call for assistance by other firefighters fighting a wildfire from Linton, Victoria , Australia. A sudden change of wind direction caused due to a cold front led to the fire truck being engulfed by the fire on the way to refilling the water tank. As a result, five Geelong West firefighters were killed: Garry Vredeveldt, Christopher Evans, Stuart Davidson, Jason Thomas, and Matthew Armstrong. This incident eventually led to the proposal for an International Firefighters' Day.

[ 1 ] Activities [ edit ] Sound off ritual [ edit ] A "sound off" occurs at noon local time on the first Sunday of May , as part of International Firefighters' Day. It involves turning on fire sirens for 30 seconds, and a subsequent moment of silence for one minute to commemorate all firefighters who were killed in line of duty. The sound off began in 2002, and has been continued annually.

[ 1 ] Fire prevention [ edit ] Fire prevention and the need for more intensive and thorough training is promoted through International Firefighters' Day, and the day is seen as an important opportunity to raise both skills and awareness .

Symbols [ edit ] Red and blue ribbon [ edit ] The red and blue ribbon is a symbol used for International Firefighters Day, the ribbon is 5 cm (2 inches) long and 1 cm (0.39 inches) wide, with the two separate colors, representing the elements firefighters work with, conjoined at the top. The red of the ribbon represents fire while the blue represents water. The ribbon is traditionally worn on the lapel but is not limited to the lapel.

Saint Florian [ edit ] Main article: Saint Florian Saint Florian, regarded in the Catholic Church as the patron saint of firefighters, is another symbol of International Firefighters' Day. The saint's day (as observed in the Catholic Church) of St. Florian is May 4, hence International Firefighters' Day is also observed on May 4. This day is seen as a day to hold events such as memorials or fundraisers .

References [ edit ] ^ a b c "About IFFD" .

Firefighters' Day . February 5, 2012 . Retrieved June 19, 2023 .

Diamantes, David. Fire Prevention: Inspection and Code Enforcement. 3rd ed. Cliffton Park, NY: Thomson Delmar Learning, 2007. Print Facts About Wind and Wildfires. The Weather Channel Interactive, Inc, 2010. Web. October 15, 2010.

International Firefighters’ Day. IFFD.NET, 2006. Web. 15 October 2010.

Klinoff, Robert. Introduction to Fire Protection. 3rd ed. Cliffton Park, NY: Delmar Cengage Learning, 2007. Print.

The Origins of International Firefighters’ Day. Newcastle Events, 2010. Web. October 15, 2010.

United States. U.S. Fire Administration. Fire Statistics. Sept 2010. U.S. Fire Administration. Web. October 15, 2010.

External links [ edit ] IFFD site v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Firefighters%27_Day&oldid=1288858014 " Categories : Fire service awards and honors Firefighting International observances May observances Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2023 This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 03:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Firefighters' Day 13 languages Add topic

