Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophy 2 Architecture 3 Family 4 Works 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Mir Damad 13 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Malagasy مازِرونی Русский Тоҷикӣ اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Iranian philosopher Bust of Mir Damad This article is about the philosopher. For the boulevard in Tehran, see Mirdamad Boulevard .

Mīr Dāmād ( Persian : ميرداماد ) (c. 1561 – 1631/1632), known also as Mir Mohammad Baqer Esterabadi , or Asterabadi , was a Twelver Shia Iranian philosopher in the Neoplatonizing Islamic Peripatetic traditions of Avicenna . He was a scholar of the traditional Islamic sciences, and foremost figure (together with his student Mulla Sadra ) of the cultural renaissance of Iran undertaken under the Safavid dynasty. He was also the central founder of the School of Isfahan , noted by his students and admirers as the Third Teacher (mu'alim al-thalith) after Aristotle and al-Farabi .

Philosophy [ edit ] His major contribution to Islamic philosophy was his novel formulation regarding gradations of time and the emanations of the separate categories of time as descending divine hypostases. He resolved the controversy of the createdness or uncreatedness of the world in time by proposing the notion of huduth-e-dahri (atemporal origination) as an explanation grounded in Avicennan and Suhrawardian categories, whilst transcending them. In brief, excepting God, he argued all things, including the earth and all heavenly bodies, share in both eternal and temporal origination. He influenced the revival of al-falsafa al-yamani ( Philosophy of Yemen ), a philosophy based on revelation and sayings of prophets rather than the rationalism of the Greeks , and he is widely recognized as the founder of the School of Isfahan, which embraced a theosophical outlook known as hikmat-i ilahi (divine wisdom).

Mir Damad’s many treatises on Islamic philosophy include Taqwim al-Iman ( Calendars of Faith , a treasure on creation and divine knowledge), the Kitab Qabasat al-Ilahiyah ( Book of the Divine Embers of Fiery Kindling ), wherein he lays out his concept of atemporal origination, Kitab al-Jadhawat and Sirat al-Mustaqim . He also wrote poetry under the pseudonym of Ishraq (Illumination). He also wrote a couple of books on mathematics, but with secondary importance.

Among his many other students besides Mulla Sadra were Seyyed Ahmad-ibn-Reyn-al-A’bedin Alavi, Mohammad ibn Alireza ibn Agajanii, Qutb-al-Din Mohammad Ashkevari and Mulla Shams Gilani .

Mir Damad's philosophical prose is often accounted as being among the most dense and obtusely difficult of styles to understand, deliberately employing as well as coining convoluted philosophical terminology and neologisms that require systematic analysis and detailed commentary.
He was called Mir Damad (Groom of the King) because he married Shah Abbas 's daughter and hence his fame was based on that event.

Architecture [ edit ] Mir Damad was also the architect of the Masjide Shah ( Shah Mosque ) in Isfahan which employed highly advanced mathematical calculations which required the knowledge of the speed of sound at that time. The geometry of the dome is as such that all sound dissipated from the base will echo in hundreds of carefully calculated and masterly executed interior corners of the dome which will ultimately collide in the center of the dome. The geometrical analysis of the dome is of absolute sophistication and the design of the dome is a magnificent piece of art and furthermore the construction of such dome in the 17th century to a precision where all sound waves must travel and collide in an imaginary point above.

Family [ edit ] His son was Seyed Ali Naghi Astarabadi and his grandson was Sayyid Mahdi bin Sayyid Ali Naqi. His daughter was the wife of Sayyid Ahmad ibn Zayn al-Abidin Alavi.

This article may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The man has not been seen: Seyyed Ali Naqi Ibn Al-Seyyed Al-Musa (father of three sons: Seyyed Kamal Hassanzadeh Hafshjani, Seyyed Musa Hassanzadeh Hafshjani, Seyyed Mohammad Hafshjani and three daughters: Seyyed Ala Ala Begum Hassanzadeh Esther Shamsabadi, who had a special reputation): Mirza Nasrollah  Karimian, Mirza Assadollah Karimian, Mirza Ali Karimian, Mirza Mehdi Karimian (father of musician Kaveh Karimian), Mirza Reza Karimian, Mirza Jalal Karimian, Mirza Hassan (father of Dr. Milad Karimian), Mirza Taghi Karimian, Seyedeh Tajzadeh Astarabad, Seyedeh Aghabazadeh, Hassanzadeh family).

Male result: Sayyid Hassan bin Al-Sayyid Mahdi Works [ edit ] Among his 134 [ 1 ] works known: Taqwim al-Iman ( Calendars of Faith ) Kitab Qabasat al-Ilahiyah ( Book of the Divine Embers of Fiery Kindling ) Kitab al-Jadhawat ( Book of Spiritual Attractions ) Sirat al-Mustaqim ( The Straight Path ) See also [ edit ] Islamic scholars List of Iranian scholars Sayyid Husayn Ahlati References [ edit ] ^ S.H. Nasr (2006), Islamic Philosophy from Its Origin to the Present: Philosophy in the Land of Prophecy , State University of New York Press, p. 214: "Some 134 works of Mir Damad have been identified ..." Further reading [ edit ] Ian Richard Netton (2013).

Encyclopedia of Islamic Civilization and Religion . Routledge, Oxon, UK.

ISBN 1135179670 .

Encyclopædia Iranica : Mir Damad .

Webster Encyclopedia of Religion .

Rizvi, Sajjad H. (2006).

"Between Time and Eternity: Mīr Dāmād on God's Creative Agency" .

Journal of Islamic Studies .

17 (2). Oxford University Press: 158– 176.

doi : 10.1093/jis/etl003 .

External links [ edit ] Islamic Philosophy Online v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Sweden Israel People DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mir_Damad&oldid=1292230478 " Categories : 16th-century Iranian philosophers Islamic philosophers 17th-century Iranian philosophers 1630s deaths 17th-century writers from Safavid Iran People from Gorgan Safavid theologians 16th-century writers from Safavid Iran Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Persian-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2022 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 21:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mir Damad 13 languages Add topic

