Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 1.1 Proto-pop 2 United Kingdom: the Independent Group 3 United States Toggle United States subsection 3.1 Early U.S. exhibitions 4 France 5 Spain 6 New Zealand 7 Japan 8 Italy 9 Belgium 10 Netherlands 11 Russia 12 Notable artists 13 See also 14 References 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Pop art 71 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Кыргызча Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Seeltersk Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Sranantongo Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art movement emerging in the mid 1950s This article is about the art movement. For other uses, see Pop art (disambiguation) .

Eduardo Paolozzi , I was a Rich Man's Plaything (1947). Part of his Bunk!

series, this is considered the initial bearer of "pop art" and the first to show the word "pop".

Andy Warhol , Campbell's Tomato Juice Box , 1964. Synthetic polymer paint and silkscreen ink on wood, 10 inches × 19 inches × 9½ inches (25.4 × 48.3 × 24.1 cm), Museum of Modern Art , New York City Pop art is an art movement that emerged in the United Kingdom and the United States during the mid- to late 1950s .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The movement presented a challenge to traditions of fine art by including imagery from popular and mass culture , such as advertising , comic books and mundane mass-produced objects. One of its aims is to use images of popular culture in art, emphasizing the banal or kitschy elements of any culture, most often through the use of irony .

[ 3 ] It is also associated with the artists' use of mechanical means of reproduction or rendering techniques. In pop art, material is sometimes visually removed from its known context, isolated, or combined with unrelated material.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Amongst the first artists that shaped the pop art movement were Eduardo Paolozzi and Richard Hamilton in Britain , and Larry Rivers , Ray Johnson , Robert Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns among others in the United States . Pop art is widely interpreted as a reaction to the then-dominant ideas of abstract expressionism , as well as an expansion of those ideas.

[ 4 ] Due to its utilization of found objects and images, it is similar to Dada . Pop art and minimalism are considered to be art movements that precede postmodern art , or are some of the earliest examples of postmodern art themselves.

[ 5 ] Pop art often takes imagery that is currently in use in advertising. Product labeling and logos figure prominently in the imagery chosen by pop artists, seen in the labels of Campbell's Soup Cans , by Andy Warhol . Even the labeling on the outside of a shipping box containing food items for retail has been used as subject matter in pop art, as demonstrated by Warhol's Campbell's Tomato Juice Box , 1964 (pictured).

Origins [ edit ] Charles Demuth , I Saw the Figure 5 in Gold 1928, collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York City The origins of pop art in North America developed differently from those in Great Britain.

[ 3 ] In the United States, pop art emerged as a reaction by artists; it marked a return to hard-edged composition and representational art . The artists employed impersonal, mundane reality, irony , and parody to "defuse" the personal symbolism and " painterly looseness" of abstract expressionism .

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] In the U.S., some works by Larry Rivers , Alex Katz and Man Ray anticipated pop art.

[ 7 ] By contrast, the origins of pop art in post-war Britain, while employing irony and parody, were more academic. British artists focused on the dynamic and paradoxical imagery of American pop culture as powerful, manipulative symbolic devices that were affecting whole patterns of life, while simultaneously improving the prosperity of a society.

[ 6 ] Early pop art in Britain was a matter of ideas fueled by American popular culture when viewed from afar .

[ 4 ] Similarly, pop art was both an extension and a repudiation of Dadaism .

[ 4 ] While pop art and Dadaism explored some of the same subjects, pop art replaced the destructive, satirical, and anarchic impulses of the Dada movement with a detached affirmation of the artifacts of mass culture.

[ 4 ] Among those artists in Europe seen as producing work leading up to pop art are: Pablo Picasso , Marcel Duchamp , and Kurt Schwitters .

Proto-pop [ edit ] Although both British and American pop art began during the 1950s, Marcel Duchamp and others in Europe like Francis Picabia and Man Ray predate the movement; in addition there were some earlier American proto-pop origins which utilized "as found" cultural objects.

[ 4 ] During the 1920s, American artists Patrick Henry Bruce , Gerald Murphy , Charles Demuth and Stuart Davis created paintings that contained pop culture imagery (mundane objects culled from American commercial products and advertising design), almost "prefiguring" the pop art movement.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] United Kingdom: the Independent Group [ edit ] Richard Hamilton 's collage Just what is it that makes today's homes so different, so appealing?

(1956) is one of the earliest works to be considered "pop art".

The Independent Group (IG), founded in London in 1952, is regarded as the precursor to the pop art movement.

[ 2 ] [ 10 ] They were a gathering of young painters, sculptors, architects, writers and critics who were challenging prevailing modernist approaches to culture as well as traditional views of fine art. Their group discussions centered on pop culture implications from elements such as mass advertising, movies, product design, comic strips, science fiction and technology. At the first Independent Group meeting in 1952, co-founding member, artist and sculptor Eduardo Paolozzi presented a lecture using a series of collages titled Bunk!

that he had assembled during his time in Paris between 1947 and 1949.

[ 2 ] [ 10 ] This material of "found objects" such as advertising, comic book characters, magazine covers and various mass-produced graphics mostly represented American popular culture. One of the collages in that presentation was Paolozzi's I was a Rich Man's Plaything (1947), which includes the first use of the word "pop", appearing in a cloud of smoke emerging from a revolver.

[ 2 ] [ 11 ] Following Paolozzi's seminal presentation in 1952, the IG focused primarily on the imagery of American popular culture, particularly mass advertising.

[ 6 ] According to the son of John McHale , the term "pop art" was first coined by his father in 1954 in conversation with Frank Cordell , [ 12 ] although other sources credit its origin to British critic Lawrence Alloway .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] (Both versions agree that the term was used in Independent Group discussions by mid-1955.) "Pop art" as a moniker was then used in discussions by IG members in the Second Session of the IG in 1955, and the specific term "pop art" first appeared in published print in the article "But Today We Collect Ads" by IG members Alison and Peter Smithson in Ark magazine in 1956.

[ 15 ] However, the term is often credited to British art critic / curator Lawrence Alloway for his 1958 essay titled The Arts and the Mass Media , even though the precise language he uses is "popular mass culture".

[ 16 ] "Furthermore, what I meant by it then is not what it means now. I used the term, and also 'Pop Culture' to refer to the products of the mass media, not to works of art that draw upon popular culture. In any case, sometime between the winter of 1954–55 and 1957 the phrase acquired currency in conversation..." [ 17 ] Nevertheless, Alloway was one of the leading critics to defend the inclusion of the imagery of mass culture in the fine arts. Alloway clarified these terms in 1966, at which time pop art had already transited from art schools and small galleries to a major force in the artworld. But its success had not been in England. Practically simultaneously, and independently, New York City had become the hotbed for pop art.

[ 17 ] In London, the annual Royal Society of British Artists (RBA) exhibition of young talent in 1960 first showed American pop influences. In January 1961, the most famous RBA- Young Contemporaries of all put David Hockney , the American R B Kitaj , New Zealander Billy Apple , Allen Jones , Derek Boshier , Joe Tilson , Patrick Caulfield , Peter Phillips , Pauline Boty and Peter Blake on the map; Apple designed the posters and invitations for both the 1961 and 1962 Young Contemporaries exhibitions.

[ 18 ] Hockney, Kitaj and Blake went on to win prizes at the John-Moores-Exhibition in Liverpool in the same year. Apple and Hockney traveled together to New York during the Royal College's 1961 summer break, which is when Apple first made contact with Andy Warhol – both later moved to the United States and Apple became involved with the New York pop art scene.

[ 18 ] United States [ edit ] Although pop art began in the early 1950s, in America it was given its greatest impetus during the 1960s. The term "pop art" was officially introduced in December 1962; the occasion was a "Symposium on Pop Art" organized by the Museum of Modern Art .

[ 19 ] By this time, American advertising had adopted many elements of modern art and functioned at a very sophisticated level. Consequently, American artists had to search deeper for dramatic styles that would distance art from the well-designed and clever commercial materials.

[ 6 ] As the British viewed American popular culture imagery from a somewhat removed perspective, their views were often instilled with romantic, sentimental and humorous overtones. By contrast, American artists, bombarded every day with the diversity of mass-produced imagery, produced work that was generally more bold and aggressive.

[ 10 ] Roy Lichtenstein , Drowning Girl , 1963, on display at the Museum of Modern Art, New York .

According to historian, curator and critic Henry Geldzahler , " Ray Johnson 's collages Elvis Presley No. 1 and James Dean stand as the Plymouth Rock of the Pop movement." [ 20 ] Author Lucy Lippard wrote that "The Elvis ... and Marilyn Monroe [collages] ... heralded Warholian Pop." [ 21 ] Johnson worked as a graphic designer, met Andy Warhol by 1956 and both designed several book covers for New Directions and other publishers. Johnson began mailing out whimsical flyers advertising his design services printed via offset lithography. He later became known as the father of mail art as the founder of his "New York Correspondence School," working small by stuffing clippings and drawings into envelopes rather than working larger like his contemporaries.

[ 22 ] A note about the cover image in January 1958's Art News pointed out that "[Jasper] Johns' first one-man show ... places him with such better-known colleagues as Rauschenberg, Twombly, Kaprow and Ray Johnson".

[ 23 ] Indeed, two other important artists in the establishment of America's pop art vocabulary were the painters Jasper Johns and Robert Rauschenberg .

[ 10 ] Rauschenberg, who like Ray Johnson attended Black Mountain College in North Carolina after World War II , was influenced by the earlier work of Kurt Schwitters and other Dada artists, and his belief that "painting relates to both art and life" challenged the dominant modernist perspective of his time.

[ 24 ] His use of discarded readymade objects (in his Combines ) and pop culture imagery (in his silkscreen paintings) connected his works to topical events in everyday America.

[ 10 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] The silkscreen paintings of 1962–64 combined expressive brushwork with silkscreened magazine clippings from Life , Newsweek , and National Geographic .

Johns' paintings of flags, targets, numbers, and maps of the U.S. as well three-dimensional depictions of ale cans drew attention to questions of representation in art.

[ 27 ] Johns' and Rauschenberg's work of the 1950s is frequently referred to as Neo-Dada , and is visually distinct from the prototypical American pop art which exploded in the early 1960s.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Roy Lichtenstein is of equal importance to American pop art. His work, and its use of parody , probably defines the basic premise of pop art better than any other.

[ 10 ] Selecting the old-fashioned comic strip as subject matter, Lichtenstein produces a hard-edged, precise composition that documents while also parodying in a soft manner. Lichtenstein used oil and Magna paint in his best known works, such as Drowning Girl (1963), which was appropriated from the lead story in DC Comics ' Secret Hearts #83. ( Drowning Girl is part of the collection of the Museum of Modern Art .) [ 30 ] His work features thick outlines, bold colors and Ben-Day dots to represent certain colors, as if created by photographic reproduction. Lichtenstein said, "[abstract expressionists] put things down on the canvas and responded to what they had done, to the color positions and sizes. My style looks completely different, but the nature of putting down lines pretty much is the same; mine just don't come out looking calligraphic, like Pollock's or Kline's." [ 31 ] Pop art merges popular and mass culture with fine art while injecting humor, irony, and recognizable imagery/content into the mix.

The paintings of Lichtenstein, like those of Andy Warhol, Tom Wesselmann and others, share a direct attachment to the commonplace image of American popular culture, but also treat the subject in an impersonal manner clearly illustrating the idealization of mass production.

[ 10 ] Andy Warhol is probably the most famous figure in pop art. In fact, art critic Arthur Danto once called Warhol "the nearest thing to a philosophical genius the history of art has produced".

[ 19 ] Warhol attempted to take pop beyond an artistic style to a life style, and his work often displays a lack of human affectation that dispenses with the irony and parody of many of his peers.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Early U.S. exhibitions [ edit ] The Cheddar Cheese canvas from Andy Warhol 's Campbell's Soup Cans , 1962.

Claes Oldenburg , Jim Dine and Tom Wesselmann had their first shows in the Judson Gallery [ broken anchor ] in 1959 and 1960 and later in 1960 through 1964 along with James Rosenquist , George Segal and others at the Green Gallery on 57th Street in Manhattan. In 1960, Martha Jackson showed installations and assemblages , New Media – New Forms featured Hans Arp , Kurt Schwitters , Jasper Johns , Claes Oldenburg, Robert Rauschenberg , Jim Dine and May Wilson . 1961 was the year of Martha Jackson 's spring show, Environments, Situations, Spaces .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Andy Warhol held his first solo exhibition in Los Angeles in July 1962 at Irving Blum's Ferus Gallery , where he showed 32 paintings of Campbell's soup cans, one for every flavor. Warhol sold the set of paintings to Blum for $1,000; in 1996, when the Museum of Modern Art acquired it, the set was valued at $15 million.

[ 19 ] Donald Factor, the son of Max Factor Jr.

, and an art collector and co-editor of avant-garde literary magazine Nomad , wrote an essay in the magazine's last issue, Nomad/New York . The essay was one of the first on what would become known as pop art, though Factor did not use the term. The essay, "Four Artists", focused on Roy Lichtenstein, James Rosenquist , Jim Dine, and Claes Oldenburg.

[ 36 ] In the 1960s, Oldenburg, who became associated with the pop art movement, created many happenings , which were performance art -related productions of that time. The name he gave to his own productions was "Ray Gun Theater". The cast of colleagues in his performances included: artists Lucas Samaras , Tom Wesselmann , Carolee Schneemann , Öyvind Fahlström and Richard Artschwager ; dealer Annina Nosei; art critic Barbara Rose ; and screenwriter Rudy Wurlitzer .

[ 37 ] His first wife, Patty Mucha, who sewed many of his early soft sculptures, was a constant performer in his happenings. This brash, often humorous, approach to art was at great odds with the prevailing sensibility that, by its nature, art dealt with "profound" expressions or ideas. In December 1961, he rented a store on Manhattan's Lower East Side to house The Store , a month-long installation he had first presented at the Martha Jackson Gallery in New York, stocked with sculptures roughly in the form of consumer goods.

[ 37 ] Opening in 1962, Willem de Kooning 's New York art dealer, the Sidney Janis Gallery, organized the groundbreaking International Exhibition of the New Realists , a survey of new-to-the-scene American, French, Swiss, Italian New Realism , and British pop art. The fifty-four artists shown included Richard Lindner , Wayne Thiebaud , Roy Lichtenstein (and his painting Blam ), Andy Warhol, Claes Oldenburg, James Rosenquist , Jim Dine, Robert Indiana , Tom Wesselmann , George Segal , Peter Phillips, Peter Blake ( The Love Wall from 1961), Öyvind Fahlström , Yves Klein , Arman , Daniel Spoerri , Christo and Mimmo Rotella . The show was seen by Europeans Martial Raysse , Niki de Saint Phalle and Jean Tinguely in New York, who were stunned by the size and look of the American artwork. Also shown were Marisol , Mario Schifano , Enrico Baj and Öyvind Fahlström . Janis lost some of his abstract expressionist artists when Mark Rothko , Robert Motherwell , Adolph Gottlieb and Philip Guston quit the gallery, but gained Dine, Oldenburg, Segal and Wesselmann.

[ 38 ] At an opening-night soiree thrown by collector Burton Tremaine, Willem de Kooning appeared and was turned away by Tremaine, who ironically owned a number of de Kooning's works. Rosenquist recalled: "at that moment I thought, something in the art world has definitely changed".

[ 19 ] Turning away a respected abstract artist proved that, as early as 1962, the pop art movement had begun to dominate art culture in New York.

A bit earlier, on the West Coast , Roy Lichtenstein, Jim Dine and Andy Warhol from New York City; Phillip Hefferton and Robert Dowd from Detroit; Edward Ruscha and Joe Goode from Oklahoma City; and Wayne Thiebaud from California were included in the New Painting of Common Objects show. This first pop art museum exhibition in America was curated by Walter Hopps at the Pasadena Art Museum .

[ 39 ] Pop art was ready to change the art world. New York followed Pasadena in 1963, when the Guggenheim Museum exhibited Six Painters and the Object , curated by Lawrence Alloway . The artists were Jim Dine, Jasper Johns, Roy Lichtenstein, Robert Rauschenberg, James Rosenquist, and Andy Warhol.

[ 40 ] Another pivotal early exhibition was The American Supermarket organised by the Bianchini Gallery in 1964. The show was presented as a typical small supermarket environment, except that everything in it—the produce, canned goods, meat, posters on the wall, etc.—was created by prominent pop artists of the time, including Apple, Warhol, Lichtenstein, Wesselmann, Oldenburg, and Johns. This project was recreated in 2002 as part of the Tate Gallery 's Shopping: A Century of Art and Consumer Culture .

[ 41 ] By 1962, pop artists started exhibiting in commercial galleries in New York and Los Angeles; for some, it was their first commercial one-man show. The Ferus Gallery presented Andy Warhol in Los Angeles (and Ed Ruscha in 1963). In New York, the Green Gallery showed Rosenquist, Segal, Oldenburg, and Wesselmann. The Stable Gallery showed R. Indiana and Warhol (in his first New York show). The Leo Castelli Gallery presented Rauschenberg, Johns, and Lichtenstein.

Martha Jackson showed Jim Dine and Allen Stone showed Wayne Thiebaud. By 1966, after the Green Gallery and the Ferus Gallery closed, the Leo Castelli Gallery represented Rosenquist, Warhol, Rauschenberg, Johns, Lichtenstein and Ruscha. The Sidney Janis Gallery represented Oldenburg, Segal, Dine, Wesselmann and Marisol, while Allen Stone continued to represent Thiebaud, and Martha Jackson continued representing Robert Indiana.

[ 42 ] In 1968, the São Paulo 9 Exhibition – Environment U.S.A.: 1957–1967 featured the "Who's Who" of pop art. Considered as a summation of the classical phase of the American pop art period, the exhibit was curated by William Seitz. The artists were Edward Hopper , James Gill , Robert Indiana , Jasper Johns , Roy Lichtenstein , Claes Oldenburg , Robert Rauschenberg , Andy Warhol and Tom Wesselmann .

[ 43 ] France [ edit ] Nouveau réalisme refers to an artistic movement founded in 1960 by the art critic Pierre Restany [ 44 ] and the artist Yves Klein during the first collective exposition in the Apollinaire gallery in Milan. Pierre Restany wrote the original manifesto for the group, titled the "Constitutive Declaration of New Realism," in April 1960, proclaiming, "Nouveau Réalisme—new ways of perceiving the real." [ 45 ] This joint declaration was signed on 27 October 1960, in Yves Klein's workshop, by nine people: Yves Klein, Arman , Martial Raysse , Pierre Restany, Daniel Spoerri , Jean Tinguely and the Ultra-Lettrists , Francois Dufrêne , Raymond Hains , Jacques de la Villeglé ; in 1961 these were joined by César , Mimmo Rotella , then Niki de Saint Phalle and Gérard Deschamps . The artist Christo showed with the group. It was dissolved in 1970.

[ 45 ] Contemporary of American pop art—often conceived as its transposition in France—new realism was along with Fluxus and other groups one of the numerous tendencies of the avant-garde in the 1960s. The group initially chose Nice , on the French Riviera, as its home base since Klein and Arman both originated there; new realism is thus often retrospectively considered by historians to be an early representative of the École de Nice [ fr ] movement.

[ 46 ] In spite of the diversity of their plastic language, they perceived a common basis for their work; this being a method of direct appropriation of reality, equivalent, in the terms used by Restany; to a "poetic recycling of urban, industrial and advertising reality".

[ 47 ] Spain [ edit ] In Spain, the study of pop art is associated with the "new figurative", which arose from the roots of the crisis of informalism .

Eduardo Arroyo could be said to fit within the pop art trend, on account of his interest in the environment, his critique of our media culture which incorporates icons of both mass media communication and the history of painting, and his scorn for nearly all established artistic styles. However, the Spanish artist who could be considered most authentically part of "pop" art is Alfredo Alcaín, because of the use he makes of popular images and empty spaces in his compositions.

[ citation needed ] Also in the category of Spanish pop art is the "Chronicle Team" ( El Equipo Crónica ), which existed in Valencia between 1964 and 1981, formed by the artists Manolo Valdés and Rafael Solbes. Their movement can be characterized as "pop" because of its use of comics and publicity images and its simplification of images and photographic compositions.

Filmmaker Pedro Almodóvar emerged from Madrid's "La Movida" subculture of the 1970s making low budget super 8 pop art movies, and he was subsequently called the Andy Warhol of Spain by the media at the time. In the book Almodovar on Almodovar , he is quoted as saying that the 1950s film "Funny Face" was a central inspiration for his work. One pop trademark in Almodovar's films is that he always produces a fake commercial to be inserted into a scene.

[ citation needed ] New Zealand [ edit ] Michel Tuffery 's Pisupo lua afe (Corned beef 2000) (1994) In New Zealand, pop art has predominately flourished since the 1990s, and is often connected to Kiwiana . Kiwiana is a pop-centered, idealised representation of classically Kiwi icons, such as meat pies , kiwifruit , tractors , jandals , Four Square supermarkets; the inherent campness of this is often subverted to signify cultural messages.

[ 48 ] Dick Frizzell is a famous New Zealand pop artist, known for using older Kiwiana symbols in ways that parody modern culture. For example, Frizzell enjoys imitating the work of foreign artists, giving their works a unique New Zealand view or influence. This is done to show New Zealand's historically subdued impact on the world; naive art is connected to Aotearoan pop art this way.

[ 49 ] This can be also done in an abrasive and deadpan way, as with Michel Tuffery 's famous work Pisupo Lua Afe (Corned Beef 2000) .

Of Samoan ancestry, Tuffery constructed the work, which represents a bull, out of processed food cans known as pisupo . It is an unusual work of western pop art because Tuffery includes themes of neocolonialism and racism against non-western cultures (signified by the food cans the work is made of, which represent economic dependence brought on Samoans by the west). The undeniable indigenous viewpoint makes it stand out against more common non-indigenous works of pop art.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Other New Zealand pop artists to deal with similar subject matter are Māori artists Michael Parekōwhai and Reuben Paterson .

One of New Zealand's earliest and famous pop artists is Billy Apple , one of the few non-British members of the Royal Society of British Artists . Featured among the likes of David Hockney , American R.B. Kitaj and Peter Blake in the January 1961 RBA exhibition Young Contemporaries , Apple quickly became an iconic international artist of the 1960s. This was before he conceived his moniker of "Billy Apple", and his work was displayed under his birth name of Barrie Bates. He sought to distinguish himself by appearance as well as name, so bleached his hair and eyebrows with Lady Clairol Instant Creme Whip. Later, Apple was associated with the 1970s Conceptual Art movement.

[ 52 ] Japan [ edit ] In Japan, pop art evolved from the nation's prominent avant-garde scene. The use of images of the modern world, copied from magazines in the photomontage-style paintings produced by Harue Koga in the late 1920s and early 1930s, foreshadowed elements of pop art.

[ 53 ] The Japanese Gutai movement led to a 1958 Gutai exhibition at Martha Jackson's New York gallery that preceded by two years her famous New Forms New Media show that put pop art on the map.

[ 54 ] The work of Yayoi Kusama contributed to the development of pop art and influenced many other artists, including Andy Warhol.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] In the mid-1960s, graphic designer Tadanori Yokoo became one of the most successful pop artists and an international symbol for Japanese pop art. He is well known for his advertisements and creating artwork for pop culture icons such as commissions from The Beatles , Marilyn Monroe , and Elizabeth Taylor , among others.

[ 57 ] Another leading pop artist at that time was Keiichi Tanaami . Iconic characters from Japanese manga and anime have also become symbols for pop art, such as Speed Racer and Astro Boy . Japanese manga and anime also influenced later pop artists such as Takashi Murakami and his superflat movement.

Italy [ edit ] The Olivetti Valentine designed by Ettore Sottsass with Perry A. King and Albert Leclerc In Italy, by 1964 pop art was known and took different forms, such as the "Scuola di Piazza del Popolo" in Rome, with pop artists such as Mario Schifano , Franco Angeli , Giosetta Fioroni , Tano Festa , Claudio Cintoli , and some artworks by Piero Manzoni , Lucio Del Pezzo , Mimmo Rotella and Valerio Adami .

Italian pop art originated in 1950s culture – the works of the artists Enrico Baj and Mimmo Rotella to be precise, rightly considered the forerunners of this scene. In fact, it was around 1958–1959 that Baj and Rotella abandoned their previous careers (which might be generically defined as belonging to a non-representational genre , despite being thoroughly post-Dadaist), to catapult themselves into a new world of images, and the reflections on them, which was springing up all around them. Rotella's torn posters showed an ever more figurative taste, often explicitly and deliberately referring to the great icons of the times. Baj's compositions were steeped in contemporary kitsch , which turned out to be a "gold mine" of images and the stimulus for an entire generation of artists.

The novelty came from the new visual panorama, both inside "domestic walls" and out-of-doors. Cars, road signs, television, all the "new world", everything can belong to the world of art, which itself is new. In this respect, Italian pop art takes the same ideological path as that of the international scene. The only thing that changes is the iconography and, in some cases, the presence of a more critical attitude toward it. Even in this case, the prototypes can be traced back to the works of Rotella and Baj, both far from neutral in their relationship with society. Yet this is not an exclusive element; there is a long line of artists, including Gianni Ruffi , Roberto Barni , Silvio Pasotti , Umberto Bignardi , and Claudio Cintoli , who take on reality as a toy, as a great pool of imagery from which to draw material with disenchantment and frivolity, questioning the traditional linguistic role models with a renewed spirit of "let me have fun" à la Aldo Palazzeschi .

[ 58 ] The King (2025) by an anonymous author Pop art has never completely left the Italian art scene, undergoing numerous variations over time and constantly changing in form and content.

[ 59 ] In the early 2000s, for example, the Sicilian artist Arrigo Musti created Impopular Art. Recently, an undercurrent called Pop Symbolism , mainly consisting of digital art , has begun to spread, especially in the North .

Belgium [ edit ] Paul Van Hoeydonck's Fallen Astronaut In Belgium , pop art was represented to some extent by Paul Van Hoeydonck, whose sculpture Fallen Astronaut was left on the Moon during one of the Apollo missions , as well as by other notable pop artists. Internationally recognized artists such as Marcel Broodthaers ( 'vous êtes doll? " ), Evelyne Axell and Panamarenko are indebted to the pop art movement; Broodthaers's great influence was George Segal . Another well-known artist, Roger Raveel , mounted a birdcage with a real live pigeon in one of his paintings. By the end of the 1960s and early 1970s, pop art references disappeared from the work of some of these artists when they started to adopt a more critical attitude towards America because of the Vietnam War 's increasingly gruesome character. Panamarenko, however, has retained the irony inherent in the pop art movement up to the present day.

Evelyne Axell from Namur was a prolific pop-artist in the 1964–1972 period.

Axell was one of the first female pop artists, had been mentored by Magritte and her best-known painting is Ice Cream .

[ 60 ] Netherlands [ edit ] While there was no formal pop art movement in the Netherlands , there were a group of artists that spent time in New York during the early years of pop art, and drew inspiration from the international pop art movement. Representatives of Dutch pop art include Daan van Golden , Gustave Asselbergs , Jacques Frenken , Jan Cremer , Wim T. Schippers , and Woody van Amen . They opposed the Dutch petit bourgeois mentality by creating humorous works with a serious undertone. Examples of this nature include Sex O'Clock, by Woody van Amen, and Crucifix / Target , by Jacques Frenken.

[ 61 ] Russia [ edit ] Dmitri Vrubel 's painting My God, Help Me to Survive This Deadly Love (1990) Russia arrived later to the movement, with pop-esque pieces emerging in the 1970s. This was likely a result of Russia's postwar political climate, which closely supervised artistic expression. Russia's version of pop art was Soviet -themed and was referred to as Sots Art . Compared to western pop art, it functioned as a counter-culture reaction against the state's approved art-movements. Afer the fall of the Berlin Wall, Russian pop art took on another form, epitomised by Dmitri Vrubel and his painting My God, Help Me to Survive This Deadly Love .

[ 62 ] Notable artists [ edit ] Billy Apple (1935–2021) Evelyne Axell (1935–1972) Sir Peter Blake (born 1932) Derek Boshier (born 1937) Pauline Boty (1938–1966) Patrick Caulfield (1936–2005) Allan D'Arcangelo (1930–1998) Jim Dine (born 1935) Burhan Dogancay (1929–2013) Robert Dowd (1936–1996) Rosalyn Drexler (born 1926) Ken Elias (born 1944) Erró (born 1932) Marisol Escobar (1930–2016) James Gill (born 1934) Dorothy Grebenak (1913–1990) Red Grooms (born 1937) Richard Hamilton (1922–2011) Keith Haring (1958–1990) Jann Haworth (born 1942) David Hockney (born 1937) Dorothy Iannone (1933–2022) Robert Indiana (1928–2018) Jasper Johns (born 1930) Ray Johnson (1927–1995) Allen Jones (born 1937) Alex Katz (born 1927) Corita Kent (1918–1986) Konrad Klapheck (1935–2023) Kiki Kogelnik (1935–1997) Nicholas Krushenick (1929–1999) Yayoi Kusama (born 1929) Gerald Laing (1936–2011) Roy Lichtenstein (1923–1997) Richard Lindner (1901–1978) Peter Max (born 1937) John McHale (1922–1978) Marta Minujin (born 1943) Claes Oldenburg (1929–2022) Don Nice (1932–2019) Julian Opie (born 1958) Eduardo Paolozzi (1924–2005) Peter Phillips (born 1939) Sigmar Polke (1941–2010) Hariton Pushwagner (1940–2018) Mel Ramos (1935–2018) Robert Rauschenberg (1925–2008) Larry Rivers (1923–2002) James Rizzi (1950–2011) James Rosenquist (1933–2017) Niki de Saint Phalle (1930–2002) Peter Saul (born 1934) George Segal (1924–2000) Colin Self (born 1941) Marjorie Strider (1931–2014) Elaine Sturtevant (1924–2014) Wayne Thiebaud (1920–2021) Joe Tilson (born 1928) Andy Warhol (1928–1987) Idelle Weber (1932–2020) John Wesley (1928–2022) Tom Wesselmann (1931–2004) See also [ edit ] Art pop Chicago Imagists Ferus Gallery Sidney Janis Leo Castelli Green Gallery New Painting of Common Objects Figuration Libre (art movement) Lowbrow (art movement) Nouveau réalisme Neo-pop Op art Plop art Radical period Retro art Superflat SoFlo Superflat The American Supermarket References [ edit ] ^ Pop Art: A Brief History , MoMA Learning ^ a b c d e Livingstone, M., Pop Art: A Continuing History , New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1990 ^ a b c de la Croix, H.; Tansey, R., Gardner's Art Through the Ages , New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., 1980.

^ a b c d e f Piper, David.

The Illustrated History of Art , ISBN 0-7537-0179-0 , p486-487.

^ Harrison, Sylvia (27 August 2001).

Pop Art and the Origins of Post-Modernism . Cambridge University Press.

^ a b c d Gopnik, A.

; Varnedoe, K.

, High & Low: Modern Art & Popular Culture , New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 1990 ^ "History, Travel, Arts, Science, People, Places | Smithsonian" .

Smithsonianmag.com . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ "Modern Love" .

The New Yorker . 6 August 2007 . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ Wayne Craven, American Art: History and .

p.464.

^ a b c d e f g Arnason, H., History of Modern Art: Painting, Sculpture, Architecture , New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. 1968.

^ " 'I was a Rich Man's Plaything', Sir Eduardo Paolozzi" . Tate. 10 December 2015 . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ "John McHale" .

Warholstars.org . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ "Pop art", A Dictionary of Twentieth-Century Art , Ian Chilvers. Oxford University Press, 1998.

^ "Pop art", The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Art Terms , Michael Clarke, Oxford University Press, 2001.

^ Alison and Peter Smithson, "But Today We Collect Ads", reprinted on page 54 in Modern Dreams The Rise and Fall of Pop , published by ICA and MIT, ISBN 0-262-73081-2 ^ Lawrence Alloway, "The Arts and the Mass Media," Architectural Design & Construction, February 1958.

^ a b Klaus Honnef, Pop Art , Taschen , 2004, p. 6, ISBN 3822822183 ^ a b Barton, Christina (2010).

Billy Apple: British and American Works 1960–69 . London: The Mayor Gallery. pp.

11– 21.

ISBN 978-0-9558367-3-2 .

^ a b c d Scherman, Tony. "When Pop Turned the Art World Upside Down." American Heritage 52.1 (February 2001), 68.

^ Geldzahler, Henry in Pop Art: 1955–1970 catalogue, Art Gallery of New South Wales , Sydney, 1985 ^ Lippard, Lucy in Ray Johnson: Correspondences catalogue, Wexner Center/Whitney Museum, 2000 ^ Bloch, Mark.

"An Illustrated Introduction to Ray Johnson 1927–1995" , 1995 ^ Author unknown. "(Table of contents, Untitled note about cover.)", Art News, vol. 56, no. 9, January 1958 ^ Rauschenberg, Robert; Miller, Dorothy C. (1959).

Sixteen Americans [exhibition] . New York: Museum of Modern Art. p. 58.

ISBN 978-0029156704 .

OCLC 748990996. "Painting relates to both art and life. Neither can be made. (I try to act in that gap between the two.)" ^ "Art: Pop Art – Cult of the Commonplace" .

Time . 3 May 1963.

ISSN 0040-781X . Retrieved 7 July 2020 .

Robert Rauschenberg, 37, remembers an art teacher who 'taught me to think, "Why not?"' Since Rauschenberg is considered to be a pioneer in pop art, this is probably where the movement went off on its particular tangent. Why not make art out of old newspapers, bits of clothing, Coke bottles, books, skates, clocks?

^ Sandler, Irving H.

The New York School: The Painters and Sculptors of the Fifties, New York: Harper & Row, 1978.

ISBN 0-06-438505-1 pp. 174–195, Rauschenberg and Johns ; pp. 103–111, Rivers and the gestural realists .

^ Rosenthal, Nan (October 2004).

"Jasper Johns (born 1930) In Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History " .

The Metropolitan Museum of Art . Retrieved 2 May 2021 .

^ Robert Rosenblum, "Jasper Johns" Art International (September 1960): 75.

^ Hapgood,  Susan, Neo-Dada: Redefining Art, 1958–62 . New York: Universe Books, 1994.

^ Hendrickson, Janis (1988).

Roy Lichtenstein . Cologne, Germany: Benedikt Taschen. p. 31.

ISBN 3-8228-0281-6 .

^ Kimmelman, Michael (30 September 1997).

"Roy Lichtenstein, Pop Master, Dies at 73" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 12 November 2007 .

^ Michelson, Annette, Buchloh, B. H. D. (eds) Andy Warhol (October Files), MIT Press, 2001.

^ Warhol, Andy.

The Philosophy of Andy Warhol, from A to B and back again . Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1975 ^ "The Collection" .

MoMA.org . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ "The Great American Pop Art Store: Multiples of the Sixties" .

Tfaoi.com . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ Diggory (2013).

^ a b Kristine McKenna (2 July 1995), When Bigger Is Better: Claes Oldenburg has spent the past 35 years blowing up and redefining everyday objects, all in the name of getting art off its pedestal Los Angeles Times .

^ Reva Wolf (24 November 1997).

Andy Warhol, Poetry, and Gossip in the 1960s . University of Chicago Press. p. 83.

ISBN 9780226904931 . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ "Museum History » Norton Simon Museum" .

Nortonsimon.org . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ Six painters and the object. Lawrence Alloway [curator, conceived and prepared this exhibition and the catalogue] (Computer file) . 24 July 2009.

OCLC 360205683 .

^ Gayford, Martin (19 December 2002).

"Still life at the check-out" .

The Telegraph . Telegraph Media Group Ltd.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 28 November 2012 .

^ Pop Artists: Andy Warhol, Pop Art, Roy Lichtenstein, Jasper Johns, Peter Max, Erró, David Hockney, Wally Hedrick, Michael Leavitt (20 May 2010) Reprinted: 2010, General Books, Memphis, Tennessee, USA, ISBN 978-1-155-48349-8 , ISBN 1-155-48349-9 .

^ Jim Edwards, William Emboden, David McCarthy: Uncommonplaces: The Art of James Francis Gill , 2005, p.54 ^ Karl Ruhrberg, Ingo F. Walther, Art of the 20th Century , Taschen, 2000, p. 518.

ISBN 3-8228-5907-9 ^ a b Kerstin Stremmel, Realism , Taschen, 2004, p. 13.

ISBN 3-8228-2942-0 ^ Rosemary M. O'Neill, Art and Visual Culture on the French Riviera, 1956–1971: The Ecole de Nice , Ashgate, 2012, p. 93.

^ 60/90.

Trente ans de Nouveau Réalisme, La Différence , 1990, p. 76 ^ "Op + Pop" .

christchurchartgallery.org.nz . Retrieved 22 July 2021 .

^ "Dick Frizzell – Overview" .

The Central . Retrieved 22 July 2021 .

^ "Collections Online – Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa" .

collections.tepapa.govt.nz . Retrieved 22 July 2021 .

^ "Collections Online – Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa" .

collections.tepapa.govt.nz . Retrieved 22 July 2021 .

^ "ARTSPACE – Billy Apple" . 9 February 2013. Archived from the original on 9 February 2013 . Retrieved 29 July 2021 .

^ Eskola, Jack (2015).

Harue Koga: David Bowie of the Early 20th Century Japanese Art Avant-garde . Kindle, e-book.

^ Bloch, Mark. The Brooklyn Rail.

"Gutai: 1953 –1959" , June 2018.

^ "Yayoi Kusama interview – Yayoi Kusama exhibition" .

TimeOut . 30 January 2013. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013 . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ [1] Archived 1 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Tadanori Yokoo : ADC • Global Awards & Club" .

Adcglobal.org . 27 June 1936 . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ "Pop Art Italia 1958–1968 — Galleria Civica" .

Comune.modena.it . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ ItaliaPress: A Roma mostra sulla Pop Art Italiana, 2024 ^ "Philadelphia Museum of Art Wins Fight with Facebook over Racy Pop Art Painting" .

artnet.com . 11 February 2016 . Retrieved 17 January 2020 .

^ "Dutch Pop Art & The Sixties – Weg met de vertrutting!" .

8weekly.nl . 28 July 2005 . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ [2] Archived 7 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine Further reading [ edit ] Bloch, Mark. The Brooklyn Rail.

"Gutai: 1953 –1959" , June 2018.

Diggory, Terence (2013) Encyclopedia of the New York School Poets (Facts on File Library of American Literature).

ISBN 978-1-4381-4066-7 Francis, Mark and Foster, Hal (2010) Pop . London and New York: Phaidon.

Haskell, Barbara (1984) BLAM! The Explosion of Pop, Minimalism and Performance 1958–1964 . New York: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc. in association with the Whitney Museum of American Art.

Lifshitz, Mikhail, The Crisis of Ugliness: From Cubism to Pop-Art . Translated and with an Introduction by David Riff. Leiden: BRILL, 2018 (originally published in Russian by Iskusstvo, 1968).

Lippard, Lucy R. (1966) Pop Art, with contributions by Lawrence Alloway, Nancy Marmer, Nicolas Calas , Frederick A. Praeger, New York.

Selz, Peter (moderator); Ashton, Dore ; Geldzahler, Henry ; Kramer, Hilton ; Kunitz, Stanley and Steinberg, Leo (April 1963) "A symposium on Pop Art" Arts Magazine , pp. 36–45. Transcript of symposium held at the Museum of Modern Art on 13 December 1962.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pop art .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Pop art .

Pop Art: A Brief History , MoMA Learning Pop Art in Modern and Contemporary Art , The Met Brooklyn Museum Exhibitions: Seductive Subversion: Women Pop Artists, 1958–1968, Oct. 2010-Jan. 2011 Brooklyn Museum, Wiki/Pop (Women Pop Artists) Tate Glossary term for Pop art v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Avant-garde movements Visual art Abstract expressionism Art Nouveau Art & Language Conceptual art Constructivism Proto-Cubism Cubism Functionalism Bauhaus Grosvenor School Devětsil Divisionism Fauvism Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Post-Impressionism Color Field Incoherents Lyrical Abstraction Mail art Minimalism Mir iskusstva Multidimensional art Neoplasticism De Stijl Neue Slowenische Kunst Nonconformism Nouveau réalisme Orphism Performance art Pop art Process art Purism Rayonism Suprematism Temporary art Vorticism Literature and poetry Acmeism Angry Penguins Asemic writing Conceptual poetry Cyberpunk Ego-Futurism Experimental literature Flarf poetry Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Language poets Neoavanguardia Neoteric Nouveau roman Oberiu Oulipo Slam poetry Ultraísmo Visual poetry Zaum Music By style Funk Jazz Free funk Yass Pop Rock Prog Punk Metal Others Aleatoric music Ars nova Ars subtilior Atonal music Electroacoustic music Electronic music Industrial music Experimental pop Free jazz Free improvisation Futurism Microtonal music Minimal music Drone music Music theatre Musique concrète New Complexity No wave Noise music Post-rock Rock in Opposition Second Viennese School Serialism Spectral music Stochastic music Textural music Totalism Twelve-tone technique Cinema and theatre Cinéma pur Dogme 95 Drop Art Epic theatre Experimental film Experimental theatre Modernist film Poetic realism Postdramatic theatre Remodernist film Structural film Theatre of the Absurd Theatre of Cruelty General Constructivism Dada Expressionism Fluxus Futurism Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Lettrism Modernism Minimalism Postminimalism Neo-minimalism Neo-Dada Neoism Postmodernism Postmodernist film Late modernism Primitivism Situationist International Social realism Socialist realism Surrealism Symbolism Russian symbolism v t e Modernism Movements Acmeism Art Deco Art Nouveau Ashcan School Constructivism Cubism Dada Expressionism Der Blaue Reiter Die Brücke Music Fauvism Functionalism Bauhaus Futurism Imagism Lettrism Neoplasticism De Stijl Orphism Surrealism Symbolism Synchromism Tonalism Literary arts Literature Apollinaire Barnes Beckett Bely Breton Broch Bulgakov Chekhov Conrad Döblin Forster Faulkner Flaubert Ford Gide Hamsun Hašek Hemingway Hesse Joyce Kafka Koestler Lawrence Mann Mansfield Marinetti Musil Dos Passos Platonov Porter Proust Stein Svevo Unamuno Woolf Poetry Akhmatova Aldington Auden Cendrars Crane H.D.

Desnos Eliot Éluard Elytis George Jacob Lorca Lowell (Amy) Lowell (Robert) Mallarmé Moore Owen Pessoa Pound Rilke Seferis Stevens Thomas Tzara Valéry Williams Yeats Works In Search of Lost Time (1913–1927) The Metamorphosis (1915) Ulysses (1922) The Waste Land (1922) The Magic Mountain (1924) Mrs Dalloway (1925) The Sun Also Rises (1926) The Master and Margarita (1928–1940) The Sound and the Fury (1929) Visual arts Painting Albers Arp Balthus Bellows Boccioni Bonnard Brâncuși Braque Calder Cassatt Cézanne Chagall Chirico Claudel Dalí Degas Delaunay Delaunay Demuth Dix Doesburg Duchamp Dufy Ensor Ernst Gauguin Giacometti Goncharova Gris Grosz Höch Hopper Kahlo Kandinsky Kirchner Klee Kokoschka Kooning Lawrence Léger Magritte Malevich Manet Marc Matisse Metzinger Miró Modigliani Mondrian Monet Moore Munch Nolde O'Keeffe Picabia Picasso Pissarro Ray Redon Renoir Rodin Rousseau Schiele Seurat Signac Sisley Soutine Steichen Stieglitz Toulouse-Lautrec Van Gogh Vuillard Wood Film Akerman Aldrich Antonioni Avery Bergman Bresson Buñuel Carné Cassavetes Chaplin Clair Cocteau Dassin Deren Dovzhenko Dreyer Edwards Eisenstein Epstein Fassbinder Fellini Flaherty Ford Fuller Gance Godard Hitchcock Hubley Jones Keaton Kubrick Kuleshov Kurosawa Lang Losey Lupino Lye Marker Minnelli Murnau Ozu Pabst Pudovkin Ray (Nicholas) Ray (Satyajit) Resnais Renoir Richardson Rossellini Sirk Sjöström Sternberg Tarkovsky Tati Trnka Truffaut Varda Vertov Vigo Welles Wiene Wood Architecture Breuer Bunshaft Gaudí Gropius Guimard Horta Hundertwasser Johnson Kahn Le Corbusier Loos Melnikov Mendelsohn Mies Nervi Neutra Niemeyer Rietveld Saarinen Steiner Sullivan Tatlin Wright Works A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte (1886) Mont Sainte-Victoir (1887) The Starry Night (1889) Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907) The Dance (1909–1910) Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (1912) Black Square (1915) The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920) Ballet Mécanique (1923) Battleship Potemkin (1925) Metropolis (1927) Un Chien Andalou (1929) Villa Savoye (1931) Fallingwater (1936) Citizen Kane (1941) Meshes of the Afternoon (1943) Performing arts Music Antheil Bartók Berg Berio Boulanger Boulez Copland Debussy Dutilleux Falla Feldman Górecki Hindemith Honegger Ives Janáček Ligeti Lutosławski Milhaud Nono Partch Russolo Satie Schaeffer Schoenberg Scriabin Stockhausen Strauss Stravinsky Szymanowski Varèse Villa-Lobos Webern Weill Theatre Anderson Anouilh Artaud Beckett Brecht Chekhov Ibsen Jarry Kaiser Maeterlinck Mayakovsky O'Casey O'Neill Osborne Pirandello Piscator Strindberg Toller Wedekind Wilder Witkiewicz Dance Balanchine Cunningham Diaghilev Duncan Fokine Fuller Graham Holm Laban Massine Nijinsky Shawn Sokolow St. Denis Tamiris Wiesenthal Wigman Works Don Juan (1888) Ubu Roi (1896) Verklärte Nacht (1899) Pelléas et Mélisande (1902) Salome (1905) The Firebird (1910) Afternoon of a Faun (1912) The Rite of Spring (1913) Fountain (1917) Six Characters in Search of an Author (1921) The Threepenny Opera (1928) Waiting for Godot (1953) Related American modernism Armory Show Avant-garde Ballets Russes Bloomsbury Group Buddhist modernism Classical Hollywood cinema Degenerate art Ecomodernism Experimental film Film noir Fin de siècle Fourth dimension in art Fourth dimension in literature Grosvenor School of Modern Art Hanshinkan Modernism High modernism Hippie modernism Impressionism Music Literature Post- Incoherents International Style Late modernism Late modernity List of art movements List of avant-garde artists List of modernist poets Maximalism Metamodernism Modernity Neo-primitivism Neo-romanticism New Hollywood New Objectivity Poetic realism Pop Art Pulp noir Reactionary modernism Remodernism Second Viennese School Structural film Underground film Vulgar modernism ← Romanticism Postmodernism → Category v t e Appropriation in the arts By field Music Bootleg recording Chopped and screwed Contrafact list Contrafactum Cover version DJ mix Interpolation Medley Music mashup Music plagiarism Musical quotation Nightcore Parody music Pasticcio Plunderphonics Potpourri Quodlibet Remix Riddim Sampling Sound collage Standard Tribute act Trope Variation Vaporwave Literature / theatre Assemblage Cut-up technique Flarf poetry Found poetry Jukebox musical Trope Verbatim theatre Visual arts Collage Combine painting Photographic mosaic Readymades of Marcel Duchamp Swipe By source material Mona Lisa Michelangelo's David Michelangelo's Pietà Statue of Liberty Cinema / television / video Abridged series Anime music video Collage film Found footage Literal music video Parody film Re-cut trailer Remake Shot-for-shot Supercut TV format Vidding Video mashup YouTube Poop Other arts In-joke Internet meme Joke theft Parody advertisement Revivalism (architecture) Video game modding General concepts Intertextual figures Allusion Calque Parody Pastiche Plagiarism Quotation Translation Adaptation Film Literary Theatre Other concepts After (art) Assemblage (art) Bricolage Citation Détournement Found object Homage Imitation in art Mashup Reprise Satire Source criticism in the arts Related artistic concepts Aesthetic interpretation Anti-art Archetypal literary criticism Artistic inspiration " The Death of the Author " Divine inspiration Afflatus Genius (literature) Muses Fan labor Fan fiction Genre Genre studies Originality Simulacrum Western canon Standard blocks and forms Archetype Formula fiction Genre fiction Jazz standard Plot device Stock character Story structure Epoch-marking works L.H.O.O.Q.

(1919) " Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote " (1939) Reality Hunger: A Manifesto (2010) Theorization Dada De Copia Rerum Diegesis Dionysian imitatio Mimesis Nachahmung Palimpsests: Literature in the Second Degree The Pictures Generation Pop art Postmodernism Russian formalism Related non- artistic concepts Academic dishonesty Appropriation in sociology Articulation in sociology Cultural appropriation History of printing Information society Intellectual property Copyright infringement Derivative work Fair use Meme Open source Participatory culture Pirate politics Recontextualisation Remix culture Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐lb4p9
Cached time: 20250814215602
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.023 seconds
Real time usage: 1.242 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6772/1000000
Revision size: 51790/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 356811/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7445/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 179314/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.518/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23648013/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  849.169      1 -total
 37.54%  318.820     14 Template:Navbox
 31.12%  264.232      1 Template:Reflist
 18.03%  153.108      1 Template:Modernism
 12.12%  102.947      8 Template:Lang
 11.26%   95.600      1 Template:Westernart
 10.32%   87.636     18 Template:Cite_web
  7.47%   63.400     10 Template:ISBN
  7.40%   62.835      1 Template:Short_description
  6.35%   53.961      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:103895:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215602 and revision id 1303423565. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pop_art&oldid=1303423565 " Categories : Pop art Avant-garde art Modern art Contemporary art movements Western art British art 1940s in art 1950s in art 1960s in art Popular culture American art Postmodern art Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 Pages with broken anchors Pages containing broken anchor template with unsupported parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 23:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pop art 71 languages Add topic

