Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Tadoma 8 languages العربية Deutsch Français Italiano Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Deafblind communication This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Tadoma" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Anne Sullivan demonstrating the use of the method with Helen Keller , 1929 Tadoma is a method of communication utilized by deafblind individuals, [ 1 ] in which the listener places their little finger on the speaker's lips and their fingers along the jawline .

[ 2 ] The middle three fingers often fall along the speaker's cheeks with the little finger picking up the vibrations of the speaker's throat . It is sometimes referred to as tactile lipreading , as the listener feels the movement of the lips, the vibrations of the vocal cords , expansion of the cheeks and the warm air produced by nasal phonemes such as 'N' and 'M'.

[ 3 ] Hand positioning can vary, and it is a sometimes also used by hard-of-hearing people to supplement their remaining hearing.

[ citation needed ] In some cases, especially if the speaker knows sign language , the deafblind listener may use the Tadoma method with one hand on the speaker's face, and their other hand on the speaker’s signing hand to hear the words. In this way, the two methods reinforce each other, increasing the chances of the listener understanding the speaker.

The Tadoma method can also help a deafblind person retain speech skills they may have had otherwise. This can, in special cases, allow deafblind people to acquire entirely new words.

It is a difficult method to learn and use [ citation needed ] , and is rarely used nowadays [ citation needed ] . However, a small [ quantify ] number of deafblind people still use the Tadoma method in everyday communication.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] The Tadoma method was invented by American teacher Sophie Alcorn and developed at the Perkins School for the Blind in Massachusetts . It is named after the first two children to whom it was taught: Winthrop "Tad" Chapman and Oma Simpson. It was hoped that the students would learn to speak by trying to reproduce what they felt on the speaker's face and throat while touching their own face.

[ 4 ] Helen Keller was a famous user of    the method.

See also [ edit ] Tactile signing References [ edit ] ^ "Fact Sheet #005 Tadoma (English)" .

www.sfsu.edu . Archived from the original on 2001-01-17 . Retrieved 2009-12-01 .

^ "Tadoma" .

^ "Deaf Blind Tadoma Method" .

www.lifeprint.com .

^ Charlotte M. Reed (November 1996).

"The Implications of the Tadoma Method of Speechreading for Spoken Language Processing" (PDF) .

Proceeding of Fourth International Conference on Spoken Language Processing. ICSLP '96 . Vol. 3. pp.

1489– 1492.

doi : 10.1109/ICSLP.1996.607898 .

ISBN 0-7803-3555-4 .

S2CID 14924215 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-06-13 . Retrieved 2009-12-01 .

External links [ edit ] Look up Tadoma in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tadoma&oldid=1306279051 " Categories : Deafblindness Deaf education Human communication Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 22:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tadoma 8 languages Add topic

