Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 References 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Political Marxism 2 languages 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Strand of Marxist theory Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Political Marxism ( PM ) is a strand of Marxist theory that places history at the centre of its analysis. It is also referred to as a form of neo-Marxism or Western Marxism .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] History [ edit ] The term political Marxism itself was coined during the Brenner debate of the late 1970s as a criticism of the work of Brenner by the French Marxist historian Guy Bois . Bois distinguished Brenner's "political Marxism" from "economic Marxism".

[ 3 ] As such, the label political Marxism has not always been accepted by the scholars to whom it has been applied.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The term is also distinguished from Marxism in the politically activist sense. According to Arnold Hauser , in this system of analysis, one can agree with Marxism as a philosophy of history and society without being a Marxist.

[ 6 ] Political Marxism was developed as a reaction against historical models of Marxist analysis in the debate on the origins of capitalism . The political Marxist critique brought social agency and class conflict to the centre of Marxism. In this context, Robert Brenner and Ellen Wood developed political Marxism as a distinct approach to rehistoricize and repoliticize the Marxist project. It was a movement away from structuralist and timeless accounts towards historical specificity as contested process and lived praxis . This research programme has since expanded across the social sciences to include the fields of history , political theory , political economy , sociology , international relations , and international political economy .

[ 7 ] Researchers linked with political Marxism today include Benno Teschke , [ 8 ] Hannes Lacher, [ 9 ] and George Comninel.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ Leavy, Patricia (2020).

The Oxford Handbook of Qualitative Research . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 71.

ISBN 978-0-19-084738-8 .

^ Das, Raju J. (2017).

Marxist Class Theory for a Skeptical World . Leiden: BRILL. p. 18.

ISBN 978-90-04-29709-8 .

^ 'Against the Neo-Malthusian Orthodoxy', in The Brenner Debate: Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe , ed. by Trevor Aston and C.H.E. Philpin, Past and Present Publications (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985), pp. 107–18 (pp. 115–16) [repr. from Past & Present , 79 (1978), pp. 60-69]. 'Brenner's Marxism is "political Marxism"—in reaction to the wave of economistic tendencies in contemporary historiography. As the role of the class struggle is widely underestimated, so he injects strong doses of it into his own historical interpretation. I do not question the motivation behind such a reaction, but rather the summary and purely ideological manner in which it is implemented. It amounts to a voluntarist vision of history in which the class struggle is divorced from all other objective contingencies and, in the first place, from such laws of development as may be peculiar to a specific mode of production.

^ David McNally, "Ellen Meiksins Wood obituary" The Guardian .

^ Alex Callinicos, ' Marxism loses a passionate champion ', Socialist Review , 410 (February 2016).

^ Dixon, Rebecca (1982).

Choice: Publication of the Association of College and Research Libraries, a Division of the American Library Association . Middletown, CT: American Library Association. p. 571.

^ Political Marxism and the Social Sciences ^ See: Benno Teschke (2003).

The Myth of 1648: Class, Geopolitics and the Making of Modern International Relations.

London and New York: Verso.

^ See: Hannes Lacher (2006).

Beyond Globalization: Capitalism, Territoriality and the International Relations of Modernity . London and New York: Routledge.

^ See: 
Comninel, G. (2000) English Feudalism and the Origins of Capitalism .

The Journal of Peasant Studies , 27 (4), pp. 1– 53 Comninel, G (1990 [1987]) Rethinking the French Revolution . London and New York: Verso.

Further reading [ edit ] By Robert Brenner: (1976) 'Agrarian Class Structures and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe' .

Past & Present , 70, (February 1976), pp. 30-75.

(1977) 'The Origins of Capitalist Development: A Critique of Neo-Smithian Marxism' .

New Left Review , I/104. pp. 25-92.

(1995 [1982]) 'The Agrarian Roots of European Capitalism' in Aston, T.H. and C.H.E. Philpin (eds.) The Brenner Debate: Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 213-327. Originally published (1982). ’The Agrarian Roots of European Capitalism’, Past & Present , 97, November, pp. 16-113.

By Ellen Meiksins Wood: (1991) The Pristine Culture of Capitalism: An Historical Essay on Old Regimes and Modern States . London and New York: Verso.

(1995) Democracy Against Capitalism: Renewing Historical Materialism.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

(2002 [1999]) The Origin of Capitalism: A Longer View . London and New York: Verso.

(2008) Citizens to Lords. A Social History of Western Political Thought From Antiquity to the Middle Ages . London and New York: Verso.

External links [ edit ] Political Marxism and the Social Sciences , a platform for research on political Marxism at the University of Sussex The Limits of 'Political Marxism' . By Alex Callinicos .

New Left Review I/184, November–December 1990.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Political_Marxism&oldid=1276621938 " Categories : Eponymous political ideologies Marxist theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from December 2020 This page was last edited on 19 February 2025, at 22:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Political Marxism 2 languages Add topic

