Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Accessibility 2 History 3 Camping 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Nā Pali Coast State Park 6 languages Català Cebuano Español Français മലയാളം 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 22°10′32″N 159°38′37″W ﻿ / ﻿ 22.17552°N 159.64362°W ﻿ / 22.17552; -159.64362 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Na Pali Coast ) State park in Hawaii, United States Nā Pali Coast State Park Nā Pali overlook of the Kalalau Valley Show map of Kauai Show map of Hawaii Location Kauaʻi , United States Coordinates 22°10′32″N 159°38′37″W ﻿ / ﻿ 22.17552°N 159.64362°W ﻿ / 22.17552; -159.64362 Area 6,175 acres (24.99 km 2 ) Governing body Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources Along the Kalalau Trail Honopū Valley , aerial view Nā Pali Coast view from a boat Nā Pali Coast State Park is a 6,175-acre (2,499 ha) state park in the U.S. state of Hawaii , located in the center of the rugged 16-mile (26 km) northwest side of Kauaʻi , the second-oldest inhabited Hawaiian island . The Nā Pali coast itself extends southwest from Keʻe Beach all the way to Polihale State Park . The nā pali (many cliffs ) along the shoreline rise as much as 4,000 feet (1,200 m) above the Pacific Ocean . The state park was formed to protect the Kalalau Valley .

To the east of the state park is the Hono O Nā Pali State Natural Reserve . It was established in 1983 and later extended to over 3,578 acres (14.5 km 2 ) in 2009.

[ 1 ] Hiking trails and hunters' roads provide access to the sharp ridges from Koke'e Road (route 550) in Waimea Canyon .

Accessibility [ edit ] Although inaccessible to vehicles, this coast can be enjoyed over land by hiking or in a helicopter , and from the ocean by kayak and paddleboard . Charter tours are available on rigid-hulled inflatable boat or catamaran , originating from Port Allen and Hanalei Bay . The Kalalau Trail from the end of Hawaii Route 560 (called the Kuhio Highway) provides the only land access along the coast, traversing 11 miles (18 km) and crossing five major valleys (and many smaller ones) before reaching Kalalau Beach at the base of Kalalau Valley .

[ 2 ] Side trails along the way lead to waterfalls in the valleys above. The coast in between Kalalau Beach and Polihale Beach is inaccessible by hiking and can only be reached by boat or helicopter. Kayak trips are a popular way to visit this area.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] The Nā Pali Coast was formed 5 million years ago, when a massive amount of water spilled onto the northwest side of the island, carving its valleys.

The first settlers on the Nā Pali Coast were Polynesian navigators around 1200 AD. Soon after, many Tahitian migrants followed, shaping the culture of Kauai and other Hawaiian islands today.  The coast was a center for trade between Hanalei , Waimea and Niʻihau , and branched out to nearby island colonies. After Kauai was visited by Captain Cook in 1778, many Westerners began traveling to the island. As more foreigners arrived, the Hawaiian tribes along the Nā Pali Coast, where Nā Pali Coast State Park now exists, began to die off from Western diseases. The last known native Hawaiians to live along the Nā Pali Coast were sighted in the 20th century.

[ 4 ] Camping [ edit ] Camping in Nā Pali Coast State Park is only allowed with a valid permit. There are three sites that allow camping access. During the summer season from May 15 to September 7, access from the ocean via boat or kayak is only allowed with a  valid camping permit. Along the Kalalau Trail , the two authorized spots for camping are in Kalalau and Hanakoa. Both are covered by the same permit and can be accessed by hiking. These locations include facilities to accommodate campers. Five nights is the maximum stay on the Kalalau Trail, and one night maximum for Hanakoa. The camp site at Miloli'i is only accessible by boat or kayak. Permits allow access for maximum of three days.

Composting toilets are available at all three camp sites.

[ 5 ] [ failed verification ] A view of the Nā Pali Coast from the ocean Nā Pali Coast view See also [ edit ] Natural Area Reserves System Hawaii Hanakapiai Beach Hanakapiai Falls Hanakoa Valley References [ edit ] ^ "Hono O Na Pali" .

official web site .

Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources . Retrieved April 13, 2010 .

^ "Nā Pali Coast Wilderness Park" .

Hawaiʻi State Park web site . Retrieved April 13, 2010 .

^ Lucier, Jessica Lane; Hsieh, Evelyn Z., eds. (2009).

Let's Go Hawaii (5th ed.). Let's Go Publications & Macmillan. p. 399.

ISBN 9780312385798 .

^ "Nā Pali Coast State Park (History)" .

Napali . Capt. Andy’s Sailing Adventures . Retrieved July 20, 2015 .

^ "Nā Pali Coast State Park (Camping)" .

Hawaii State Parks . Hawaii Information Consortium, LLC . Retrieved July 20, 2015 .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nā Pali Coast State Park .

External links [ edit ] Nā Pali Coast Magazine Nā Pali Coast ʻOhana Nā Pali Hiking Tips Nā Pali Coast Beach Nā Pali Coast Hike - Hanakapiaʻai Overview of Nā Pali Coast. Pictures + Map Nā Pali Guide Koke'e & Nā Pali Coast Recreation Map for smartphones – GPS enabled map of Koke'e and Nā Pali coast trails v t e Protected areas of Hawaii Federal National Estuarine Research Reserves Heʻeia National Historic Sites and Historical Parks Honouliuli Kalaupapa Kaloko-Honokōhau Puʻuhonua o Hōnaunau Puʻukoholā Heiau National Marine Sanctuaries Hawaiian Islands Humpback Whale National Memorials Pearl Harbor National Monuments Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Parks Haleakalā Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Trails Ala Kahakai National Wildlife Refuges Hakalau Forest Hanalei Hawaiian Islands Hulēʻia James Campbell Kakahaiʻa Kealia Pond Kīlauea Point Kona Forest Oʻahu Forest Pearl Harbor Other National Historic Landmarks National Natural Landmarks National Register of Historic Places Wilderness Areas State Parks, Monuments, Recreation Areas, and Preserves Hawaiʻi (island) ʻAkaka Falls State Park Hāpuna Beach State Recreation Area Huliheʻe Palace Kalōpā State Recreation Area Kealakekua Bay State Historical Park Kekaha Kai (Kona Coast) State Park Kīholo State Park Reserve Kohala Historical Sites State Monument Lapakahi State Historical Park Lava Tree State Monument MacKenzie State Recreation Area Manuka State Wayside Park Mauna Kea Ice Age Reserve Mauna Kea State Recreation Area Old Kona Airport State Recreation Area Wailoa River State Recreation Area Wailuku River State Park / Rainbow Falls Kaua‘i Ahukini State Recreation Pier Hāʻena State Park Kōkeʻe State Park Nā Pali Coast State Park Polihale State Park Russian Fort Elizabeth State Historical Park Wailua River State Park Waimea Canyon State Park Waimea State Recreational Pier Maui Halekiʻi-Pihana Heiau State Monument ʻĪao Valley State Monument Kaumahina State Wayside Park Mākena State Park Polipoli Spring State Recreation Area Puaʻa Kaʻa State Wayside Park Waiʻanapanapa State Park Wailua Valley State Wayside Park Moloka‘i Palaʻau State Park O‘ahu Ahupuaʻa O Kahana State Park ʻAiea Bay State Recreation Area Diamond Head State Monument Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve Heʻeia State Park ʻIolani Palace State Monument Kaʻena Point State Park Kaiwi State Scenic Shoreline Kakaʻako Waterfront Park Keaīwa Heiau State Recreation Area Kewalo Basin Kūkaniloko Birthstones State Monument Lāʻie Point State Wayside Makapuʻu Point State Wayside Mālaekahana State Recreation Area Nuʻuanu Pali State Wayside Puʻu o Mahuka Heiau State Monument Puʻu ʻUalakaʻa State Wayside Queen Emma Summer Palace Royal Mausoleum State Monument Sacred Falls State Park Sand Island State Recreation Area Ulupō Heiau State Historic Site Waʻahila Ridge State Recreation Area Wahiawā Freshwater State Recreation Area Hawai'i Department of Land and Natural Resources Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nā_Pali_Coast_State_Park&oldid=1277981861 " Categories : State parks of Hawaii Beaches of Kauai Protected areas of Kauai Cliffs of Hawaii Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from August 2023 Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from May 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 February 2025, at 21:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nā Pali Coast State Park 6 languages Add topic

