Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Interpretation 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Sputum 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa Қазақша Кыргызча Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mucus that is coughed up from the lower airways This article needs more reliable medical references for verification or relies too heavily on primary sources .

Please review the contents of the article and add the appropriate references if you can. Unsourced or poorly sourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Sputum" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2023 ) Medical condition Abnormal sputum Other names Mucus Cocci -shaped Enterococcus sp.

bacteria taken from a pneumonia patient Pronunciation /'spju:təm/ Specialty Pulmonology Sputum is mucus that is coughed up from the lower airways (the trachea and bronchi ). In medicine, sputum samples are usually used for a naked-eye examination, microbiological investigation of respiratory infections, and cytological investigations of respiratory system.

A naked eye exam of the sputum can be done at home by a patient in order to note the various colors (see below). Any hint of yellow or green color ( pus ) suggests an airway infection (but does not indicate the type of organism causing it). Such color hints are best detected when the sputum is viewed against a bright white background, such as white paper, a white pot, or a white sink surface.

Having green, yellow, or thickened phlegm (sputum) does not always indicate the presence of an infection. Also, if an infection is present, the color of the phlegm (sputum) does not determine whether a virus, a bacterium or another pathogen has caused it. Simple allergies can also cause changes in the color of mucus.

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] The best sputum samples contain very little saliva , [ 2 ] as saliva contaminates the sample with oral bacteria . This is especially true for samples for laboratory testing in cytology or microbiology . Specimen adequacy is assessed by the laboratory technologists by examining a Gram stain or cytology stain of the sputum. More than 25 squamous epithelial cells at low power magnification exam under the microscope strongly suggest salivary contamination.

[ 3 ] Sputum samples have been used to quantify the degree of airway inflammation in human diseases such as asthma. Specifically, this work has demonstrated that a subgroup of severe asthma patients has airway inflammation that is resistant to treatment with corticosteroids.

[ 4 ] When a sputum specimen is plated out in microbiology, it is best to get the portion of the sample that almost looks like yellow pus onto the swab. If there is any blood in the sputum, this should also be on the swab.

[ citation needed ] Microbiological sputum samples are used to look for infections, such as Moraxella catarrhalis , Mycobacterium tuberculosis , Streptococcus pneumoniae , and Haemophilus influenzae . Other pathogens can also be found.

Purulent sputum [ 5 ] contains pus , composed of white blood cells , cellular debris, dead tissue, serous fluid , and viscous liquid ( mucus ). Purulent sputum is typically yellow or green. It is seen in cases of pneumonia, bronchiectasis , lung abscess , or an advanced stage of bronchitis .

[ 6 ] Interpretation [ edit ] Sputum can be (when examined by the naked eye): [ citation needed ] Bloody [ 5 ] ( hemoptysis ) Blood-streaked sputum –an indicator of possible inflammation of the throat (larynx and/or trachea) or bronchi; lung cancer ; other bleeding erosions, ulcers, or tumors of the lower airway.

Pink sputum – it indicates sputum evenly mixed with blood from alveoli and/or small peripheral bronchi as is seen in potential pulmonary edema .

Massive blood – an indicator of possible cavitary tuberculosis or tumor such as lung cancer , or lung abscess ; bronchiectasis ; lung infarction ; pulmonary embolism .

Red, jelly-like sputum - an indicator of possible pneumonia caused by Klebsiella .

Green or greenish colored - indicative of potential longstanding respiratory infection (green from degenerative changes in cell debris) as in pneumonia, ruptured lung abscess, chronic infectious bronchitis, and infected bronchiectasis or cystic fibrosis.

Rust colored – usually caused by pneumococcal bacteria (in pneumonia ), pulmonary embolism , lung cancer or pulmonary tuberculosis .

Brownish –potential indicator of chronic bronchitis (greenish/yellowish/brown); chronic pneumonia (whitish-brown); tuberculosis ; lung cancer .

Yellow, yellowish purulent – an indicator of the sample containing pus. "The sputum color of patients with acute cough and no underlying chronic lung disease does not imply therapeutic consequences such as prescription of antibiotics." [ 7 ] The color can provide hints as to effective treatment in chronic bronchitis patients: [ 8 ] A yellow-greenish (mucopurulent) color suggests that treatment with antibiotics can reduce symptoms. The green color is caused by degenerating neutrophil verdoperoxidase .

Whitish gray sputum color against a white color background (such as a white sink surface) tends to indicate either a specimen from someone who is dehydrated, and/or from an older person, and/or a specimen with a mixed, modest number of eosinophils and maybe some acute inflammatory neutrophil cells (this last choice tends to suggest chronic allergic bronchitis).

A white, milky, or opaque (mucoid) appearance means that antibiotics are less likely to be effective in treatment because the likelihood is greater of a viral infection or allergy than of antibiotic-responsive micro-organisms. Thickness may indicate asthma.

Foamy white – may come from earlier-phase pulmonary edema .

Frothy pink – may indicate more severe pulmonary edema . Antibiotics may not be necessary at this time.

Clear – pulmonary embolism (clear to frothy); COPD chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (clear to gray); viral respiratory infection (clear to whitish and sometimes a hint of yellow); asthma (thick and white to yellowish).

See also [ edit ] Phlegm References [ edit ] ^ "Green phlegm and snot 'not always a sign of an infection needing antibiotics' " .

GOV.UK . 18 November 2013 . Retrieved 2022-04-17 .

^ Clinical Microbiology procedures handbook , American Society for Microbiology 2nd Ed. 2007 update ^ Gershman, Neil H.; Liu, Hong; Wong, Hofer H.; Liu, Jane T.; Fahy, John V. (August 1999).

"Fractional analysis of sequential induced sputum samples during sputum induction: Evidence that different lung compartments are sampled at different time points" .

Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology .

104 (2): 322– 328.

doi : 10.1016/S0091-6749(99)70374-X .

PMID 10452752 .

^ Peters, Michael C.; Kerr, Sheena; Dunican, Eleanor M.; Woodruff, Prescott G.; Fajt, Merritt L.; Levy, Bruce D.; Israel, Elliot; Phillips, Brenda R.; Mauger, David T.; Comhair, Suzy A.; Erzurum, Serpil C.; Johansson, Mats W.; Jarjour, Nizar N.; Coverstone, Andrea M.; Castro, Mario; Hastie, Annette T.; Bleecker, Eugene R.; Wenzel, Sally E.; Fahy, John V. (March 2018).

"Refractory airway type 2 inflammation in a large subgroup of asthmatic patients treated with inhaled corticosteroids" .

Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology .

143 (1): 104–113.e14.

doi : 10.1016/j.jaci.2017.12.1009 .

PMC 6128784 .

PMID 29524537 .

^ a b Richard F. LeBlond; Richard L. DeGowin; Donald E. Brown (2004).

DeGowin's diagnostic examination . New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 0-07-140923-8 .

^ What can sputum tell us?

^ Altiner A, Wilm S, Däubener W, Bormann C, Pentzek M, Abholz HH, Scherer M (2009).

"Sputum color for diagnosis of a bacterial infection in patients with acute cough" .

Scand J Prim Health Care .

27 (2): 70– 3.

doi : 10.1080/02813430902759663 .

PMC 3410464 .

PMID 19242860 .

^ Sputum Color is the Key to Treating Acute COPD Exacerbations External links [ edit ] Classification D ICD - 11 : MD10 ICD - 10 : R09.3 ICD - 9-CM : 786.4 MeSH : D013183 SNOMED CT : 45710003 Scholia has a topic profile for Sputum .

v t e Signs and symptoms relating to the respiratory system Auscultation Stethoscope Respiratory sounds Stridor Wheeze Crackles Rhonchi Stertor Squawk Pleural friction rub Fremitus Bronchophony Death rattle Elicited findings Percussion Pectoriloquy Whispered pectoriloquy Egophony Breathing Rate Apnea Prematurity Sleep Dyspnea Hyperventilation Hypoventilation Hyperpnea Tachypnea Hypopnea Bradypnea Pattern Agonal respiration Biot's respiration Cheyne–Stokes respiration Kussmaul breathing Ataxic respiration Other Respiratory distress Respiratory arrest Orthopnea / Platypnea Trepopnea Aerophagia Asphyxia Breath holding Mouth breathing Snoring Vocal fold Aphonia Muteness Selective Dysphonia Hypophonia Other Chest pain In children Precordial catch syndrome Pleurisy Nail clubbing Cyanosis Cough Sputum Hemoptysis Epistaxis Silhouette sign Post-nasal drip Hiccup COPD Hoover's sign asthma Curschmann's spirals Charcot–Leyden crystals chronic bronchitis Reid index sarcoidosis Kveim test pulmonary embolism Hampton hump Westermark sign pulmonary edema Kerley lines Hamman's sign Golden S sign Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sputum&oldid=1295902296 " Category : Symptoms and signs: Respiratory system Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional medical references from September 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles requiring reliable medical sources Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with plain IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2007 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 15:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sputum 41 languages Add topic

