Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples on the Moon 2 Examples on Mars 3 Examples on Mercury 4 See also 5 References 6 Notes Toggle the table of contents Wrinkle ridge 2 languages العربية Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Feature commonly found on lunar maria This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( October 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Wrinkles ridges of Mare Serenitatis in selenochromatic format (more infos here : https://www.gawh.it/main/selenocromatica ) Unnamed wrinkle ridges north of the lunar crater Flamsteed , Oceanus Procellarum , from Apollo 12 A wrinkle ridge is a type of feature commonly found on lunar maria , or basalt plains. These features are low, sinuous ridges formed on the mare surface that can extend for up to several hundred kilometers. Wrinkle ridges are tectonic features created after the lava cooled and solidified. They frequently outline ring structures buried within the mare, follow circular patterns outlining the mare, or intersect protruding peaks. They are sometimes called veins due to their resemblance to the veins that protrude from beneath the skin.

Wrinkle ridges are named with the Latin designation dorsum (plural dorsa ). The standard IAU nomenclature uses the names of people (generally scientists) to identify wrinkle ridges on the Moon.  For example, the Dorsa Burnet are named for Thomas Burnet , and the Dorsum Owen is named after George Owen of Henllys .

Wrinkle ridges can also be found on Mars , for example in Chryse Planitia , on several of the asteroids that have been visited by spacecraft, on Mercury , and certain moons of Jupiter and Saturn . Although several hypotheses have been advanced as causes of wrinkle ridges, today they are generally considered to be of tectonic origin. They involve folding and faulting .

[ 1 ] If correctly interpreted as thrust faults, where a rupture occurs and one side of the rupture is pushed on top of the other, they are evidence of compressional stress in planetary crust.

[ 2 ] Examples on the Moon [ edit ] Lunar crater Krieger and vicinity, showing wrinkle ridges in the surrounding mare and sinuous rilles along the left edge, from Apollo 15 Dorsum Zirkel in Mare Imbrium , from Apollo 15 Oblique view of Dorsum Heim on the Moon, from Apollo 17 Dorsa Geikie is a prominent wrinkle ridge in Mare Fecunditatis .

LRO mosaic.

Examples on Mars [ edit ] Solis Dorsa are an expansive set of parallel wrinkle ridges on Solis Planum on Mars.

Viking 1 Oribiter mosaic.

Floor and eroded south wall of the crater Flaugergues on Mars. Arrows point to wrinkle ridges.

Wrinkle ridges in Hesperia Planum , Mars, as seen by Viking. The wrinkle ridges trend in different directions, so compressional forces may have changed direction over time.

Trough cutting a wrinkle ridge, as seen by HiRISE under HiWish program. Location in the Coprates quadrangle , Mars.

Wrinkle ridge in the Oxia Colles region of Mars Examples on Mercury [ edit ] Antoniadi Dorsum cuts across the crater Geddes.

The prominent wrinkle ridge across the center is Schiaparelli Dorsum.

See also [ edit ] List of features on the Moon Planetary nomenclature References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wrinkle ridges .

^ Kieffer, H, B. Jakosky, C. Snyder, M. Matthews (eds.).  1992.  Mars.  University of Arizona Press.

^ "HiRISE | Wrinkle Ridges and Pit Craters (ESP_046817_1775)" . Uahirise.org. 2016-10-19 . Retrieved 2018-10-22 .

Notes [ edit ] Golombek, M. P., F. S. Anderson, and M. T. Zuber (2001), Martian wrinkle ridge topography: Evidence for subsurface faults from MOLA, J. Geophys. Res., 106, 23,811–23,821, doi : 10.1029/2000JE001308 .

Montési, L. G. J., and M. T. Zuber (2003), Clues to the lithospheric structure of Mars from wrinkle ridge sets and localization instability, J. Geophys. Res., 108(E6), 5048, doi : 10.1029/2002JE001974 .

Watters, T. R. (1988), Wrinkle Ridge Assemblages on the Terrestrial Planets, J. Geophys. Res., 93(B9), 10,236–10,254, doi : 10.1029/JB093iB09p10236 .

Watters, et al., Evidence of Recent Thrust Faulting on the Moon Revealed by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera.

Science 20 August 2010: 936–940.

doi : 10.1126/science.1189590 Ruj, T., and Kawai, K. (2021). A global investigation of wrinkle ridge formation events; implications towards the thermal evolution of Mars. Icarus, 114625, doi : 10.1016/j.icarus.2021.114625 .

v t e Moon Outline Physical properties Internal structure Topography Atmosphere Gravity field Hill sphere Magnetic field Sodium tail Moonlight Earthlight Orbit Orbital elements Distance Perigee and apogee Libration Nodes Nodal period Precession Syzygy New moon Full moon Eclipses Lunar eclipse Total penumbral lunar eclipse Tetrad Solar eclipse Solar eclipses on the Moon Eclipse cycle Supermoon Tide Tidal force Tidal locking Tidal acceleration Tidal range Lunar station Surface and features Selenography Terminator Limb Hemispheres Near side Far side Poles North pole South pole Face Maria List Mountains Peak of eternal light Valleys Volcanic features Domes Calderas Lava tubes Craters List Ray systems Permanently shadowed craters South Pole–Aitken basin Regolith swirls Rilles Wrinkle ridges Rocks Lunar basalt 70017 Changesite-(Y) Water Space weathering Micrometeorite Sputtering Quakes Transient lunar phenomenon Selenographic coordinate system Science Observation Libration Lunar theory Origin Giant-impact hypothesis Theia Lunar magma ocean Geology Timescale Late Heavy Bombardment Lunar meteorites KREEP Volcanism Experiments Lunar laser ranging ALSEP Lunar sample displays Apollo 11 Apollo 17 Lunar seismology Exploration Missions Apollo program Explorers Probes Landing Colonization Moonbase Tourism Lunar resources Time-telling and navigation Lunar calendar Lunisolar calendar Month Lunar month Nodal period Fortnight Sennight Lunar station Lunar distance Phases and names New Full Names Crescent Super and micro Blood Blue Black Dark Wet Tetrad Daily phenomena Moonrise Meridian passage Moonset Related Lunar deities Lunar effect Earth phase Moon illusion Pareidolia Man in the Moon Moon rabbit Craters named after people Artificial objects on the Moon Memorials on the Moon Moon in science fiction list Apollo era futuristic exploration Hollow Moon Moon landing conspiracy theories Moon Treaty " Moon is made of green cheese " Natural satellite Double planet Lilith (hypothetical second moon) Splitting of the Moon Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wrinkle_ridge&oldid=1279330500 " Categories : Extraterrestrial ridges Volcanism on the Moon Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2018 All articles lacking in-text citations Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 7 March 2025, at 22:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wrinkle ridge 2 languages Add topic

