Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Artists 3 Origins 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Superflat 11 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano 日本語 Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art movement Takashi Murakami described Hokusai's " Thunderstorm Beneath the Summit " as an example of a Superflat art piece.

[ 1 ] Superflat is a postmodern art movement , founded by Japanese contemporary artist Takashi Murakami , which is influenced by manga and anime .

[ 2 ] However, superflat does not have an explicit definition because Takashi Murakami does not want to limit the movement, but rather leave room for it to grow and evolve over time.

[ 1 ] Superflat is also the name of a 2000 [ 1 ] art exhibition, curated by Murakami, that toured West Hollywood , Minneapolis and Seattle .

[ 3 ] Description [ edit ] "Superflat" is used by Murakami to refer to various flattened forms in Japanese graphic art, animation, pop culture and fine arts, as well as the "shallow emptiness of Japanese consumer culture." [ 4 ] Superflat has been embraced by American artists, who have created a hybrid called " SoFlo Superflat ".

[ 3 ] Murakami defines Superflat in broad terms, so the subject matter is very diverse. Some works explore the consumerism and sexual fetishism that is prevalent in post-war Japanese culture . This often includes lolicon art, which is parodied by works such as those by Henmaru Machino . These works are an exploration of otaku sexuality through grotesque and/or distorted images. Other works are more concerned with a fear of growing up. For example, Yoshitomo Nara 's work often features playful graffiti on old Japanese ukiyo-e executed in a childish manner. And some works focus on the structure and underlying desires that comprise otaku and overall post-war Japanese culture. Murakami is influenced by directors such as Hideaki Anno .

[ 5 ] Superflat is not limited to contemporary art alone. Murakami cites older Japanese pieces as superflat as well, including Katsushika Hokusai 's " Thunderstorm Beneath the Summit " (1830–32) as an example of superflat.

[ 1 ] A subversive look at otakuism is not a defining factor of Kaikai Kiki's galleries; Bome , one of the most important artists involved with the first Superflat exhibition, is a famous otaku figure sculptor and his work based on existing bishōjo anime characters has been showcased in multiple galleries including a solo exhibition in the Kaikai Kiki Gallery. The artist Mr.

is a self-described lolicon and views his artwork to be not a cultural commentary but a portrayal of his own personal fantasies.

[ 6 ] Artists [ edit ] Superflat artists include Chiho Aoshima , Keiichi Tanaami , Ayako Rokkaku , Mahomi Kunikata , Sayuri Michima , Yoshitomo Nara , Yuko Yamaguchi , Aya Takano , Yusuke Nakamura , Tomokazu Matsuyama , Sebastian Masuda , Fantasista Utamaro and Takashi Murakami.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In addition, some animators within anime and some manga artists have had their past and present work exhibited in Superflat exhibitions, especially Kōji Morimoto , Keita Takahashi , Seizō Watase , Seiichi Hayashi , Hibiki Yoshizaki , and the work of Hitoshi Tomizawa , author of Alien 9 and Milk Closet .

Origins [ edit ] There are multiple factors that played a role for Murakami to come up with his Superflat claim. In his Manifesto, he describes “ Super flatness ” as an original concept of Japanese who have been completely Westernized, that simultaneously links the past with the present and the future.

[ 9 ] The past, in this case, refers to art made during the Edo period in Japan, where Murakami finds his foremost inspiration in the works of Fine Art painters such as Kano Sansetsu , Ito Jakuchu , Soga Shohaku and Katsushika Hokusai . Murakami explains that his theory was born from a hypothesis created by art historian Nobuo Tsuji in his book The Lineage of Eccentricity .

[ 9 ] In his book, Tsuji critically analyses works from Edo period painters and explains how the picture controls the speed and course of its observer's gaze, creating an interaction between the surface and the viewer with a zigzag motion. This is further elaborated in Takashi Murakami: Lineage of Eccentrics , a book that presents key examples of Murakami's work alongside a selection of Japanese masterpieces arranged according to the concepts laid out by Tsuji himself. It is mentioned that the juxtaposition of foreground forms extending horizontally across broad compositions and two-dimensional surfaces is another feature that Murakami has adapted for his own theory and contemporary subject matter.

[ 10 ] The particular sensibility of the gaze and inspiration from old masters is what Murakami continues to incorporate in his own works. An example of this is his painting called 727 , a work made with acrylics on three panels. In the middle is his alter ego depicted, also known as 'Mr. DOB', riding a stylized wave that is a direct reference to Hokusai his famous Great Wave off Kanagawa . The panels on which it was painted show a resemblance to the flat and often 'blank' backgrounds characterizing in Nihonga paintings and folding screens, illustrating features of Superflatness.

Another field within the arts that, according to both Murakami and Tsuji, is closely related to eccentricity of traditional Japanese art and also carries Superflat features, is animation. In his manifesto, Murakami takes Yoshinori Kanada as a prime example of an animator whose work contains a compositional dynamic that resembles that of the “eccentric” artists to a startling degree.

[ 9 ] A connection can be made of modern-day animation back to twelfth- and thirteenth-century Japanese handscrolls, where the narrative is composed across multiple sheets of joined paper, read from right to left, providing the observer once again a two-dimensional 'flat' space and composition where the gaze leads the viewer through the story.

[ 10 ] A different factor that played a role for the emergence of Superflatness was the bursting bubble of the Japanese economy in the 1990s, where Japan was led into uncertain territory and a loss of its sense of security. Michael Darling explains that "rabid consumerism and the slavish following of fads, especially in fashion, have further contributed to a culture of surfaces and superficiality, representing still another facet of the Superflat concept".

[ 11 ] Darling, 2001). He uses photography and fashion as further examples to illustrate Superflatness and the hype and high consumer demand of Japan.

See also [ edit ] Hiropon (sculpture) My Lonesome Cowboy Nijikon References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Steinberg, Marc Aaron (2002).

Emerging from flatness: Murakami takashi and superflat aesthetics (Thesis).

ProQuest 305459576 .

^ Natalie Avella, Graphic Japan: From Woodblock and Zen to Manga and Kawaii , Rotovision, 2004, p111.

ISBN 2-88046-771-3 ^ a b Hauser, Kitty (October 2004).

"Superflat: Kitty Hauser on fan fare" .

Artforum International .

43 : 129.

OCLC 5261037854 .

^ Drohojowska-Philp, Hunter (January 18, 2001).

"Superflat (Art Exhibit Review)" .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2021.

^ Frenchy Lunning, Emerging Worlds of Anime and Manga , University of Minnesota Press, 2006, p. 133.

ISBN 0-8166-4945-6 .

^ Chen, Aric (May 2007). " Candy Man Archived 2017-07-15 at the Wayback Machine ".

Hint Fashion Magazine . Accessed 9 March 2009.

^ "Superflat" . artnet.com. January 14, 2001 . Retrieved October 27, 2015 .

^ "Little Boy: The Arts of Japan's Exploding Subculture" . japansociety.org. April 8, 2005 . Retrieved October 27, 2015 .

^ a b c Murakami, Takashi (November 1, 2000).

Superflat . Japan: Madora Shuppan.

ISBN 978-4944079209 .

^ a b Murakami, Takashi (2018).

Lineage of Eccentrics; a collaboration with Nobuo Tsuji and the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston . Boston: MFA Publications. p. 65.

ISBN 978-0878468492 .

^ Darling, Michael (2001). "Plumbing the Depths of Superflatness".

Art Journal .

60 (3): 76– 89.

doi : 10.2307/778139 .

JSTOR 778139 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Store A, ed. (1999).

Takashi Murakami: the meaning of the nonsense of the meaning . New York, NY: Center for Curatorial Studies Museum, Bard College, in association with Harry N. Abrams, Inc., Publishers.

ISBN 0-8109-6702-2 .

Murakami, Takashi, ed. (2018). Lineage of Eccentrics; A Collaboration with Nobuo Tsuji and the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Boston; MFA Publications.

ISBN 978-0878468492 .

Murakami, Takashi, ed. (2001).

Superflat . Last Gasp.

ISBN 4-944079-20-6 .

Murakami, Takashi, ed. (2003).

Little Boy: The Arts of Japan's Exploding Subculture . New York: Japan Society.

ISBN 0-913304-57-3 .

Darling, Michael (2001). "Plumbing the Depths of Superflatness".

Art Journal .

60 (3): 76– 89.

doi : 10.2307/778139 .

JSTOR 778139 .

External links [ edit ] Kaikai Kiki Co., Ltd.

—Takashi Murakami's official site featuring Superflat artists Superflat Japanese postmodernity by Hiroki Azuma [ permanent dead link ] —on blog.emilkerie.com "Superflat Japanese Postmodernity" (Archived) —essay by Hiroki Azuma .

Plumbing the Depths of Superflatness Inspired works from Superflat Overthinking Superflat v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Superflat&oldid=1294447940 " Categories : Contemporary art movements Anime and manga terminology Concepts in Japanese aesthetics Pop art Postmodern art Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2023 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 19:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Superflat 11 languages Add topic

