Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ideology and historical practice Toggle Ideology and historical practice subsection 1.1 Original meaning 1.2 Syrian Ba'ath constitution and practice 1.3 Between Aflaq's Ba'athism and Marxism 1.3.1 Initial disconnect 1.3.2 Later turn towards Marxism 2 Nasserism Toggle Nasserism subsection 2.1 1961 Cairo Convention: debate and critique 2.2 Jewry within Nasserism 2.3 Internal criticism 3 Consequences of the 1967 Arab-Israeli War 4 External reception 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Arab socialism 29 languages العربية Asturianu Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lombard مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский සිංහල کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political ideology Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Ba'athism Organizations Arab Ba'ath Arab Ba'ath Movement Ba'ath Party Baath Party (pro-Iraqi) Baath Party (pro-Syrian) Variants Neo-Ba'athism Assadism Saddamism People Aflaq al-Arsuzi Assad (Bashar) Assad (Hafez) al-Bakr Bitar al-Douri Ghanim Jadid al-Rikabi Rimawi Saddam Literature On the Way of Resurrection The Battle for One Destiny The Genius of Arabic in Its Tongue History Ba'athist Iraq Attempted assassination of Abdul-Karim Qasim Ramadan Revolution November 1963 coup d'état 17 July Revolution 1979 Ba'ath Party Purge Iran–Iraq War Gulf War Sanctions Iraq War De-Ba'athification Ba'athist Syria Syrian Committee to Help Iraq 1963 coup d'état 1966 coup d'état Syrian invasion of Jordan Corrective Revolution Intervention in Lebanon Syrian occupation of Lebanon Syrian civil war Fall of the Assad regime Regional organizations Algeria pro-Iraq pro-Syria Bahrain pro-Iraq pro-Syria Egypt pro-Iraq pro-Syria Iraq pro-Iraq pro-Syria Jordan pro-Iraq pro-Syria Kuwait pro-Iraq Lebanon pro-Iraq pro-Syria Libya pro-Iraq Mauritania pro-Iraq pro-Syria Palestine pro-Iraq pro-Syria Sudan pro-Iraq pro-Syria Syria pro-Iraq pro-Syria Tunisia pro-Iraq pro-Syria Yemen pro-Iraq pro-Syria Splinter groups Arab Socialist Revolutionary Ba'ath Party Socialist Lebanon Arab Revolutionary Workers Party Democratic Socialist Arab Ba'ath Party Sudanese Ba'ath Party Armed groups Arab Liberation Front Al-Awda Al-Abud Network Jeish Muhammad Rejectionists Snake Party Supreme Command for Jihad and Liberation Naqshbandi Army General Military Council for Iraqi Revolutionaries Free Iraqi Army Related topics Arab nationalism Arab socialism Assadist–Saddamist conflict Nasserism Pan-Arabism Waḥda, Ḥurriyya, Ishtirākiyya Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Arab socialism ( Arabic : الإشتِراكيّة العربية , romanized : Al-Ishtirākīya Al-'Arabīya ) is a political ideology based on the combination of pan-Arabism or Arab nationalism and socialism . The term "Arab socialism" was coined by Michel Aflaq , [ 1 ] the principal founder of Ba'athism and the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party in Syria , in order to distinguish his version of socialist ideology from the international socialist movement. While distinct from the much broader tradition of socialist thought in the Arab world , which predates Arab socialism by as much as fifty years, direct influence and evolutions of his thought, Marxist or otherwise, were realized and expanded upon in countries like Syria, Egypt , Iraq and others.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] A main innovation of Aflaq's thought was the transformation of Arab unity from an intellectual ideal into a real-world political pursuit of rights alongside a new set of socio-economic conditions.

[ 2 ] Gamal Abdel Nasser 's Egypt in particular served as a potent vehicle for Aflaq's thought, and would have to grapple with crises in the intellectual and military spheres.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Ideology and historical practice [ edit ] Original meaning [ edit ] The spawning of Arab socialism is thought to be a product of two developments in Aflaq's life: of the intellectual labor spent studying European philosophy in Paris , and his practice in the Arab political sphere.

[ 2 ] It can be considered monist given that the concept of Arab unity was both the origin and main goal of his project.

[ 2 ] For Aflaq, to be Arab is to be Islamic , Arabic-speaking and of a shared history.

[ 2 ] His line of thinking is best understood not as a linear evolution over time, but as a set of ideas all interlinked by what he called the "Arab Mission".

[ 2 ] The three main branches of the Arab Mission include "unity", "liberty" and "socialism", all backed by Islam as a spiritual driver and nationalism as a binding force.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] These branches, while all having significant overlap with each other, can be independently defined: "unity" meant an Arab majority in parliament, "liberty" meant parliamentarism and "socialism" meant national development.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Liberty's allowances were twofold: it would prevent the splintering of the state and allow for proper combat against the enemies of the project ( Imperialism , Zionism and Western colonization ).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] After all, the goal of the Arab liberation struggle was to fight imperialism , oppose the ruling classes and fight for social justice .

[ 6 ] [ 2 ] Tying "unity" to "liberty" was nationalism, which he defined as, "love before anything else".

[ 2 ] More concretely, he believed the nation ought to have the same kind of ties between citizens as do family members to each other, with nationalism primarily serving as a means to unite in the face of imperial threats.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Parliamentary liberty combined with "socialism" served as a pathway to achieving unity.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Socialism was to mean equality of opportunity and access to education, with education forming the foundation of practice.

[ 2 ] Socialism, while subservient to the Arab unity project and liberty, remained just as important. Aflaq would contend that fighting for Arab liberation and unity was the same as fighting for socialism, believing they were two sides of the same coin.

[ 6 ] [ 2 ] However, only with "intellectual consistency" and a "rejection of corruption" could socialism properly fuse with nationalism.

[ 2 ] Aflaq further noted that the social economic question is the issue of prime importance in our life, but it is directly related to the wider issue of nationalism and we want socialism to serve our nationalism.

[ 7 ] In 1950, Aflaq defined socialism as, not an aim in itself, but rather a necessary means to guarantee society the highest standard of production with the farthest limit of cooperation and solidarity among the citizens […] Arab society […] needs a social order with deeper foundations, wider horizons, and more forceful realization than moderate British socialism .

[ 8 ] In 1955 Aflaq defined socialism as the sharing of the resources of the country by its citizens.

[ 8 ] Syrian Ba'ath constitution and practice [ edit ] The Ba'ath Party was founded in 1947 as the Arab Ba'ath Party, becoming the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party in 1952 upon merging with the Arab Socialist Party .

[ 3 ] [ 7 ] The party constitution of 1947 called for a "just redistribution of wealth ", state ownership of public utilities , natural resources , large industry, and transport , state control over foreign and domestic trade , limiting the agricultural holdings of owners to the amount the owner could cultivate, an economy under some sort of state supervision, workers' participation in management and profit sharing , respected inheritance and the rights of private property .

[ 8 ] Prominent in Ba'athist writings from the 1940s and the 1950s, was the concern of exploitation of one group of citizens by another.

[ 8 ] The party forbade exploitation in its constitution in line with its direct confrontation with colonialism.

[ 2 ] [ 8 ] It further called for the abolition of class and class differences in the future envisaged society.

[ 8 ] Aflaq's concept of Arab unity would become a reality with the merger of the Syrian and Egyptian regimes from 1958 to 1961, built off the fusion of Nasser's revolutionaries with Aflaq's pan-Arabism.

[ 2 ] This embracing of authoritarian Nasserism exemplifies a shift within the Ba'athist movement away from liberalism and towards authoritarianism.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 9 ] The causes of this shift, as argued by scholar Rey Matthieu, are intertwined and threefold.

[ 3 ] First, internal struggles within the Ba'athist party coinciding with the Arab defeat in the Six-Day-War and subsequent Naksa revitalized the issue of defense in the minds of Arab nationalists.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Furthermore, the super-powered tension between the Cold War blocs served to unify the fragmented Arab political landscape under a policy of neutrality.

[ 3 ] And in the Arab world, the political head of the concept of neutrality was Nasser. (In 1947 the Ba'athists had not yet chosen a side: the US funded Israel and Turkey , while the Soviets were atheist).

[ 3 ] Between Aflaq's Ba'athism and Marxism [ edit ] Initial disconnect [ edit ] The socialism envisaged in the party's constitution of 1947 and in later writings up to the establishment of the United Arab Republic , is moderate and shows little, if any, signs of Marxism .

[ 7 ] The party's 1947 constitution reads, socialism is a necessity which emanates from the depths of Arab nationalism […]. Socialism constitutes the ideal social order [for] the Arab people .

[ 7 ] Indeed, socialism was a major component of Ba'athist thought, and it featured in the party's tripartite slogan of "unity, liberty , socialism".

[ 3 ] [ 6 ] However, in using the term "Arab socialism," Aflaq was not referring to the internationalist strain of socialism; his conception resolved socialism with Arab nationalism .

[ 6 ] Aflaq believed that classical international socialism of nineteenth century Europe was not suited to the Arab world, on the basis that Western socialism was forced to stand up not only against capitalism but also against nationalism, which protected capitalism, against religion, which defended it, and against every concept which called for conservatism and the sanctification of the past.

[ 10 ] In a written statement from 1946, Aflaq wrote The Arab nationalists are socialists , hence there is neither incompatibility nor contradiction nor war between nationalists and socialists.

[ 6 ] While Aflaq always found it easier to define socialism as what it was not, one thing he and Salah al-Din al-Bitar were certain of, was that Arab socialism was not communist or related in any way to communism.

[ 8 ] Part of the reason for this was the French Communist Party 's support for lengthening the French Mandate of Syria .

[ 8 ] In a published shortly after that decision was made, Aflaq wrote If I am asked to define socialism, I shall not look for it in the works of [Karl] Marx and [Vladimir] Lenin .

[ 11 ] The main cardinal difference between Arab socialism and communism, according to Aflaq and Ba'athists in general, was the cardinal role given to nationalism .

[ 11 ] Since everything in Ba'athist thought was somehow linked to Arab nationalism, Aflaq could not bridge the gap between nationalism and communist internationalism .

[ 11 ] However, he did note Josip Broz Tito 's policy of self-determination while governing Yugoslavia .

[ 8 ] Another difference was that Aflaq did not support the communist idea that class struggle was the central piece throughout human history, given that role instead to nationalism.

[ 11 ] Arab socialism rejected communism based on the belief that it was deceitful, as it sought to tie the Arab destiny to the destiny of another state, namely Russia .

[ 10 ] Later turn towards Marxism [ edit ] However, in the 1950s, changing attitudes of socialism within the Ba'ath Party began to be apparent.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Jamal al-Atassi , in a writing dating to 1956, wrote that while Arab socialism was not communism, the party could learn from the experience of the socialist countries of how to construct a socialist society.

[ 13 ] It was around this time communist-inspired terms such as "masses of the people" and "people's organization" began to be heavily used in Ba'athist literature, while at the same time emphasizing class conflict more than before.

[ 13 ] He wrote that Socialism cannot realize its goals unless it starts from the [fact of] division, difference, and conflict among society's structures and classes.

[ 13 ] Atassi ended the article by calling for the "oppressed classes" of the workers, peasants and "other strugglers" to join in the effort to overthrow the oppressors to establish a united Arab society.

[ 13 ] In short, he called for revolutionary struggle.

[ 13 ] While Aflaq did believe class conflict existed, he believed it to be subordinate to nationalism.

[ 13 ] Munif al-Razzaz , a Jordanian Ba'athist, wrote the Ba'athist classic "Why Socialism Now?" in 1957.

[ 13 ] In it he takes a "very different" approach on interpreting the meaning of socialism from Aflaq.

[ 13 ] As he wrote, Socialism is a way of life, not just an economic order. It extends to all aspects of life— economics , politics , training , education , social life, health , morals , literature , science , history , and others, both great and small.

[ 13 ] In contrast to official party writings which stressed Arab unity above else, Razzaz tried to demonstrate the interdependent nature of unity, liberty and socialism.

[ 13 ] He criticized the view that socialism had to come after Arab unity, stating Socialism, freedom and unity are not different names for different things, […] but different facets of one basic law from which they spring.

[ 14 ] He further noted that If I believe in man and in man's worth, then I should believe in unity, nationalism, freedom , and socialism because each of them represents a facet of man's fundamental value.

[ 14 ] Razzaz ended the article, stating that socialism had been achieved to the same degree as freedom and unity have been achieved.

[ 14 ] Nasserism [ edit ] Main article: Nasserism Gamal Abdel Nasser Arab socialism in Egypt has its roots in pan-Arabism, nationalism, anti-colonialism and Islamic thought. It greatly differentiates itself from communism and other forms of Western socialism, both of which greatly focus on the material conditions, whereas Arab socialism also incorporates religious ideals.

[ 15 ] These ideas are to be found in the Qu'ran , which aimed at the distribution of wealth and the caring for all members of society.

[ 16 ] Socialism had also been introduced at the beginning of the nineteenth century through French thinkers which recognized the particularities of the Egyptian thought towards revolutionary movements.

[ 17 ] Arab socialism was greatly developed through the influence of Gamal Abd el-Nasser , who came to create the definition of Arab socialism.

[ 18 ] Nasser's socialism was based on a pragmatic and empirical approach which broadly disregarded the theoretical framework of socialism if it had no basis in the real conditions that Egypt was facing.

[ 19 ] Moreover, he staunchly opposed the internationalism of other Egyptian communists, seeking alliance purely on pragmatic terms until later purging them.

[ 20 ] After the successful coup d'état of 1952 , where King Farouk was deposed bloodlessly, Nasser was only guided by six main tenets: the end of imperialism , the end of the government of capital, social justice (end of domination), creation of a strong national army, creation of a fully operational democratic system and the end of the feudal system .

[ 21 ] Guided by these, he also stressed the importance of a double revolution , a revolution which had to be political and social. Political as it needed to end feudalism and the corrupt government ; social because it needed to end with oppression between classes.

[ 22 ] The end of oppression did not mean class abolishment, but class harmony within the state. He wanted to create the conditions for everyone to have equal opportunities to perform whichever role within society, for which he invested in education and public health measures.

[ 23 ] Addressing students at Alexandria University in 1966, Nasser stated that there was no 'Arab socialism' but an 'Arab application of socialism'.

[ 24 ] Nasser's socialism had the goals previously mentioned, and he tried to accomplish them through a neutralism in the foreign sphere and socialist measures at the national level.

[ 25 ] He did not want to participate in the global divide of the time between the USSR and USA at the global sphere as he wanted to prioritise Egypt's national interests through a policy of positive alignment.

[ 26 ] Throughout his mandate, he passed several reforms, which included the redistribution of land through the abolishment of feudalism, worker laws which ensured their participation into committees which had direct contact with management.

[ 27 ] He aspired to eventually convert into a form of direct democracy , which he saw necessary for a true socialist state and the well being of every individual.

Nasser, in his adoption of Arab socialism, focuses on embracing and encompassing religion within socialism , as he perceives it to be part of Egypt's social fabric, being one of its main constituents. He therefore rejects Marxist historical materialism and historical determinism , which allows for a hands-on approach to his conception of history.

[ 28 ] Although arguments can be made for inspirations or adoptions of Marxist thought in certain instances, like when Nasser came to adopt the communist stance of armed support for Sudanese self-determination.

[ 20 ] Scholar Rif'at al Sa'id argues the more widespread embrace of socialism in the 1960's would also serve as evidence to this claim.

[ 20 ] 1961 Cairo Convention: debate and critique [ edit ] Critical to the development of Arab socialism in the 1960's was a series of political debates held in Cairo , Egypt.

[ 5 ] Scholarship on the events declare it "a moment of crisis and critique" within Arab political history. Ideologues from all across the political spectrum were invited, from socialists to nationalists and liberals to conservatives, all to debate the role of the intellectual vis-a-vis the state in building Arab socialism.

[ 5 ] Muhammad Haykal , drawing from his Crisis of the Intellectuals, attempted to convince a "reluctant leftist vanguard " to join arms with the Nasserist project, arguing that without cooperation between Nasser's military clique and the intellectual sphere, Arab socialism would fall.

[ 5 ] On the other hand arguing against Nasserian ideals is Clovis Maksoud and his piece, The Crisis of the Arab Left, which would come to serve as the Arab socialist political platform.

[ 5 ] He seeks to critique both contending models of political economy: Nasser's Arab socialism and the Soviet state-centric project (despite borrowing their rhetoric).

[ 5 ] Maksoud blasts what he calls the "bourgeoise national liberation" of Nasser's movement as providing a sense of political liberty without collective equality.

[ 5 ] Conversely, Soviet "economistic socialism" provides the feeling of collective equality but lacks proper avenues for exercising political dissent.

[ 5 ] To sublate the two and prevent the deterioration of Arab nationalism into totalitarianism, a "substantive socialism" must replace "idealism, identity and isolationism".

[ 5 ] Maksoud recognized the Arab left (which he defined as those "striving towards the inclusion of the masses in politics and the minimisation of class differences" with "material conditions determined thought") as a potentially palpable force, but it must reckon with the necessity of grassroots operations given the complete military capture of the Egyptian and Iraqi states.

[ 5 ] The implications of the debate shook the Arab intellectual sphere. Most pressing perhaps, is how Nasser would come to formally adopt Arab socialism in the Egyptian National Charter of 1962.

[ 5 ] The conference also allowed for clarity on the various positions that existed vis-a-vis Arab socialism.

[ 5 ] Its composition was quite diverse, pulling in political advocates from all across the political sphere into heated debate: from nationalists to liberals and from conservatives to socialists.

[ 5 ] Furthermore, it cemented Nasser's Cairo as the base for not just Arab neutrality, but the global non-Alignment movement .

[ 5 ] Jewry within Nasserism [ edit ] From 1910 to the 1950s, Egyptian Jews would hold various positions across the political stratum, from active leadership roles to your average "rank-and-file" member, exerting intellectual influence on policy making, founding large movements themselves or otherwise contributing to ground-level activism.

[ 29 ] It would not be until after the 1948 war that most communist Jews were exiled from Egypt.

[ 29 ] Post-exile, scholarship and debate dedicated to examining the role of Jewry in Egyptian socialism would focus on the question of whether or not "ex-comrades of Jewish origin" could be blamed for its failure.

[ 29 ] But division on a number of points would proliferate. As the Arab-Israeli conflict would unfold, these debates became much more antagonistic and tended to view the Jewish role with more pessimism.

[ 29 ] A significant portion of Jewish communists were atheists, in stark contrast to the Islamism of Arab socialism, further increasing the weight of the Palestine question.

[ 29 ] Rami Ginat argues that according to the scholarship at large, Jews played a crucial role in Egyptian socialist nation building, with opinions ranging on Jewish motivations, their stances with regard to Israel, and their level of culpability with regard to the schisms within the movement.

[ 29 ] Internal criticism [ edit ] Egyptian leftists at large blame repressive state structures in tandem with the growth of right-wing Islamism for the failure of their socialist project.

[ 30 ] Arwa Salih , an Egyptian left-revolutionary feminist, would ground her criticism of the Egyptian regime in gender, breaking taboos regarding sex and morality within the male-dominated Egyptian communist movement.

[ 30 ] Salih draws attention to the ways conservative takes on "emotions, gender relations, moral regimes and sexuality" impeded the growth of the Egyptian left movement.

[ 30 ] Chehata Haroun was an influential Jewish Egyptian revolutionary whose particular persuasion of socialism butted ideological heads with Nasserism. A Marxist of the international variety, he opposed the exclusive nationalism inherent to Nasser's Arab socialism.

[ 31 ] His central argument was threefold: (1) his Jewishness does not negate his Egyptian identity, (2) Both Zionism and the Arab leadership have shared fault in the "asphyxiation of Egyptian Jewry", and (3) Jews are integral to Egyptian culture and society as a whole.

[ 31 ] In contrast to many Jewish Egyptian communists, Haroun would maintain his Jewish identity while in Egypt, building support for nationalist critique of Nasser.

[ 31 ] Consequences of the 1967 Arab-Israeli War [ edit ] The Arab defeat in the Six-Day War held a vast array of consequences for Arab socialism and the Arab left as a whole, marking a series of political and intellectual transitions.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 9 ] [ 12 ] Firstly, it spelled the end of decolonization and pan-Arabism as a military project, instead capturing the attention of wandering revolutionaries and directing it towards the Palestinian struggle.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 9 ] It cemented the turn towards Marxism in Arab left circles and marked the beginning of Nasser's decline, altering the entire trajectory of the MENA region's history.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Critique of the "Old Left" associated with Nasser's regime led to the development of a "New Left" current. Conversely, the Naksa also shifted the Overton window to include more radical and Islamist focused ideologies.

[ 4 ] Understanding of the New Left's trajectory is made possible by examining the founding of the Egyptian Communist Organisation (1969) and its development into the Egyptian Communist Workers' Party (1975) as a part of a new radical left current characterized by clear discontinuities with the Old Left or its Marxist outgrowths.

[ 4 ] Related popular Egyptian movements in the wake of Nasser's 1967 resignation called for him to remain and face consequences, creating a space for public political critique of his regime.

[ 4 ] Student protests in the following years represented the first significant instance of public government critique in decades, even as the government monopoly on "all political life" and the stunted scope of the protestors slashed chances of success.

[ 4 ] Eventually, Nasser's death in 1970 alongside further protests would open up avenues for more varied independent politics, even if the New Arab Left would ultimately fall short of realizing any tangible vehicle for change.

[ 4 ] Anwar al-Sadat , while still a target of popular protest, would consolidate power in the 1971 Corrective Revolution .

[ 4 ] External reception [ edit ] The website of the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party has an entry dated 1 January 2011, stating: In 28/10/2003, by the attendance of comrade Al-Ahmar and Mr. Ching, the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party and the Chinese Communist Party agreed to sign an agreement at the end of the discussions for three years, 2004/2005/2006. The two parties wish to promote and enhance the relations of friendship and cooperation between their two parties and co-ordinate their efforts for embodying their common objectives for the wellbeing of their two friendly peoples .

[ 1 ] On the other hand, the Arabist Bernard Lewis has stated: Nobody seems to have a good word to say for Arab socialism. Commercial, professional, and middle class elements bring against it the usual complaints which are brought against socialism in Western countries .

Left-wingers dismiss Arab socialism with contempt as a half-hearted and inefficient compromise which has the merits neither of socialism nor of capitalism.

[ 32 ] A Soviet analyst on the subject of the Ba'athist movement noted The concept of socialist structure [as it] appeared in the articles and speeches […] [in] the period of the birth of the new movement [the Ba'ath] […] was just a hazy outline on a barely developed ideological negative.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] African socialism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Arab nationalism Arab fascism Ba'athism Islamic socialism Nasserism Pan-Arabism Third International Theory Marhaenism Titoism References [ edit ] ^ a b "Baath Party" . Archived from the original on 26 July 2020 . Retrieved 21 November 2014 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s Stegagno, Carlotta (2017).

"Mīšīl ʿAflaq's Thought between Nationalism and Socialism" .

Oriente Moderno .

97 (1): 154– 176.

doi : 10.1163/22138617-12340143 .

ISSN 0030-5472 .

JSTOR 48572295 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n The Arab Lefts: Histories and Legacies, 1950s–1970s . Edinburgh University Press. 2020. pp.

57– 76.

ISBN 978-1-4744-5423-0 .

JSTOR 10.3366/j.ctv1453jv5 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l The Arab Lefts: Histories and Legacies, 1950s–1970s . Edinburgh University Press. 2020. pp.

148– 168.

ISBN 978-1-4744-5423-0 .

JSTOR 10.3366/j.ctv1453jv5 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q The Arab Lefts: Histories and Legacies, 1950s–1970s . Edinburgh University Press. 2020. pp.

222– 242.

ISBN 978-1-4744-5423-0 .

JSTOR 10.3366/j.ctv1453jv5 .

^ a b c d e Devlin 1975 , p. 32.

^ a b c d Devlin 1975 , p. 33.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Devlin 1975 , p. 34.

^ a b c Kadri, Ali (2016), "The Infeasibility of Revolution in Syria" , The Unmaking of Arab Socialism , Anthem Press, pp.

117– 158, doi : 10.2307/j.ctt1hj9zdb.8 , ISBN 978-1-78308-440-1 , JSTOR j.ctt1hj9zdb.8 , retrieved 6 December 2024 ^ a b Torrey, Gordon H.; Devlin, John F. (1965).

"Arab Socialism" .

Journal of International Affairs .

19 (1): 47– 62.

ISSN 0022-197X .

JSTOR 24363337 .

^ a b c d Devlin 1975 , p. 35.

^ a b Ginat, Rami (2000).

"The Soviet Union and the Syrian Ba'th Regime: From Hesitation to Rapprochement" .

Middle Eastern Studies .

36 (2): 150– 171.

doi : 10.1080/00263200008701312 .

ISSN 0026-3206 .

JSTOR 4284075 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Devlin 1975 , p. 36.

^ a b c Devlin 1975 , p. 37.

^ Moghny Said, Abdel (1972).

Arab Socialism . New York: Barnes and Noble. pp.

23– 29.

^ A.Hanna, Samia; H.Gardner, George (1969).

Arab Socialism. A documentary survey . Leiden: E.J.Brill. p. 52.

^ Fakkar, Rouchdi (1974).

Reflets de la Sociologie Premarxiste dans le Monde Arabe (in French). Paris: Geuthner. p. 88.

^ A.Hannah, Sami; H.Gardner, George (1969).

Arab Socialism: a documentary survey . Leiden: Leiden E.J.Brill. p. 99.

^ Moghny Said, Abdel (1972).

Arab Socialism . New York: Barns and Noble Books. p. 9.

^ a b c Ginat, Rami; Alon, Odelya (2016).

"En Route to Revolution: The Communists and the Free Officers—Honeymoon and Separation" .

British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies .

43 (4): 602, 612.

doi : 10.1080/13530194.2016.1142859 .

ISSN 1353-0194 .

JSTOR 26155520 .

^ W.Horton, Alan (1962).

The Charter of National Action of the UAR. A résumé of the complete document . Cairo: Americas Universities Field. p. 3.

^ El-Nasser, Gamal (1954).

The Philosophy of the Revolution . Cairo: Dar Al-Maaref. p. 23.

^ A.Hanna, Samia; H.Gardner, George (1969).

Arab Socialism: A documentary survey . Leiden: E.J.Brill. pp.

112– 113.

^ Waterbury, John (1983).

The Egypt of Nasser and Sadat: the Political Economy of Two Regimes . Princeton University Press. p. 324.

^ Ginat, Rami; Noema, Meir (November 2008).

"Al-Fajr al-Jadid: A Breeding Ground for the Emergence of Revolutionary Ideas in the Immediate Post-Second World War" .

Middle Eastern Studies .

44 (6): 867– 893.

doi : 10.1080/00263200802426005 .

ISSN 0026-3206 .

S2CID 144087987 .

^ Abd El-Nasser, Gamal (1954).

The Philosophy of the Revolution . Cairo: Dar Al-Maaref.

^ Moghny Said, Abdel (1972).

Arab socialism . Barnes and Noble. pp.

33– 39.

^ Moghny Said, Abdel (1972).

Arab Socialism . New York: Barnes and Noble. p. 69.

^ a b c d e f Ginat, Rami (2013).

"Remembering History: The Egyptian Discourse on the Role of Jews in the Communist Movements" .

Middle Eastern Studies .

49 (6): 919– 920, 937.

doi : 10.1080/00263206.2013.836497 .

ISSN 0026-3206 .

JSTOR 24585952 .

^ a b c Hammad, Hanan (2016).

"Arwa Salih's "the Premature": Gendering the History of the Egyptian Left" .

The Arab Studies Journal .

24 (1): 118– 119.

ISSN 1083-4753 .

JSTOR 44746849 .

^ a b c Meital, Yoram (2017).

"A Jew in Cairo: the defiance of Chehata Haroun" .

Middle Eastern Studies .

53 (2): 183– 184.

doi : 10.1080/00263206.2016.1214580 .

ISSN 0026-3206 .

JSTOR 48543653 .

^ Bernard Lewis , "From Babel to Dragomans: Interpreting the Middle East, Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press , p.249 Bibliography [ edit ] Devlin, John (1975).

The Baath Party: a History from its Origins to 1966 (2nd ed.). Hoover Institute Press.

ISBN 978-0-8179-6561-7 .

External links [ edit ] Nasser and Arab Socialism v t e Arab nationalism Ideology Arab socialism Arab-Islamic nationalism Ba'athism Assadism Neo-Ba'athism Saddamism Nasserism Pan-Arabism Third International Theory History Arab Revolt Intercommunal conflict in Mandatory Palestine 1936–1939 Arab revolt in Palestine Iraqi Revolt Arab separatism in Khuzestan 1979 Khuzestan insurgency Great Syrian Revolt 1941 Iraqi coup d'état Anglo-Iraqi War Arab–Israeli conflict Suez Crisis Six-Day War War of Attrition Yom Kippur War Israeli–Palestinian conflict 1952 Egyptian revolution Iraqi Intifada Algerian War 14 July Revolution 1959 Mosul uprising 1961 Syrian coup d'état Arab Cold War North Yemen civil war Ramadan Revolution 1963 Syrian coup d'état Dhofar rebellion November 1963 Iraqi coup d'état Aden Emergency 1966 Syrian coup d'état 17 July Revolution 1969 Sudanese coup d'état 1969 Libyan revolution Black September Lebanese Civil War Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy war Yemeni unification Concepts Arab identity Arab Union Arab world Arabization Personalities Butrus al-Bustani Michel Aflaq Jassem Alwan Yasser Arafat Abdul Rahman Arif Abdul Salam Arif Zaki al-Arsuzi Bashar al-Assad Hafez al-Assad Jamal al-Atassi Mansur al-Atrash Sultan al-Atrash Tariq Aziz Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr Ahmed Ben Bella Salah al-Din al-Bitar Izzat Darwaza Faisal I Muammar Gaddafi Rashid Ali al-Gaylani George Habash Sati' al-Husri Hussein bin Ali, King of Hejaz Saddam Hussein Amin al-Husseini Salah Jadid Abd al-Rahman al-Kawakibi Mostéfa Merarda Gamal Abdel Nasser Adnan Pachachi Ameen Rihani Fuad al-Rikabi Abdullah Rimawi Hamdeen Sabahi Constantin Zureiq Organizations Al-Awda Al-Fatat Al-Mourabitoun Arab Ba'ath Arab Ba'ath Movement Arab Federation Arab Higher Committee Arab Islamic Republic Arab Liberation Army Arab Nationalist Movement Arab Socialist Action Party Arab Socialist Union (Egypt) Arab Socialist Union (Iraq) Arab Socialist Union (Libya) Arab Socialist Union Party (Syria) Arabian Peninsula People's Union Army of the Men of the Naqshbandi Order Ba'ath Party Ba'ath Party (Iraqi-dominated faction) Ba'ath Party (Syrian-dominated faction) Fatah Federation of Arab Republics General Military Council for Iraqi Revolutionaries Independence Party (Mandatory Palestine) Islamic Legion Lebanese National Movement National Liberation Front (Algeria) Palestine Liberation Organization Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Rejectionist Front Supreme Command for Jihad and Liberation Unified Political Command Union of Arab Republics (1972) United Arab Republic United Arab States Literature The Arab Awakening The Battle for One Destiny On the Way of Resurrection Symbolism Arab Liberation Flag Coat of arms of the United Arab Republic Eagle of Saladin Flag of the Arab Federation Flag of the Arab Revolt Flag of the Federation of Arab Republics Flag of the United Arab Republic Hawk of Quraish Pan-Arab colors Related topics Algerian nationalism Egyptian nationalism Greater Mauritania Greater Morocco Greater Syria Greater Yemen Iraqi nationalism Islamism Jordanian nationalism Lebanese nationalism Libyan nationalism Palestinian nationalism Pan-Islamism Sahrawi nationalism Syrian nationalism Tunisian nationalism Category v t e Socialism by country By country Argentina Australia New Australia Bangladesh Brazil Lulism Canada China Communist since 1978 Kuomintang Hong Kong Estonia Ethiopia Finland France Greece India Iran Italy Libya Netherlands New Zealand Pakistan Sri Lanka Sweden Tunisia United Kingdom Corbynism United States African-American Venezuela Chavismo Vietnam History United Kingdom United States Regional variants African Arab British Burmese Chinese European Israeli Melanesian Nicaraguan Tanzanian Venezuelan Vietnamese Current and historical socialist states Africa Angola Benin Burkina Faso Congo-Brazzaville Egypt Ethiopia 1974–1987 1987–1991 Guinea Libya Madagascar Mozambique Seychelles Somalia Sudan Americas Barbados Cuba Grenada Chile Nicaragua Asia Afghanistan Burma Cambodia 1975–1979 1979–1992 1982–1992 China Iraq North Korea Laos Mongolia South Yemen Syria Tuva Vietnam North Vietnam Short-lived Azerbaijan People's Government East Turkestan Far East Fujian Gilan Inner Mongolia Jiangxi Kuwait Kurdish Republic of Mahabad North Korea (1946–1947) North Korea (1947–1948) Democratic Republic of Yemen South Vietnam Europe Albania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia Czech Republic Slovakia East Germany Hungary (1949–1989) Poland Romania Soviet Union Yugoslavia Short-lived Alsace-Lorraine Banat Baranya–Baja Bavaria 1918–1919 1919 Bessarabia Byelorussia (1919) Bremen Bihać Crimea (1919) Finland 1918 1939–1940 Estonia (1918–1919) Galicia Hungary (1919) Ireland Naissaar Saxony Slovakia (1919) Tarnobrzeg Užice Würzburg Brussels Soldiers' Council History of socialism v t e Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party Iraqi-dominated faction Syrian-dominated faction History Predecessors Arab Ba'ath Arab Ba'ath Movement Arab Socialist Movement Syrian Committee to Help Iraq Founders Michel Aflaq Salah al-Din al-Bitar Pre-split 1954 Syrian coup d'état 14 July Revolution 1959 Mosul uprising Attempted assassination of Abdul-Karim Qasim Ramadan Revolution 1963 Syrian coup d'état Ba'athist Syria Politics National Council for the Revolutionary Command Ar-Rashid revolt November 1963 Iraqi coup d'état 1964 Hama riot 1966 Syrian coup d'état Post-split 17 July Revolution Ba'athist Iraq Revolutionary Command Council Members Arab Belt Corrective Movement Union of Arab Republics Ba'athist Arabization campaigns in northern Iraq 1979 Ba'ath Party Purge Assadist–Saddamist conflict Faith Campaign Iraqi conflict De-Ba'athification in Iraq Ba'ath Party archives Syrian civil war Fall of the Assad regime Leadership General Secretaries Pre-split Michel Aflaq Munif Razzaz Iraqi-dominated faction Michel Aflaq Saddam Hussein Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri Salah Al-Mukhtar * Syrian-dominated faction Nureddin al-Atassi Hafez al-Assad Abdullah al-Ahmar (de facto) Bashar al-Assad Regional Secretaries Iraq Fuad al-Rikabi Talib El-Shibib Ali Salih al-Sa'di Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr Saddam Hussein Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri Mohammed Younis al-Ahmed * Jordan Abdullah Rimawi Munif Razzaz Akram al-Homsi * Lebanon Assem Qanso Abd al-Majid al-Rafei Palestine Isam al-Qadi Rakad Salem * Syria Hammud al-Shufi Shibli al-Aysami Amin al-Hafiz Nureddin al-Atassi Hafez al-Assad Bashar al-Assad Members of the National Command Hadiya Khalaf Abbas Michel Aflaq Abdullah al-Ahmar Zaki al-Arsuzi Bashar al-Assad Hafez al-Assad Nureddin al-Atassi Mansur al-Atrash Shibli al-Aysami Ali Abdullah Ayyoub Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr Salah al-Din al-Bitar Elias Farah Hakem Al-Fayez Wahib al-Ghanim Amin al-Hafiz Akram al-Hourani Salah Jadid Zuheir Mohsen Munif Razzaz Fuad al-Rikabi Abdullah Rimawi Ali Salih al-Sa'di Talib El-Shibib Khaled Yashruti Members of the Regional Commands Iraq Humam Abd al-Khaliq Abd al-Ghafur Ghanim Abdul-Jalil Saad Abdul-Majid Jamal Mustafa Abdullah Mohammed Younis al-Ahmed Salah Omar al-Ali Huda Salih Mahdi Ammash Salih Mahdi Ammash Hussein Al-Awadi Tariq Aziz Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr Adil Abdullah Mahdi Al-Douri Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri Saadoun Ghaidan Fadil Mahmud Gharib Mizban Khadr al-Hadi Sa'dun Hammadi Qusay Hussein Saddam Hussein Latif Nassif Jassim Rashid Taan Kazim Adnan Khayr Allah Ali Hassan al-Majid Muhyi Abdul-Hussein Mashhadi Samir Abdul Aziz al-Najim Aziz Saleh Al-Numan Ghazi Hamoud Al-Obaidi Taha Yassin Ramadan Fawzi Mutlaq al-Rawi Rashid al-Rifai Fuad al-Rikabi Ali Salih al-Sa'di Abd Al-Baqi Abd Karim Al-Sadun Muhammad Zimam al-Sadun Abdul Khaliq al-Samarra'i Abdullah Sallum al-Samarra'i Talib El-Shibib Nayef Shindakh Thamer Khamis Sirhan Hardan al-Tikriti Yahya Abdallah al-Ubaydi Tahir Yahya Mohammed Hamza Zubeidi Ibrahim Hesqel Lebanon Musa Shuaib Syria Hadiya Khalaf Abbas Abdullah al-Ahmar Hussein Arnous Bashar al-Assad Hafez al-Assad Maher al-Assad Rifaat al-Assad Nureddin al-Atassi Shibli al-Aysami Ali Abdullah Ayyoub Mohammed Saeed Bekheitan Muhsen Bilal Mahdi Dakhlallah Ahmad Diyab Ali Duba Fahd Jassem al-Freij Marwan Habash Ibrahim al-Hadid Amin al-Hafiz Muhammad Ali al-Halabi Wael Nader al-Halqi Adnan Badr Hassan Salim Hatum Hilal Hilal Mohammad al-Hussein Hisham Ikhtiyar Salah Jadid Abdul-Karim al-Jundi Sami al-Jundi Abdul Rauf al-Kasm Abdul Halim Khaddam Imad Khamis Ahmad al-Khatib Abdul Rahman Khleifawi Mohammad Jihad al-Laham Ibrahim Makhous Zuhair Masharqa Muhammad Mustafa Mero Muhammad Naji al-Otari Abdul Qadir Qaddura Hammouda Sabbagh Farouk al-Sharaa Hikmat al-Shihabi Hammud al-Shufi Mustafa Tlass Hasan Turkmani Muhammad Umran Salim Yasin Yusuf Zuayyin Yemen Ali Ahmad Nasser al-Dhahab Heads of state Iraq Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr Saddam Hussein Syria Amin al-Hafiz Nureddin al-Atassi Ahmad al-Khatib Hafez al-Assad Abdul Halim Khaddam (interim) Bashar al-Assad Heads of government Iraq Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr Saddam Hussein Sa'dun Hammadi Mohammed Hamza Zubeidi Ahmad Husayn Khudayir as-Samarrai Syria Salah al-Din al-Bitar Amin al-Hafiz Yusuf Zuayyin Nureddin al-Atassi Hafez al-Assad Abdul Rahman Khleifawi Mahmoud al-Ayyubi Muhammad Ali al-Halabi Abdul Rauf al-Kasm Mahmoud Al-Zoubi Muhammad Mustafa Mero Muhammad Naji al-Otari Adel Safar Riyad Farid Hijab Omar Ibrahim Ghalawanji Wael Nader al-Halqi Imad Khamis Hussein Arnous Mohammad Ghazi al-Jalali * = incumbent Organization Regional branches Iraqi-dominated faction Algeria Bahrain Egypt Iraq Regional Command Jordan Lebanon Libya Mauritania Palestine Sudan Tunisia Yemen Syrian-dominated faction Jordan Lebanon Mauritania Palestine South Yemen Sudan Syria Central Command History National Security Bureau Yemen Newspapers Al-Ba'ath Sawt al-Jamahir Al-Thawra Popular fronts National Progressive Front (Iraq) National Progressive Front (Syria) Wings Paramilitary Army of the Men of the Naqshbandi Order Ba'ath Brigades Fedayeen Saddam General Military Council for Iraqi Revolutionaries Jeish Muhammad National Defense Battalions Popular Army Supreme Command for Jihad and Liberation Others General Federation of Trade Unions General Union of Peasants Revolutionary Youth Union Associated organizations Armed groups Al-Abud Network Free Iraqi Army Rejectionists Snake Party Breakaway groups Arab Revolutionary Workers Party Arab Socialist Movement Damascus branch Arab Socialist Revolutionary Ba'ath Party Arabic Toilers' Movement Al-Awda Democratic Socialist Arab Ba'ath Party Palestinian Arab Front Socialist Lebanon Sudanese Ba'ath Party Political alliances Current Alliance of Palestinian Forces Forces of Freedom and Change March 8 Alliance National Consensus Forces National Democratic Alliance Palestine Liberation Organization Palestinian National and Islamic Forces Former Ahd Bloc Front of Patriotic and National Parties Lebanese National Movement Lebanese National Resistance Front National Alliance for the Liberation of Syria National Union Front Palestinian National Alliance Palestinian National Salvation Front Rejectionist Front Political parties Arab Socialist Union Party Arab Democratic Union Party Democratic Socialist Unionist Party Kurdistan Revolutionary Party Libyan National Movement National Covenant Party Popular Unity Party Sawab Social Democratic Unionists Socialist Unionist Party Syrian Communist Party Bakdash Unified Syrian Social Nationalist Party in Lebanon Miscellaneous Ideology Anti-imperialism Anti-Zionism Arab nationalism Arab socialism Assadism Ba'athism Neo-Ba'athism Pan-Arabism Progressivism Republicanism Revolutionary socialism Romantic nationalism Saddamism Secularism Socialism Vanguardism Literature The Battle for One Destiny On the Way of Resurrection Symbolism Ardulfurataini Pan-Arab colors Waḥda, Ḥurriyya, Ishtirākiyya Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arab_socialism&oldid=1291825244 " Categories : Arab socialism Socialism Types of socialism Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2022 Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 16:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arab socialism 29 languages Add topic

