Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Classes Toggle Classes subsection 2.1 1815–1841 2.2 After 1841 3 The order Toggle The order subsection 3.1 Officers 3.1.1 Officers until 1837 3.1.2 Officers since 1987 3.2 Members 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Royal Guelphic Order 18 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hanoverian order of chivalry Royal Guelphic Order Grand cross star, sash and badge of the Royal Guelphic Order (Civil Division) Awarded by Kingdom of Hanover Type House Order Established 28 April 1815 Motto Nec Aspera Terrent (Not afraid of difficulties) Sovereign Ernst August Grades After 1841 Grand Cross Commander 1st Class Commander 2nd Class Knight Cross of Merit Former grades Original Knight Grand Cross Knight Commander Knight Precedence Next (higher) Order of Saint George Next (lower) Order of Ernst August Ribbon of the order Badge of the Royal Guelphic Order Medal of the Order Flag of the Electorate of Hanover , 1692 The Royal Guelphic Order ( German : Königlicher Guelphen-Orden ), sometimes referred to as the Hanoverian Guelphic Order , is a Hanoverian order of chivalry instituted on 28 April 1815 by the Prince Regent (later King George IV ).

[ 1 ] It takes its name from the House of Guelph , of which the House of Hanover was a branch. Since Hanover and the United Kingdom shared a monarch until 1837, the order was frequently bestowed upon British subjects .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Until 1837 the order was frequently awarded to officers in the British Navy and Army , [ 3 ] although it was still classed as a foreign order, with British members of the order not entitled to style themselves as "Sir" unless they were also created Knights Bachelor , as many were.

[ 4 ] The British link ended in 1837 when Hanover 's royal union with Great Britain ended, with Ernest Augustus becoming King of Hanover and Queen Victoria ascending the British throne.

[ 2 ] When Hanover was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia in 1866, the order continued as a house order to be awarded by the Royal House of Hanover. Today, its current Sovereign is the Hanoverian head of the house, Ernst August, Prince of Hanover .

[ citation needed ] Classes [ edit ] The insignia was based on the white horse on Hanover's arms.

[ citation needed ] The Order includes two divisions, Civil and Military, the latter indicated by crossed swords on both the badge and star.

[ 3 ] It originally had three classes, but with several reorganisations since 1841, as house order today it has four classes and an additional Cross of Merit. In descending order of seniority the classes are: 1815–1841 [ edit ] Knight Grand Cross (GCH). Received a collar chain and badge, a star worn on the left breast, and a badge worn from sash over the right shoulder.

[ 2 ] Knight Commander (KCH). A neck badge worn from a ribbon, with a breast star, smaller than that for the GCH.

[ 2 ] Knight (KH). Wore the badge on the left breast. Versions in both gold and silver were awarded.

[ 2 ] Holders of the respective degrees of the order in Britain were entitled to be post-nominally addressed with the initials, which stand for Knight Grand Cross of Hanover, Knight Commander of Hanover and Knight of Hanover. The initial GCG was also used, and was cited in the original statutes of the order.

[ 5 ] Gold and silver medals were attached to the order, for award to those not eligible for the order itself, including non commissioned officers and royal servants.

[ 3 ] After 1841 [ edit ] Grand Cross Commander 1st Class Commander 2nd Class Knight Cross of Merit The order [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Officers [ edit ] The Order has six officers: the Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor, the Registrar, the King of Arms , the Genealogist, and the Secretary.

Officers until 1837 [ edit ] The first six officers were: Chancellor: Count Ernst Friedrich Herbert von Münster Vice-Chancellor: Georg Nieper Secretary: Ludwig Moeller King of Arms: Sir George Nayler Genealogist: August Neubourg Registrar: Sir William Woods Officers since 1987 [ edit ] Chancellor: Ernst August, Prince of Hanover Members [ edit ] List of knights grand cross of the Royal Guelphic Order List of knights commander of the Royal Guelphic Order List of knights of the Royal Guelphic Order Charles Ashe à Court-Repington Charles Babbage Lovell Benjamin Badcock William Stanhope Badcock Henry Bayly (British Army officer, born 1790) Charles Bell George Frederick Beltz William Brereton (British Army officer) David Brewster Samuel Brown (Royal Navy officer) George Brown (British Army officer) Thomas Bunbury (British Army general) Ryder Burton Nicholas Carlisle James Charles Chatterton Robert Alexander Chermside Thomas Henry Shadwell Clerke Abraham Josias Cloëté William Colebrooke John Cowell-Stepney Henry John Cumming Augustus De Butts Edward Cromwell Disbrowe Wilhelm von Dörnberg William Granville Eliot William Henry Elliott Henry Ellis (librarian) Richard England (British Army officer, born 1793) Mathias Everard Arthur Farquhar (Royal Navy officer, born 1772) Alexander Findlay (British Army officer) Charles Augustus FitzRoy Charles Fergusson Forbes William Forster (British Army officer) James Freeth Robert Garrett (British Army officer) George Gawler Johann Karl Ludwig Gieseler Charles Stephen Gore Gideon Gorrequer Gottlieb Graf von Haeseler Andrew Halliday (physician) Henry Hanmer Jakob von Hartmann Graves Haughton William Havelock Andrew Leith Hay William Henderson (Royal Navy officer) William Herschel John Herschel Felton Hervey-Bathurst John Hindmarsh William Jackson Hooker William Hotham (Royal Navy officer, born 1794) John Hobart Caradoc, 2nd Baron Howden Frederick Irwin James Ivory (mathematician) James Jackson (British Army officer) William Jervois (British Army officer) Love Jones-Parry (British Army officer) Heinrich Kirchweger Charles Konig Joseph de Courcy Laffan Henry John Leeke John Leslie (physicist) Henry Frederick Lockyer Edmund Lodge Frederick Love Alexander Maconochie (penal reformer) Frederic Madden Charles Menzies (Royal Marines officer) Samuel Rush Meyrick Charles Collier Michell William Taylor Money Sir John Murray, 8th Baronet George Nayler Robert Nickle (British Army officer) Nicholas Harris Nicolas John Owen (Royal Marines officer) Francis Palgrave George William Paty John Pennycuick (British Army infantry officer) George Dean Pitt Henry Riddell John Robison (inventor) John Robyns Sir David Scott, 2nd Baronet Robert Smart Charles Hamilton Smith Frederick Smith (British Army officer, born 1790) Henry Somerset (British Army officer) John Spink Thomas Staunton St Clair Joseph Thackwell Edward Thomason Walter Tremenheere George Tyler (Royal Navy officer) James Maxwell Wallace George Wetherall Edward Charles Whinyates Charles Wilkins Frederick von Wissell William Woods (officer of arms) See also [ edit ] Hanoverian Waterloo Medal Order of Ernst August Order of St. George (Hanover) References [ edit ] ^ Robertson, Megan C. (2 April 2007).

"United Kingdom: The Royal Guelphic Order" .

Medals of the World .

^ a b c d e Mussell, John, ed. (2014).

The Medal Yearbook 2015 . Devon, UK: Token Publishing Ltd. p. 56.

ISBN 9781908828163 .

^ a b c Captain H. Taprell Dorling.

Ribbons and Medals . pp. 31–32. A.H.Baldwin & Sons, London. 1956.

^ "No. 18907" .

The London Gazette . 24 February 1832. p. 414.

Examples of KCH's created Knight Batchelor.

^ Disbrowe, Charlotte Anne Albinia (1903).

Old Days in Diplomacy : Recollections of a Closed Century, by the Eldest Daughter of the late Sir Edward Cromwell Disbrowe, G.C.G. p 17 . London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) External links [ edit ] Media related to Royal Guelphic Order at Wikimedia Commons v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of the United Kingdom Orders Current Garter Thistle Bath Merit St Michael and St George Royal Victorian Distinguished Service British Empire Imperial Service Companions of Honour St John Royal family orders George VI Elizabeth II Charles III Dormant St Patrick Crown of India Star of India Indian Empire Indian Merit British India Burma Defunct Royal Guelphic Royal family orders George IV Victoria & Albert Edward VII George V Other Royal Victorian Chain Hereditary peerage Life peerage Privy counsellor Baronet Knight Bachelor Aide-de-camp Current decorations and medals Level 1 Victoria Cross George Cross Level 2A Distinguished Service Order Conspicuous Gallantry Cross Royal Red Cross (class I) Level 2B George Medal King's Police Medal, for Gallantry King's Fire Service Medal, for Gallantry Level 3A Distinguished Service Cross Military Cross Distinguished Flying Cross Air Force Cross Royal Red Cross (class II) Level 3B Sea Gallantry Medal King's Gallantry Medal Royal Victorian Medal British Empire Medal King’s Police Medal, for Distinguished Service King's Fire Service Medal, for Distinguished Service King's Ambulance Service Medal King's Volunteer Reserves Medal Polar Medal Imperial Service Medal Overseas Territories Police Medal Merchant Navy Medal for Meritorious Service Level 4 Mentioned in Despatches King's Commendation for Bravery King's Commendation for Bravery in the Air King's Commendation for Valuable Service Other Badge of Honour Elizabeth Cross Elizabeth Emblem Obsolete decorations and medals Level 1 Indian Order of Merit (1st class) Albert Medal (1st class) Edward Medal (1st class) Empire Gallantry Medal Level 2A Indian Order of Merit (2nd class) Distinguished Conduct Medal Conspicuous Gallantry Medal Conspicuous Gallantry Medal (Flying) Level 2B Albert Medal (2nd class) Edward Medal (2nd class) Union of South Africa King's Medal for Bravery, Gold Level 3A Order of British India (1st class) Order of British India (2nd class) Indian Order of Merit (3rd class) Title Badge (India) (1st class) Title Badge (India) (2nd class) Title Badge (India) (3rd class) Royal West African Frontier Force Distinguished Conduct Medal King's African Rifles Distinguished Conduct Medal Indian Distinguished Service Medal Distinguished Service Medal Military Medal Distinguished Flying Medal Air Force Medal Burma Gallantry Medal Level 3B Constabulary Medal (Ireland) Union of South Africa King's Medal for Bravery, Silver Kaisar-i-Hind Medal (Gold, Silver, Bronze) Indian Police Medal, for Gallantry Ceylon Police Medal, for Gallantry Sierra Leone Police Medal, for Gallantry Sierra Leone Fire Brigades Medal, for Gallantry Mauritius Police Medal for Meritorious Service Colonial Police Medal, for Gallantry Canada Medal Queen's Medal for Chiefs Indian Police Medal, for Meritorious Service Ceylon Police Medal, for Merit Sierra Leone Police Medal, for Meritorious Service Sierra Leone Fire Brigades Medal, for Meritorious Service Level 4 Queen's Commendation for Brave Conduct Queen's Commendation for Valuable Service in the Air See also Order of Wear British campaign medals Degradation (knighthood) Revocations v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of the German Empire Kingdom of Prussia Order of the Black Eagle Order of Merit of the Prussian Crown Order of the Red Eagle Order of the Crown House Order of Hohenzollern Pour le Mérite Order of Saint John (Bailiwick of Brandenburg) Order of Louise Wilhelm-Orden Kingdom of Bavaria Order of Saint Hubert Military Order of Max Joseph Military Merit Order (Bavaria) Order of Theresa Order of Saint Elizabeth Royal Order of Saint George Order of Merit of the Bavarian Crown Order of Saint Michael (Bavaria) Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art Order of Louis (Bavaria) Medical military Order Kingdom of Saxony Order of the Rue Crown Military Order of St. Henry Albert Order Civil Order of Saxony Order of Sidonia Order of Maria Anna Kingdom of Württemberg Order of the Crown (Württemberg) Military Merit Order (Württemberg) Friedrich Order Order of Olga Kingdom of Hanover Order of St. George Royal Guelphic Order Order of Ernst August Grand Duchy of Baden Military Karl-Friedrich Merit Order Order of Berthold the First Order of the Zähringer Lion House Order of Fidelity Grand Duchy of Hesse House Order of the Golden Lion Ludwig Order Order of Philip the Magnanimous Order of the Star of Brabant General Honor Decoration Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel House Order of the Golden Lion Wilhelm Order Order of the Iron Helmet Landgraviate of Hesse-Darmstadt Order of Philip the Magnanimous Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin Order of the Griffon (Mecklenburg) House Order of the Wendish Crown Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz Order of the Griffon (Mecklenburg) House Order of the Wendish Crown Grand Duchy of Oldenburg House and Merit Order of Peter Frederick Louis Friedrich-August Cross Duchy of Saxe-Weimar Order of the White Falcon Duchy of Brunswick Order of Henry the Lion Duchy of Nassau Order of the Gold Lion of the House of Nassau Order of Adolphe of Nassau Duchy of Saxe-Altenburg Saxe-Ernestine House Order Duchy of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha Saxe-Ernestine House Order (2006: Saxe-Coburg-Gotha House Order) Duchy of Saxe-Meiningen Saxe-Ernestine House Order Duchy of Anhalt Order of Albert the Bear Order of Merit for Science and Art Principality of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen House Order of Hohenzollern Principality of Hohenzollern-Hechingen House Order of Hohenzollern Principality of Lippe-Detmold Order of the Cross of Honour (Lippe) Order of Leopold (Lippe) Order of Berta Order of the Rose of Lippe Principality of Schaumburg-Lippe Order of the Cross of Honour (Lippe) Principality of Reuss Princely Reuss Honour Cross Principality of Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt Princely Schwarzburg Honor Cross Principality of Schwarzburg-Sondershausen Princely Schwarzburg Honor Cross Principality of Waldeck and Pyrmont Order of Merit (Waldeck and Pyrmont) Free cities Hanseatic Cross Authority control databases VIAF Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Royal_Guelphic_Order&oldid=1257519309 " Categories : Orders of chivalry of the United Kingdom Orders of chivalry of Germany 1815 establishments in the Kingdom of Hanover Awards established in 1815 Orders, decorations, and medals of Hanover Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Articles needing additional references from July 2021 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2024 Use British English from January 2024 This page was last edited on 15 November 2024, at 10:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Royal Guelphic Order 18 languages Add topic

