Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Philosophical work 3 Books 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Benson Mates 3 languages Deutsch Español Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (1919–2009) Part of a series on Pyrrhonism Pyrrhonists Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus Concepts Ataraxia Acatalepsy Adiaphora Aporia Dogma Epoché Similar philosophies Academic skepticism Modern influence Münchhausen trilemma Benson Mates Robert Fogelin Philosophy portal v t e Benson Mates (May 19, 1919 in Portland, Oregon – May 14, 2009 in Berkeley, California ) was an American philosopher at the University of California, Berkeley , noted for his work in logic , the history of philosophy , and skepticism .

Education and career [ edit ] Mates studied philosophy and mathematics at the University of Oregon , Cornell University , and the University of California at Berkeley .  Some of his teachers included J. Barkley Rosser , Harold Cherniss , and Alfred Tarski .  From 1948 until his retirement in 1989, he was a professor of philosophy at Berkeley.  He remained Professor Emeritus of philosophy at University of California at Berkeley until his death.

Philosophical work [ edit ] Mates's 1948 dissertation, "On the Logic of the Old Stoa", formed the basis for his 1953 book Stoic Logic , of which Peter Geach wrote, "Stoic logic is a difficult subject [...] Dr. Mates's monograph is a strenuous and successful effort to overcome these difficulties." [ 1 ] Mates's 1965 book, Elementary Logic , remains a widely used introductory textbook in symbolic logic .  His 1986 study of Leibniz is also highly regarded.

[ 2 ] In his own philosophical work, Mates defends a stance akin to Pyrrhonian skepticism .  He argues that the major problems of philosophy (such as the liar paradox , the existence of an external world, and free will ) are intelligible and non-trivial yet utterly defy solution.

[ 3 ] Unlike the classical Pyrrhonists, however, Mates finds that skeptical arguments lead to unsatisfactory perplexity rather than ataraxia .

[ 4 ] Books [ edit ] Stoic Logic , Berkeley: University of California Press, 1953 (second revised edition 1961).

Elementary Logic , 1965, second edition New York: Oxford University Press, 1972.

Skeptical Essays , Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981.

The Philosophy of Leibniz. Metaphysics and Language , New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.

The Skeptic Way: Sextus Empiricus's Outlines of Pyrrhonism , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.

See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers Karl W. Aschenbrenner References [ edit ] ^ P.T. Geach, The Philosophical Review , 64:1 (January 1955), p. 143.

^ J.A. Cover and Glenn Hartz, Noûs , 24:1 (March 1990), p. 169: "Mates' book [is] the best work of its kind on Leibniz yet published." ^ B. Mates, Skeptical Essays (University of Chicago Press, 1981), pp. 3–13.

^ Ibid ., p. 158.

v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Benson_Mates&oldid=1293186411 " Categories : 1919 births 2009 deaths University of Oregon alumni Cornell University alumni University of California, Berkeley alumni University of California, Berkeley faculty Philosophers from California Philosophers from Oregon American logicians Skeptic philosophers American skeptics Modal logicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 07:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Benson Mates 3 languages Add topic

