Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Meaning in philosophy 2 Meaning in psychology Toggle Meaning in psychology subsection 2.1 Example 3 Meaning in epistemology 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Apperception 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Several aspects of perception and consciousness Apperception (from the Latin ad- , "to, toward" and percipere , "to perceive, gain, secure, learn, or feel") is any of several aspects of perception and consciousness in such fields as psychology , philosophy and epistemology .

Meaning in philosophy [ edit ] The term originates with René Descartes in the form of the word apercevoir in his book Traité des passions .

Leibniz introduced the concept of apperception into the more technical philosophical tradition, in his work Principes de la nature fondés en raison et de la grâce ; although he used the word practically in the sense of the modern attention , by which an object is apprehended as "not-self" and yet in relation to the self.

[ 1 ] Immanuel Kant distinguished transcendental apperception from empirical apperception. The first is the perception of an object as involving the consciousness of the pure self as subject – "the pure, original, unchangeable consciousness that is the necessary condition of experience and the ultimate foundation of the unity of experience". The second is "the consciousness of the concrete actual self with its changing states", the so-called "inner sense" (Otto F. Kraushaar in Runes [ 2 ] ).

The German philosopher Theodor Lipps distinguished the terms perception and apperception in his 1902 work Vom Fühlen, Wollen und Denken .

[ 3 ] Perception, for Lipps, is a generic term that covers such psychic occurrences as auditory and tactile sensations, recollections, visual representations in memory, etc. But these perceptions do not always hold one's conscious attention – perception is not always consciously noticed. Lipps uses the term apperception, then, to refer to attentive perception, wherein, in addition to merely perceiving an object, either one also consciously attends to the perceived object or one also attends to the very perception of the object.

[ 4 ] Meaning in psychology [ edit ] In psychology , apperception is "the process by which new experience is assimilated to and transformed by the residuum of past experience of an individual to form a new whole".

[ 2 ] In short, it is to perceive new experience in relation to past experience. The term is found in the early psychologies of Herbert Spencer , Hermann Lotze , and Wilhelm Wundt . It originally means passing the threshold into consciousness, i.e., to perceive. But the percept is changed when reaching consciousness due to its entry into an already present interpretive context; thus it is not perceived but apperceived.

According to Johann Friedrich Herbart , apperception is that process by which an aggregate or "mass" of presentations becomes systematized ( apperceptions-system ) by the accretion of new elements, either sense-given or as a product of the inner workings of the mind. He thus emphasizes in apperception the connection with the self as resulting from the sum of antecedent experience. Hence in education the teacher should fully acquaint himself with the mental development of the pupil, in order that he may make full use of what the pupil already knows.

[ 1 ] Alfred Adler used the notion of apperception to explain certain principles of perception in child psychology. A child perceives different situations not as they actually exist, but by means of the biases prism of their personal interests, in other words, according to their personal apperception scheme.

[ 5 ] Apperception is thus a general term for all mental processes in which a presentation is brought into connection with an already existent and systematized mental conception, and thereby is classified, explained or, in a word, understood; e.g. a new scientific phenomenon is explained in the light of phenomena already analysed and classified. The whole intelligent life of man is, consciously or unconsciously, a process of apperception, in as much as every act of attention involves the appercipient process.

[ 1 ] Example [ edit ] A rich child and a poor child walking together come across the same ten dollar bill on the sidewalk. The rich child says it is not very much money and the poor child says it is a lot of money. The difference lies in how they apperceive the same event – the lens of past experience through which they see and value (or devalue) the money.

[ 6 ] Meaning in epistemology [ edit ] In epistemology , apperception is "the introspective or reflective apprehension by the mind of its own inner states".

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Projective test Rorschach inkblot test Thematic Apperception Test Saṃjñā References [ edit ] ^ a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Apperception ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 221.

This cites: Karl Lange, Ueber Apperception (6th ed. revised, Leipzig, 1899; trans. E. E. Brown, Boston, 1893) G. F. Stout , Analytic Psychology (London, 1896), bk. ii. ch. viii.

^ a b c Runes, Dagobert D.

(ed.), Dictionary of Philosophy , Littlefield, Adams, and Company, Totowa, NJ, 1972.

^ Lipps, Theodor.

Vom Fuehlen, Wollen und Denken.

Leipzig, Verlag von Johann Ambrosius Barth, 1902. See pages 6-7.

^ Judgement and Truth in Early Analytic Philosophy and Phenomenology . ed. Mark Textor. Springer, 2013. pp. 14f.

^ Adler, Alfred (2011).

"The Science of Living" .

^ Ott, Christopher, The Evolution of Perception and the Cosmology of Substance , iUniverse, 2004.

Further reading [ edit ] Runes, Dagobert D.

(ed.), Dictionary of Philosophy , Littlefield, Adams, and Company, Totowa, NJ, 1972.

Yao, Zhihua (2005).

The Buddhist Theory of Self-Cognition . (Routledge Critical Studies in Buddhism) (Hardcover). Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-34431-9 External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of apperception at Wiktionary William James (1892), "Talks to Teachers", Chapter 14 Archived 2007-12-30 at the Wayback Machine .

Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Apperception&oldid=1294200576 " Categories : Cognition Concepts in epistemology Philosophy of perception Phenomenology Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 07:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Apperception 25 languages Add topic

