Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Kant on noumena 2 Locke on primary and secondary qualities 3 Philosophy of science 4 Kinds of unobservables 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Unobservable 5 languages Italiano Latina Português Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Entity not directly observable by humans An unobservable (also called impalpable ) is an entity whose existence, nature, properties, qualities or relations are not directly observable by humans. In philosophy of science , typical examples of "unobservables" are the force of gravity , causation and beliefs or desires .

[ 1 ] : 7 [ 2 ] The distinction between observable and unobservable plays a central role in Immanuel Kant 's distinction between noumena and phenomena as well as in John Locke 's distinction between primary and secondary qualities . There is considerable disagreement about which objects should be classified as unobservable, for example, whether bacteria studied using microscopes or positrons studied using cloud chambers count as unobservable. Different notions of unobservability have been formulated corresponding to different types of obstacles to their observation.

Kant on noumena [ edit ] The distinction between "observable" and "unobservable" is similar to Immanuel Kant 's distinction between noumena and phenomena . Noumena are the things-in-themselves , i.e., raw things in their necessarily unknowable state, [ 3 ] before they pass through the formalizing apparatus of the senses and the mind in order to become perceived objects, which he refers to as "phenomena". According to Kant, humans can never know noumena; all that humans know is the phenomena.

Locke on primary and secondary qualities [ edit ] Kant's distinction is similar to John Locke 's distinction between primary and secondary qualities .  Secondary qualities are what humans perceive such as redness, chirping, heat, mustiness or sweetness.  Primary qualities would be the actual qualities of the things themselves which give rise to the secondary qualities which humans perceive.

Philosophy of science [ edit ] The ontological nature and epistemological issues concerning unobservables are central topics in philosophy of science. The theory that unobservables posited by scientific theories exist is referred to as scientific realism . It contrasts with instrumentalism , which asserts that we should withhold ontological commitments to unobservables even though it is useful for scientific theories to refer to them.

The notion of observability plays a central role in constructive empiricism . According to Bas van Fraassen , the goal of scientific theories is not truth about all entities but only truth about all observable entities.

[ 4 ] If a theory is true in this restricted sense, it is called an empirically adequate theory. Van Fraassen characterizes observability counterfactually: "X is observable if there are circumstances which are such that, if X is present to us under those circumstances, then we observe it".

[ 5 ] A problem with this and similar characterizations is to determine the exact extension of what is unobservable. There is little controversy that regular everyday objects that we can perceive without any aids are observable. Such objects include, for example, trees, chairs, or dogs. But controversy starts with cases where unaided perception fails. These include using telescopes to study distant galaxies, [ 6 ] using microscopes to study bacteria, or using cloud chambers to study positrons.

[ 5 ] Some philosophers have been motivated by these and similar examples to question the value of the distinction between observable and unobservable in general.

[ 7 ] Kinds of unobservables [ edit ] W. V. Metcalf distinguishes three kinds of unobservables.

[ 8 ] One is the logically unobservable, which involves a contradiction. An example would be a length which is both longer and shorter than a given length. The second is the practically unobservable, that which we can conceive of as observable by the known sense-faculties of man but we are prevented from observing by practical difficulties. The third kind is the physically unobservable, that which can never be observed by any existing sense-faculties of man.

See also [ edit ] Banach–Tarski paradox Empiricism Future Hidden variable theory If a tree falls in a forest Logical positivism Object of the mind Phenomenology Proxy (statistics) , for an unobservable variable Rationalism Unobservable chaos References [ edit ] ^ Fodor, J. A.

, Psychosemantics: The Problem of Meaning in the Philosophy of Mind ( Cambridge, MA / London : MIT Press , 1989), p. 7 .

^ Dijk, Bram van (2018).

Constructive Empiricism in the Social Sciences . Utrecht University. p. 54. Archived from the original on 2021-11-29 . Retrieved 2020-10-18 .

^ Palmquist, S. R.

, "The Radical Unknowability of Kant's 'Thing in Itself'", Cogito 3:2 (March 1985), pp. 101-115; reprinted as Appendix V of Kant's System of Perspectives ( Lanham, MD : University Press of America , 1993).

^ Monton, Bradley [in Finnish] ; Mohler, Chad (2017).

Constructive Empiricism .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2017 Edition).

^ a b van Fraassen, Bas (1980).

The Scientific Image . Oxford University Press. pp.

16– 17.

^ Churchland, Paul M.

(1985). "The Ontological Status of Observables: In Praise of the Superempirical Virtues". In Churchland, Paul M.; Hooker, Clifford A. (eds.).

Images of Science: Essays on Realism and Empiricism . University of Chicago Press.

^ Hacking, Ian (1981).

"Do We See through a Microscope?" .

Pacific Philosophical Quarterly .

62 (4): 305– 322.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0114.1981.tb00070.x .

^ Metcalf, W. V. (1940). "The Reality of the Unobservable".

Philosophy of Science .

7 (3): 337– 341.

doi : 10.1086/286640 .

JSTOR 184849 .

S2CID 121713405 .

v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unobservable&oldid=1305775228 " Categories : Concepts in epistemology Concepts in metaphysics Hidden categories: CS1 interwiki-linked names Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 01:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Unobservable 5 languages Add topic

