Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Harlem Renaissance 1.2 Civil rights movement 2 Developments Toggle Developments subsection 2.1 Authors 2.2 Locations 2.3 The Black Aesthetic 2.4 Major works 2.4.1 Black Art 2.4.2 The Revolutionary Theatre 3 Effects on society Toggle Effects on society subsection 3.1 Legacy 3.2 Influence 4 Notable individuals 5 Notable organisations 6 See also 7 References 8 Works cited 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Black Arts Movement 6 languages العربية Français Italiano Português Slovenčina Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1960s–1970s art movement This article is about an arts movement. For the poem, see Black Art (poem) .

Black Arts Movement Nikki Giovanni , a participant in the Black Arts Movement Years active 1965–1975 (approx.) [ 1 ] Location United States Major figures Amiri Baraka [ 1 ] Audre Lorde [ 1 ] Dudley Randall [ 2 ] Gwendolyn Brooks [ 1 ] Haki R. Madhubuti [ 2 ] Hoyt W. Fuller [ 1 ] Ishmael Reed [ 2 ] Larry Neal [ 2 ] Maya Angelou [ 1 ] Nikki Giovanni [ 1 ] Rosa Guy [ 2 ] Sonia Sanchez [ 2 ] This article is part of a series about Black power History Black Arts Movement Black is beautiful Black power movement Black Power Revolution Kwanzaa Raised fist events of 1968 and 1972 Ideologies African socialism Africana womanism Afrocentrism Anti-Americanism Black anarchism Black feminism Black leftism Black nationalism Black pride Black separatism Black supremacy Intercommunalism Pan-Africanism Garveyism Organizations African People's Socialist Party Assata's Daughters Black Guerrilla Family Black Liberators Black Liberation Army Black Panther Militia Black Panther Party Black Radical Congress Black Revolutionary Assault Team Black Riders Liberation Party Black Women's Defense League British Black Panthers Conscious Community Five-Percent Nation George Jackson Brigade Huey P. Newton Gun Club League of Revolutionary Black Workers Lowndes County Freedom Organization May 19th Communist Organization MOVE Nation of Islam National Joint Action Committee New Black Panther Party Republic of New Afrika Revolutionary Action Movement Revolutionary Black Panther Party SNCC Symbionese Liberation Army US Organization Weather Underground People Angela Davis Assata Shakur Donald DeFreeze Elaine Brown Eldridge Cleaver Fay Bellamy Powell Fred Hampton George Jackson Gloria Richardson Hakim Jamal Huey P. Newton John Africa Malcolm X Marcus Garvey Martin Luther King, Jr.

Maulana Karenga Malik Zulu Shabazz Michael X Max Stanford Obi Egbuna Robert F. Williams Rosa Parks Stokely Carmichael Wadsworth Jarrell Works A Taste of Power Black Power and the American Myth Ten-Point Program The Diary of Malcolm X Revolutionary Suicide Related Anarchism Black Lives Matter Black Power gang Black Power in the Caribbean Black Power in Montreal Communism Feminism Hutu Power New Left Political hip hop Red Power movement Socialism The Troubles United States civil rights movement White power Youth rights Category v t e The Black Arts Movement ( BAM ) was an African-American -led art movement that was active during the 1960s and 1970s.

[ 3 ] Through activism and art, BAM created new cultural institutions and conveyed a message of black pride .

[ 4 ] The movement expanded from the accomplishments of artists of the Harlem Renaissance .

Famously referred to by Larry Neal as the "aesthetic and spiritual sister of Black Power ", [ 5 ] BAM applied these same political ideas to art and literature.

[ 6 ] and artists found new inspiration in their African heritage as a way to present the black experience in America. Artists such as Aaron Douglas , Hale Woodruff , and Meta Vaux Warrick Fuller pioneered the movement with a distinctly modernist aesthetic.

[ 7 ] This style influenced the proliferation of African American art during the twentieth century.

The poet and playwright Amiri Baraka is widely recognized as the founder of BAM.

[ 8 ] In 1965, he established the Black Arts Repertory Theatre School (BART/S) in Harlem .

[ 9 ] Baraka's example inspired many others to create organizations across the United States.

[ 4 ] While many of these organizations were short-lived, their work has had a lasting influence. Some still exist, including the National Black Theatre , founded by Barbara Ann Teer in Harlem, New York.

Background [ edit ] Novelist James Baldwin on the Albert Memorial , Kensington Gardens , London African Americans had always made valuable artistic contributions to American culture. However, due to the brutalities of slavery and the systemic racism of Jim Crow , these contributions often went unrecognized.

[ 10 ] Despite continued oppression, African-American artists continued to create literature and art that would reflect their experiences. A high-point for these artists was the Harlem Renaissance —a literary era that spotlighted black people.

[ 11 ] Harlem Renaissance [ edit ] Many parallels can be made between the Harlem Renaissance and the Black Arts Movement. The link is so strong that some scholars refer to the Black Arts Movement era as the Second Renaissance.

[ 12 ] One sees this connection clearly when reading Langston Hughes 's The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain (1926). Hughes's seminal essay advocates that black writers resist external attempts to control their art, arguing instead that the "truly great" black artist will be the one who can fully embrace and freely express his blackness.

[ 12 ] Yet, the Harlem Renaissance lacked many of the radical political stances that defined BAM.

[ 13 ] Inevitably, the Renaissance and many of its ideas, failed to survive the Great Depression .

[ 14 ] Civil rights movement [ edit ] During the civil rights era , activists paid more and more attention to the political uses of art. The contemporary work of those like James Baldwin and Chester Himes would show the possibility of creating a new "black aesthetic". Several art groups were established during this period, such as the Umbra Poets and the Spiral Arts Alliance , which can be seen as precursors to BAM.

[ 15 ] Art was seen as a way to decompress from the upheaval of the civil rights era by, for example, the ceramicist Marva Lee Pitchford-Jolly , the maker of "Story Pots".

[ 16 ] Civil Rights activists were also interested in creating black-owned media outlets, establishing journals (such as Freedomways , Black Dialogue , The Liberator , The Black Scholar and Soul Book ) and publishing houses (such as Dudley Randall 's Broadside Press and Third World Press .) [ 4 ] It was through these channels that BAM would eventually spread its art, literature, and political messages.

[ 17 ] [ 4 ] Developments [ edit ] The beginnings of the Black Arts Movement may be traced to 1965, when Amiri Baraka, at that time still known as Leroi Jones, moved uptown to establish the Black Arts Repertory Theatre/School (BARTS) following the assassination of Malcolm X.

[ 18 ] Rooted in the Nation of Islam , the Black Power movement and the Civil Rights Movement, the Black Arts Movement grew out of a changing political and cultural climate in which Black artists attempted to create politically engaged work that explored the African American cultural and historical experience.

[ 19 ] Black artists and intellectuals such as Baraka made it their project to reject older political, cultural, and artistic traditions.

[ 17 ] Although the success of sit-ins and public demonstrations of the Black student movement in the 1960s may have "inspired black intellectuals, artists, and political activists to form politicized cultural groups", [ 17 ] many Black Arts activists rejected the non-militant integrational ideologies of the Civil Rights Movement and instead favored those of the Black Liberation Struggle, which emphasized " self-determination through self-reliance and Black control of significant businesses, organization, agencies, and institutions." [ 20 ] According to the Academy of American Poets, "African American artists within the movement sought to create politically engaged work that explored the African American cultural and historical experience." The importance that the movement placed on Black autonomy is apparent through the creation of institutions such as the Black Arts Repertoire Theatre School (BARTS), created in the spring of 1964 by Baraka and other Black artists. The opening of BARTS in New York City often overshadows the growth of other radical Black Arts groups and institutions all over the United States. In fact, transgressional and international networks, those of various Left and nationalist (and Left nationalist) groups and their supports, existed far before the movement gained popularity.

[ 17 ] Although the creation of BARTS did indeed catalyze the spread of other Black Arts institutions and the Black Arts movement across the nation, it was not solely responsible for the growth of the movement.

Although the Black Arts Movement was a time filled with black success and artistic progress, the movement also faced social and racial ridicule. The leaders and artists involved called for Black Art to define itself and speak for itself from the security of its own institutions. For many of the contemporaries the idea that somehow black people could express themselves through institutions of their own creation and with ideas whose validity was confirmed by their own interests and measures was absurd.

[ 21 ] While it is easy to assume that the movement began solely in the Northeast, it actually started out as "separate and distinct local initiatives across a wide geographic area", eventually coming together to form the broader national movement.

[ 17 ] New York City is often referred to as the "birthplace" of the Black Arts Movement, because it was home to many revolutionary Black artists and activists. However, the geographical diversity of the movement opposes the misconception that New York (and Harlem, especially) was the primary site of the movement.

[ 17 ] In its beginning states, the movement came together largely through printed media. Journals such as Liberator , The Crusader , and Freedomways created "a national community in which ideology and aesthetics were debated and a wide range of approaches to African-American artistic style and subject displayed." [ 17 ] These publications tied communities outside of large Black Arts centers to the movement and gave the general black public access to these sometimes exclusive circles.

As a literary movement, Black Arts had its roots in groups such as the Umbra Workshop . Umbra (1962) was a collective of young Black writers based in Manhattan's Lower East Side; major members were writers Steve Cannon , [ 22 ] Tom Dent , Al Haynes , David Henderson , Calvin C. Hernton , Joe Johnson, Norman Pritchard , Lennox Raphael , Ishmael Reed , Lorenzo Thomas , James Thompson, Askia M. Touré (Roland Snellings; also a visual artist), Brenda Walcott, and musician-writer Archie Shepp . Touré, a major shaper of "cultural nationalism", directly influenced Jones. Along with Umbra writer Charles Patterson and Charles's brother, William Patterson, Touré joined Jones, Steve Young, and others at BARTS.

Umbra, which produced Umbra Magazine , was the first post-civil rights Black literary group to make an impact as radical in the sense of establishing their own voice distinct from, and sometimes at odds with, the prevailing white literary establishment. The attempt to merge a black-oriented activist thrust with a primarily artistic orientation produced a classic split in Umbra between those who wanted to be activists and those who thought of themselves as primarily writers, though to some extent all members shared both views. Black writers have always had to face the issue of whether their work was primarily political or aesthetic. Moreover, Umbra itself had evolved out of similar circumstances: in 1960 a Black nationalist literary organization, On Guard for Freedom, had been founded on the Lower East Side by Calvin Hicks . Its members included Nannie and Walter Bowe, Harold Cruse (who was then working on The Crisis of the Negro Intellectual , 1967), Tom Dent, Rosa Guy, Joe Johnson, LeRoi Jones, and Sarah E. Wright , and others. On Guard was active in a famous protest at the United Nations of the American-sponsored Bay of Pigs Cuban invasion and was active in support of the Congolese liberation leader Patrice Lumumba . From On Guard, Dent, Johnson, and Walcott along with Hernton, Henderson, and Touré established Umbra.

In 1967, the Visual Arts Workshop of the Organization of Black American Culture, composed of several artists such as Jeff Donaldson, William Walker, and more, painted the Wall of Respect which was a mural that represented the Black Arts Movement; what it stood for and who it was celebrating. The mural commemorated several important black figures such as Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X, along with artists such as Aretha Franklin and Gwendolyn Brooks, etc.

[ 23 ] It was a renowned symbol of the movement, placed in Chicago, that represented black culture and creativity, and was met with a lot of attention, support, and respect from the black community. It was a symbolic and important representation of the Black Arts Movement, as it directly celebrated and acknowledged the iconic figures of the Black community through art, emphasizing the importance of art for the community. Furthermore, it left a legacy and served as a beacon for the Black community, promoting Black consciousness and helping many Black people to learn and recognize their worth. In the eight years following the installation of the mural, over 1,500 murals were painted in black neighborhoods across the country, and by 1975, over 200 were painted in Chicago. It brought the community together symbolically, and literally, as rival gangs even declared the location of the mural to be neutral ground, supporting the artists and the movement.

[ 24 ] In 1968, renowned Black theorist Barbara Ann Teer founded the National Black Theatre , located in Harlem , New York. Teer was an American writer, producer, teacher, actress and social visionary. Teer was an important black female intellectual, artist, and activist who contributed to the Black Arts Movement. Her theater was one of the first revenue generating Black theaters in the US. Teer's art was politically and socially conscious and like many other contributors to the BAM, embraced African aesthetics, and rejected traditional theatrical notions of time and space.  Teer's revolutionary and ritualistic dramas and plays blurred the lines between performers and audience, "encouraging all to use the performance event itself as an opportunity to bring about social change." Authors [ edit ] Another formation of black writers at that time was the Harlem Writers Guild , led by John O. Killens , which included Maya Angelou , Jean Carey Bond , Rosa Guy , and Sarah Wright among others. But the Harlem Writers Guild focused on prose, primarily fiction, which did not have the mass appeal of poetry performed in the dynamic vernacular of the time. Poems could be built around anthems, chants, and political slogans, and thereby used in organizing work, which was not generally the case with novels and short stories. Moreover, the poets could and did publish themselves, whereas greater resources were needed to publish fiction. That Umbra was primarily poetry- and performance-oriented established a significant and classic characteristic of the movement's aesthetics.
When Umbra split up, some members, led by Askia Touré and Al Haynes, moved to Harlem in late 1964 and formed the nationalist-oriented Uptown Writers Movement, which included poets Yusef Rahman, Keorapetse "Willie" Kgositsile from South Africa, and Larry Neal . Accompanied by young "New Music" musicians, they performed poetry all over Harlem. Members of this group joined LeRoi Jones in founding BARTS.

Jones's move to Harlem was short-lived. In December 1965 he returned to his home, Newark (N.J.), and left BARTS in serious disarray. BARTS failed but the Black Arts center concept was irrepressible, mainly because the Black Arts movement was so closely aligned with the then-burgeoning Black Power movement.
The mid-to-late 1960s was a period of intense revolutionary ferment. Beginning in 1964, rebellions in Harlem and Rochester, New York, initiated four years of long hot summers.

Watts , Detroit, Newark, Cleveland, and many other cities went up in flames, culminating in nationwide explosions of resentment and anger following the April 1968 assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.

Nathan Hare , author of The Black Anglo-Saxons (1965), was the founder of 1960s Black Studies. Expelled from Howard University, Hare moved to San Francisco State University, where the battle to establish a Black Studies department was waged during a five-month strike during the 1968–69 school year. As with the establishment of Black Arts, which included a range of forces, there was broad activity in the Bay Area around Black Studies, including efforts led by poet and professor Sarah Webster Fabio at Merrit College.

The initial thrust of Black Arts ideological development came from the Revolutionary Action Movement (RAM), a national organization with a strong presence in New York City. Both Touré and Neal were members of RAM. After RAM, the major ideological force shaping the Black Arts movement was the US (as opposed to "them") organization led by Maulana Karenga . Also ideologically important was Elijah Muhammad 's Chicago-based Nation of Islam . These three formations provided both style and conceptual direction for Black Arts artists, including those who were not members of these or any other political organization. Although the Black Arts Movement is often considered a New York-based movement, two of its three major forces were located outside New York City.

Locations [ edit ] As the movement matured, the two major locations of Black Arts' ideological leadership, particularly for literary work, were California's Bay Area because of the Journal of Black Poetry and The Black Scholar , and the Chicago–Detroit axis because of Negro Digest/Black World and Third World Press in Chicago, and Broadside Press and Naomi Long Madgett 's Lotus Press in Detroit. The only major Black Arts literary publications to come out of New York were the short-lived (six issues between 1969 and 1972) Black Theatre magazine, published by the New Lafayette Theatre , and Black Dialogue , which had actually started in San Francisco (1964–1968) and relocated to New York (1969–1972).

Although the journals and writing of the movement greatly characterized its success, the movement placed a great deal of importance on collective oral and performance art. Public collective performances drew a lot of attention to the movement, and it was often easier to get an immediate response from a collective poetry reading, short play, or street performance than it was from individual performances.

[ 17 ] The people involved in the Black Arts Movement used the arts as a way to liberate themselves. The movement served as a catalyst for many different ideas and cultures to come alive. This was a chance for African Americans to express themselves in a way that most would not have expected.

In 1967, LeRoi Jones visited Karenga in Los Angeles and became an advocate of Karenga's philosophy of Kawaida . Kawaida, which produced the "Nguzo Saba" (seven principles), Kwanzaa , and an emphasis on African names, was a multifaceted, categorized activist philosophy. Jones also met Bobby Seale and Eldridge Cleaver and worked with a number of the founding members of the Black Panthers . Additionally, Askia Touré was a visiting professor at San Francisco State and was to become a leading (and long-lasting) poet as well as, arguably, the most influential poet-professor in the Black Arts movement. Playwright Ed Bullins and poet Marvin X had established Black Arts West, and Dingane Joe Goncalves had founded the Journal of Black Poetry (1966).

[ 25 ] This grouping of Ed Bullins, Dingane Joe Goncalves, LeRoi Jones, Sonia Sanchez, Askia M. Touré, and Marvin X became a major nucleus of Black Arts leadership.

[ 26 ] As the movement grew, ideological conflicts arose and eventually became too great for the movement to continue to exist as a large, coherent collective.

The Black Aesthetic [ edit ] Part of a series on African Americans History Periods Timeline Atlantic slave trade Abolitionism in the United States Slavery in the colonial history of the US Revolutionary War Antebellum period Slavery and military history during the Civil War Reconstruction era Politicians Juneteenth Civil rights movement (1865–1896) Jim Crow era (1896–1954) Civil rights movement (1954–1968) Black power movement Post–civil rights era Aspects Agriculture history Black Belt in the American South Business history Military history Treatment of the enslaved Migrations Great Migration Second Great Migration New Great Migration Culture Lifeways Dance Family structure Film Folktales Music Musical theater Names Neighborhoods Newspapers Soul food Schools Education during the slave period in the US Education of freed people during the Civil War History of African-American education , after the Civil War Historically black colleges and universities Fraternities Academic study Studies Art Literature Celebrations Martin Luther King Jr. Day Black History Month Juneteenth Kwanzaa Economic class African-American businesses Middle class Upper class Billionaires Symbols and ideas African-American beauty Black is beautiful Black pride African-American hair Good hair Stepping " Lift Every Voice and Sing " Self-determination Religion Institutions Black church Theologies Black theology Womanist theology Non-Christian groups Hoodoo Black Hebrew Israelites African-American Jews African-American Muslims Nation of Islam Louisiana Voodoo African Diaspora Religions Politics Organizations Congressional Black Caucus Joint Center National Black Caucus of State Legislators National Conference of Black Mayors Ideologies Afrocentrism Anarchism Back-to-Africa movement Black power Capitalism Conservatism Garveyism Leftism Liberalism Nationalism Pan-Africanism Patriotism Populism Radicalism Socialism Civic/economic groups Organizations Association for the Study of African American Life and History Black conductors NAACP National Black Chamber of Commerce National Council of Negro Women National Pan-Hellenic Council National Urban League TransAfrica UNCF Sports Negro league baseball Athletic associations and conferences Central (CIAA) HBCU (HBCUAC) Mid-Eastern (MEAC) Southern (SIAC) Southwestern (SWAC) Sub-communities Multiethnic African-American Jews Afro-Puerto Ricans Alabama Creole people Black Indians Black Seminoles Mascogos Blaxicans Brass Ankles Creoles of color Dominickers Freedmen Great Dismal Swamp maroons Louisiana Creoles Melungeon Carmel Redbone Specific ancestries Americo-Liberians Creek Freedmen Gullah Merikins Nova Scotians Samaná Americans Sierra Leone Creole Sexual orientation LGBT community Dialects and languages English dialects African-American English African-American Vernacular English Liberian English Samaná English Tutnese Languages and other dialects Gullah Afro-Seminole Creole Negro Dutch Black American Sign Language Population US states Alabama Arkansas California Florida Georgia Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Louisiana Maryland Mississippi Nebraska New York North Carolina Ohio Oklahoma Oregon South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Virginia US cities Black mecca List of neighborhoods Atlanta Baltimore Boston Chicago Dallas-Fort Worth Davenport Detroit Houston Jacksonville Kentucky Lexington Los Angeles New York City Omaha Philadelphia San Antonio San Francisco Historic places District of Columbia Florida Georgia Mississippi Missouri Omaha, Nebraska North Carolina South Carolina Texas West Virginia Population count US states and territories US metropolitan areas US cities US communities Places by plurality of population Diaspora Africa Canada France Ghana Israel Liberia Nova Scotia Sierra Leone Prejudice Racism Black genocide Race and ethnicity in the US census Racism against Black Americans Reparations for slavery School segregation in the US Unarmed African Americans killed by police officers Stereotypes and media depictions Blackface Criminal stereotypes Hollywood Magical Negro Minstrel show United States portal Category Index v t e Although The Black Aesthetic was first coined by Larry Neal in 1968, across all the discourse, The Black Aesthetic has no overall real definition agreed upon by all Black Aesthetic theorists.

[ 27 ] It is loosely defined, without any real consensus besides that the theorists of The Black Aesthetic agree that "art should be used to galvanize the black masses to revolt against their white capitalist oppressors".

[ 28 ] Pollard also argues in her critique of the Black Arts Movement that The Black Aesthetic "celebrated the African origins of the Black community, championed black urban culture, critiqued Western aesthetics, and encouraged the production and reception of black arts by black people". In The Black Arts Movement by Larry Neal, where the Black Arts Movement is discussed as "aesthetic and spiritual sister of the Black Power concept", The Black Aesthetic is described by Neal as being the merger of the ideologies of Black Power with the artistic values of African expression.

[ 29 ] Larry Neal attests: "When we speak of a 'Black aesthetic', several things are meant. First, we assume that there is already in existence the basis for such an aesthetic. Essentially, it consists of an African-American cultural tradition. But this aesthetic is finally, by implication, broader than that tradition. It encompasses most of the usable elements of the Third World culture. The motive behind the Black aesthetic is the destruction of the white thing, the destruction of white ideas, and white ways of looking at the world." [ 30 ] The Black Aesthetic also refers to ideologies and perspectives of art that center on Black culture and life. This Black Aesthetic encouraged the idea of Black separatism, and in trying to facilitate this, hoped to further strengthen black ideals, solidarity, and creativity.

[ 31 ] In The Black Aesthetic (1971), Addison Gayle argues that Black artists should work exclusively on uplifting their identity while refusing to appease white folks.

[ 32 ] The Black Aesthetic works as a "corrective", where black people are not supposed to desire the "ranks of Norman Mailer or a William Styron".

[ 27 ] Black people are encouraged by Black artists who take their own Black identity, reshaping and redefining themselves for themselves by themselves via art as a medium.

[ 33 ] Hoyt Fuller defines The Black Aesthetic "in terms of the cultural experiences and tendencies expressed in artist' work" [ 27 ] while another meaning of The Black Aesthetic comes from Ron Karenga, who argues for three main characteristics of The Black Aesthetic and Black art itself: functional, collective, and committed. Karenga says, "Black Art must expose the enemy, praise the people, and support the revolution". The notion "art for art's sake" is killed in the process, binding the Black Aesthetic to the revolutionary struggle, a struggle that is the reasoning behind reclaiming Black art in order to return to African culture and tradition for Black people.

[ 34 ] Under Karenga's definition of The Black Aesthetic, art that does not fight for the Black Revolution is not considered as art at all, and needs the vital context of social issues as well as an artistic value.

Among these definitions, the central theme that is the underlying connection of the Black Arts, Black Aesthetic, and Black Power movements is then this: the idea of group identity, which is defined by Black artists of organizations as well as their objectives.

[ 32 ] The narrowed view of The Black Aesthetic, often described as Marxist by critics, brought upon conflicts of the Black Aesthetic and Black Arts Movement as a whole in areas that drove the focus of African culture; [ 35 ] In The Black Arts Movement and Its Critics , David Lionel Smith argues in saying "The Black Aesthetic", one suggests a single principle, closed and prescriptive in which just really sustains the oppressiveness of defining race in one single identity.

[ 27 ] The search of finding the true "blackness" of Black people through art by the term creates obstacles in achieving a refocus and return to African culture. Smith compares the statement "The Black Aesthetic" to "Black Aesthetics", the latter leaving multiple, open, descriptive possibilities. The Black Aesthetic, particularly Karenga's definition, has also received additional critiques; Ishmael Reed, author of Neo-HooDoo Manifesto, argues for artistic freedom, ultimately against Karenga's idea of the Black Aesthetic, which Reed finds limiting and something he cannot ever sympathize with.

[ 36 ] The example Reed brings up is if a Black artist wants to paint black guerrillas, that is okay, but if the Black artist "does so only deference to Ron Karenga, something's wrong".

[ 36 ] The focus of blackness in the context of maleness was another critique raised with the Black Aesthetic.

[ 28 ] Pollard argues that the art made with the artistic and social values of the Black Aesthetic emphasizes the male talent of blackness, and it is uncertain whether the movement only includes women as an afterthought.

As there begins a change in the Black population, Trey Ellis points out other flaws in his essay "The New Black Aesthetic".

[ 37 ] Blackness in terms of cultural background can no longer be denied to appease or please white or black people. From mulattos to a "post-bourgeois movement driven by a second generation of middle class", blackness is not a singular identity as the phrase "The Black Aesthetic" forces it to be but rather multifaceted and vast.

[ 37 ] BAM also turned to the religious tradition of voodoo in defining black aesthetics.

James Baldwin was critical of both the black church and the Nation of Islam . He argued that Christianity had only been forced on black people to rationalize and justify slavery and colonization . Nation of Islam failed in its strong mission to separate itself and black people from white people, said Baldwin, especially looking at their culture of expensive suits and cars all the while demonizing white people. Voodoo then became an alternative to Christianity and Islam for BAM. The historical tradition of voodoo among enslaved Africans had been forgotten in favor of assimilation to the white, Christian identity. The turn to voodoo is therefore regarded as a pan-African reclaiming of the roots. The approximation to voodoo is maybe most clear in the poetry collection "Hoodoo Hollerin Bebop Ghosts" by Larry Neal and the novels "Neo-Hoo-Doo Manifesto" and " Mumbo Jumbo " by Ishmael Reed .

[ 38 ] Major works [ edit ] Black Art [ edit ] Amiri Baraka 's poem " Black Art " serves as one of his more controversial, poetically profound supplements to the Black Arts Movement. In this piece, Baraka merges politics with art, criticizing poems that are not useful to or adequately representative of the Black struggle. First published in 1966, a period particularly known for the Civil Rights Movement , the political aspect of this piece underscores the need for a concrete and artistic approach to the realistic nature involving racism and injustice. Serving as the recognized artistic component to and having roots in the Civil Rights Movement, the Black Arts Movement aims to grant a political voice to black artists (including poets, dramatists, writers, musicians, etc.). Playing a vital role in this movement, Baraka calls out what he considers to be unproductive and assimilatory actions shown by political leaders during the Civil Rights Movement. He describes prominent Black leaders as being "on the steps of the white house...kneeling between the sheriff's thighs negotiating coolly for his people." Baraka also presents issues of Eurocentric mentality, by referring to Elizabeth Taylor as a prototypical model in a society that influences perceptions of beauty, emphasizing its influence on individuals of white and black ancestry. Baraka aims his message toward the Black community, to coalesce African Americans into a unified movement, devoid of white influences. "Black Art" serves as a medium for expression meant to strengthen that solidarity and creativity, in terms of the Black Aesthetic. Baraka believes poems should "shoot...come at you, love what you are" and not succumb to mainstream desires.

[ 39 ] He ties this approach into the emergence of hip-hop, which he paints as a movement that presents "live words...and live flesh and coursing blood." [ 39 ] Baraka's cathartic structure and aggressive tone are comparable to the beginnings of hip-hop music, which created controversy in the realm of mainstream acceptance, because of its  "authentic, un-distilled, unmediated forms of contemporary black urban music." [ 40 ] Baraka believes that integration inherently takes away from the legitimacy of having a Black identity and Aesthetic in an anti-Black world. Through pure and unapologetic blackness, and with the absence of white influences, Baraka believes a black world can be achieved. Though hip-hop has been serving as a recognized salient musical form of the Black Aesthetic, a history of unproductive integration is seen across the spectrum of music, beginning with the emergence of a newly formed narrative in mainstream appeal in the 1950s. Much of Baraka's cynical disillusionment with unproductive integration can be drawn from the 1950s, a period of rock and roll , in which "record labels actively sought to have white artists "cover" songs that were popular on the rhythm-and-blues charts" [ 40 ] originally performed by African-American artists. The problematic nature of unproductive integration is also exemplified by Run-DMC , an American hip-hop group founded in 1981, which became widely accepted after a calculated collaboration with the rock group Aerosmith on a remake of the latter's " Walk This Way " took place in 1986, evidently appealing to young white audiences.

[ 40 ] Hip-hop emerged as an evolving genre of music that continuously challenged mainstream acceptance, most notably with the development of rap in the 1990s. A significant and modern example of this is Ice Cube , a well-known American rapper, songwriter, and actor, who introduced the subgenre of hip-hop known as " gangsta rap ", merged social consciousness and political expression with music. With the 1960s serving as a more blatantly racist period of time, Baraka notes the revolutionary nature of hip-hop, grounded in the unmodified expression through art. This method of expression in music parallels significantly with Baraka's ideals presented in "Black Art", focusing on poetry that is also productively and politically driven.

The Revolutionary Theatre [ edit ] "The Revolutionary Theatre" is a 1965 essay by Baraka that was an important contribution to the Black Arts Movement, discussing the need for change through literature and theater arts. He says: "We will scream and cry, murder, run through the streets in agony, if it means some soul will be moved, moved to actual life understanding of what the world is, and what it ought to be." Baraka wrote his poetry, drama, fiction and essays in a way that would shock and awaken audiences to the political concerns of black Americans, which says much about what he was doing with this essay.

[ 41 ] It also did not seem coincidental to him that Malcolm X and John F. Kennedy had been assassinated within a few years because Baraka believed that every voice of change in America had been murdered, which led to the writing that would come out of the Black Arts Movement.

In his essay, Baraka says: "The Revolutionary Theatre is shaped by the world, and moves to reshape the world, using as its force the natural force and perpetual vibrations of the mind in the world. We are history and desire, what we are, and what any experience can make us." With his thought-provoking ideals and references to a euro-centric society, he imposes the notion that black Americans should stray from a white aesthetic in order to find a black identity. In his essay, he says: "The popular white man's theatre like the popular white man's novel shows tired white lives, and the problems of eating white sugar, or else it herds bigcaboosed blondes onto huge stages in rhinestones and makes believe they are dancing or singing." This, having much to do with a white aesthetic, further proves what was popular in society and even what society had as an example of what everyone should aspire to be, like the "bigcaboosed blondes" that went "onto huge stages in rhinestones". Furthermore, these blondes made believe they were "dancing and singing" which Baraka seems to be implying that white people dancing is not what dancing is supposed to be at all. These allusions bring forth the question of where black Americans fit in the public eye. Baraka says: "We are preaching virtue and feeling, and a natural sense of the self in the world. All men live in the world, and the world ought to be a place for them to live." Baraka's essay challenges the idea that there is no space in politics or in society for black Americans to make a difference through different art forms that consist of, but are not limited to, poetry, song, dance, and art.

Effects on society [ edit ] Ntozake Shange (1978), author of for colored girls who have considered suicide / when the rainbow is enuf According to the Academy of American Poets , "many writers—Native Americans, Latinos/as, gays and lesbians, and younger generations of African Americans have acknowledged their debt to the Black Arts Movement." [ 19 ] The movement lasted for about a decade, through the mid-1960s and into the 1970s. This was a period of controversy and change in the world of literature. One major change came through in the portrayal of new ethnic voices in the United States. English-language literature, prior to the Black Arts Movement, was dominated by white authors.

[ 42 ] African Americans became a greater presence not only in the field of literature but in all areas of the arts. Theater groups, poetry performances, music and dance were central to the movement. Through different forms of media, African Americans were able to educate others about the expression of cultural differences and viewpoints. In particular, black poetry readings allowed African Americans to use vernacular dialogues. This was shown in the Harlem Writers Guild, which included black writers such as Maya Angelou and Rosa Guy. These performances were used to express political slogans and as a tool for organization. Theater performances also were used to convey community issues and organizations. The theaters, as well as cultural centers, were based throughout America and were used for community meetings, study groups and film screenings. Newspapers were a major tool in spreading the Black Arts Movement. In 1964, Black Dialogue was published, making it the first major Arts movement publication.

The Black Arts Movement, although short, is essential to the history of the United States. It spurred political activism and use of speech throughout every African-American community.  It allowed African Americans the chance to express their voices in the mass media as well as become involved in communities.

It can be argued that "the Black Arts movement produced some of the most exciting poetry, drama, dance, music, visual art, and fiction of the post-World War II United States" and that many important "post-Black artists" such as Toni Morrison , Ntozake Shange , Alice Walker , and August Wilson were shaped by the movement.

[ 17 ] The Black Arts Movement also provided incentives for public funding of the arts and increased public support of various arts initiatives.

[ 17 ] Legacy [ edit ] The movement has been seen as one of the most important times in African-American literature . It inspired black people to establish their own publishing houses, magazines, journals and art institutions. It led to the creation of African-American Studies programs within universities.

[ 43 ] Some claim that the movement was triggered by the assassination of Malcolm X , but its roots predate that event.

[ 18 ] Among the well-known writers who were involved with the movement are Nikki Giovanni , Sonia Sanchez , Maya Angelou , Hoyt W. Fuller , and Rosa Guy .

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Although not strictly part of the Movement, other notable African American writers such as Toni Morrison , Jay Wright , and Ishmael Reed share some of its artistic and thematic concerns. Although Reed is neither a movement apologist nor advocate, he said: I think what Black Arts did was inspire a whole lot of Black people to write. Moreover, there would be no multiculturalism movement without Black Arts. Latinos, Asian Americans, and others all say they began writing as a result of the example of the 1960s. Blacks gave the example that you don't have to assimilate . You could do your own thing, get into your own background, your own history, your own tradition and your own culture. I think the challenge is for cultural sovereignty and Black Arts struck a blow for that.

[ 46 ] BAM influenced the world of literature with the portrayal of different ethnic voices. Before the movement, the literary canon lacked diversity, and the ability to express ideas from the point of view of racial and ethnic minorities, which was not valued by the mainstream at the time. BAM also spurred experimentalism in Black letters.

[ 47 ] Influence [ edit ] Theater groups, poetry performances, music and dance were centered on this movement, and therefore African Americans gained social and historical recognition in the area of literature and arts. Due to the agency and credibility given, African Americans were also able to educate others through different types of expressions and media outlets about cultural differences. The most common form of teaching was through poetry reading. African-American performances were used for their own political advertisement, organization, and community issues. The Black Arts Movement was spread by the use of newspaper advertisements.

[ 1 ] The first major arts movement publication was in 1964.

"No one was more competent in [the] combination of the experimental and the vernacular than Amiri Baraka, whose volume Black Magic Poetry 1961–1967 (1969) is one of the finest products of the African-American creative energies of the 1960s." [ 19 ] Notable individuals [ edit ] Amiri Baraka (formerly LeRoi Jones) Larry Neal Nikki Giovanni Maya Angelou Gwendolyn Brooks Haki R. Madhubuti (formerly Don Lee) Sun Ra Audre Lorde James Baldwin Hoyt W. Fuller Ishmael Reed Rosa Guy Dudley Randall Ed Bullins David Henderson Henry Dumas Sonia Sanchez Faith Ringgold Ming Smith Betye Saar Cheryl Clarke John Henrik Clarke Jayne Cortez Don Evans Mari Evans Sarah Webster Fabio Wanda Coleman Barbara Ann Teer Askia M. Touré Marvin X Ossie Davis June Jordan Sarah E. Wright Amina Baraka (formerly Sylvia Robinson) Ellis Haizlip David Hammons Eugene "Eda" Wade Garrett Morris Notable organisations [ edit ] AfriCOBRA Black Academy of Arts and Letters Black Artists Group Black Arts Repertory Theatre School Black Dialogue Black Emergency Cultural Coalition Broadside Press Freedomways Harlem Writers Guild National Black Theatre Negro Digest Organization of Black American Culture Soul Book Soul!

The Black Scholar The Crusader The Liberator Uptown Writers Movement Where We At See also [ edit ] Portals : United States 1960s Literature Poetry Art African-American art African American culture Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Black pride Négritude Progressive soul References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h Foster, Hannah (2014-03-21).

"The Black Arts Movement (1965-1975)" .

Black Past . Retrieved 9 February 2019 .

^ a b c d e f Salaam, Kaluma.

"Historical Overviews of The Black Arts Movement" .

Department of English, University of Illinois . Archived from the original on 22 July 2018 . Retrieved 9 February 2019 .

^ Finkelman, Paul, ed. (2009).

Encyclopedia of African American History . Vol. 1. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 187.

ISBN 9780195167795 .

^ a b c d Bracey, John H.; Sonia Sanchez; James Edward Smethurst, eds. (2014).

SOS – Calling All Black People: A Black Arts Movement Reader . University of Massachusetts Press. p. 7.

ISBN 9781625340306 .

OCLC 960887586 .

^ Neal, Larry (Summer 1968). "The Black Arts Movement".

The Drama Review .

12 (4): 29– 39.

doi : 10.2307/1144377 .

JSTOR 1144377 .

^ Iton, Richard.

In Search of the Black Fantastic: Politics and Popular Culture in the Post Civil Rights Era .

^ Hassan, Salah M. (2011).

"Remembering the Black Arts Movement" .

Nka: Journal of Contemporary African Art .

29 (1): 4– 7.

doi : 10.1215/10757163-1496309 .

ISSN 2152-7792 .

S2CID 193193496 .

^ Woodard, Komozi (1999).

A Nation within a Nation . Chapel Hill and London: The University Of North Carolina Press.

doi : 10.5149/uncp/9780807847619 (inactive 11 July 2025).

ISBN 9780807847619 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Jeyifous, Abiodun (Winter 1974). "Black Critics on Black Theatre in America: An Introduction".

The Drama Review .

18 (3): 34– 45.

doi : 10.2307/1144922 .

JSTOR 1144922 .

^ Muhammad, Khalil Gibran (2010).

The condemnation of blackness : race, crime, and the making of modern urban America (1st Harvard University Press paperback ed.). Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. pp.

1– 14.

ISBN 9780674054325 .

OCLC 809539202 .

^ Kuenz, Jane (2007). "Modernism, Mass Culture, and the Harlem Renaissance: The Case of Countee Cullen".

Modernism/Modernity .

14 (3): 507– 515.

doi : 10.1353/mod.2007.0064 .

S2CID 146484827 .

^ a b Nash, William R. (2017). "Black Arts Movement".

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Literature .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190201098.013.630 .

ISBN 978-0-19-020109-8 .

^ Rae, Brianna (19 February 2016).

"From the Harlem Renaissance to the Black Arts Movement, Writers Who Changed the World" .

The Madison Times .

^ "The Harlem Renaissance".

Encyclopaedia Britannica . 1999.

OCLC 40923010 .

^ Fortune, Angela Joy (2012). "Keeping the communal tradition of the Umbra Poets: creating space for writing".

Black History Bulletin .

75 (1): 20– 25.

JSTOR 24759716 .

Gale A291497077 .

^ Gipson, Ferren (2022).

Women's Work: From Feminine Arts to Feminist Art . London: Frances Lincoln.

ISBN 978-0-7112-6465-6 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Smethurst, James E.

The Black Arts Movement: Nationalism in the 1960s and 1970s (The John Hope Franklin Series in African American History and Culture), NC: The University of North Carolina Press, 2005.

[ page needed ] ^ a b Salaam, Kalamu ya (2000).

"Historical Background of the Black Arts Movement (BAM) — Part II" .

The Black Collegian . Archived from the original on April 20, 2000.

^ a b c "A Brief Guide to the Black Arts Movement" . poets.org. February 19, 2014 . Retrieved March 6, 2016 .

^ Douglas, Robert L.

Resistance, Insurgence, and Identity: The Art of Mari Evans, Nelson Stevens, and the Black Arts Movement . NJ: Africa World Press, 2008.

[ page needed ] ^ Bracey, John H. (2014).

SOS – Calling All Black People: A Black Arts Movement Reader . Massachusetts: University of Massachusetts Press. p. 18.

ISBN 978-1-62534-031-3 .

^ "A Gathering of the Tribes" (includes biography of Steve Cannon).

Archived 2016-04-15 at the Wayback Machine (Place Matters, January 2012).

^ Morgan, Jo-Ann (December 17, 2018).

The Black Arts Movement and the Black Panther Party in American Visual Culture . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780429467851 .

^ Tribune, Chicago (July 29, 2017).

"Chicago's 'Wall of Respect' inspired neighborhood murals across U.S." Tribune Publishing.

^ Tolle, Yeshua G. B. (2023). "Friendship in the Time of COINTELPRO: Clarence Major and Dingane Joe Goncalves".

MELUS .

https://doi.org/10.1093/melus/mlac059 ^ "Historical Overview of the Black Arts Movement" . Department of English, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Archived from the original on 2008-12-02 . Retrieved 2008-12-01 .

^ a b c d Smith, David Lionel (1991). "The Black Arts Movement and Its Critics".

American Literary History .

3 (1): 93– 110.

doi : 10.1093/alh/3.1.93 .

^ a b Pollard, Cherise A. (2006). "Sexual Subversions, Political Inversions: Women's Poetry and the Politics of the Black Arts Movement". In Collins, Lisa Gail; Crawford, Margo Natalie (eds.).

New Thoughts on the Black Arts Movement . Rutgers University Press. pp.

173– 186.

ISBN 9780813536941 .

JSTOR j.ctt5hj474.12 .

^ Neal, Larry (1968). "The Black Arts Movement".

The Drama Review .

12 (4): 28– 39.

doi : 10.2307/1144377 .

JSTOR 1144377 .

^ Neal, Larry. "The Black Arts Movement", Floyd W. Hayes III (ed.), A Turbulent Voyage: Readings in African American Studies , San Diego, California: Collegiate Press, 2000 (3rd edition), pp. 236–246.

^ "Black Arts Movement" .

Encyclopædia Britannica article ^ a b Smalls, James (2001). "Black aesthetic in America".

Grove Music Online (8th ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.T2088343 .

ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0 .

^ Duncan, John; Gayle, Addison (1972). "Review of The Black Aesthetic, Addison Gayle, Jr".

Journal of Research in Music Education .

20 (1): 195– 197.

doi : 10.2307/3344341 .

JSTOR 3344341 .

S2CID 220628543 .

^ Karenga, Ron (Maulana) (2014). "Black Cultural Nationalism". In Bracey, John H.; Sanchez, Sonia; Smethurst, James (eds.).

SOS – Calling All Black People: A Black Arts Movement Reader . University of Massachusetts Press. pp.

51– 54.

ISBN 9781625340306 .

JSTOR j.ctt5vk2mr.10 .

^ Kuryla, Peter (2005), "Black Arts Movement", Encyclopedia of African American Society , SAGE Publications, Inc., doi : 10.4135/9781412952507.n79 , ISBN 9780761927648 ^ a b MacKey, Nathaniel (1978). "Ishmael Reed and the Black Aesthetic".

CLA Journal .

21 (3): 355– 366.

JSTOR 44329383 .

^ a b Ellis, Trey (1989). "The New Black Aesthetic".

Callaloo (38): 233– 243.

doi : 10.2307/2931157 .

JSTOR 2931157 .

^ Mitchell, Verner D., and Cynthia Davis, Encyclopedia of the Black Arts Movement , 2019.

^ a b Young, Kevin, ed. (2020).

Black Poem, African American Poetry: 250 Years of Struggle & Song .

Library of America . pp.

396– 398.

ISBN 9781598536669 .

^ a b c "Pop Music and the Spatialization of Race in the 1990s | The Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History" .

www.gilderlehrman.org . July 12, 2012 . Retrieved October 31, 2016 .

^ "Amiri Baraka" .

Poetry Foundation . October 31, 2016 . Retrieved October 31, 2016 .

^ Nielson, Erik (2014). "White Surveillance of the Black Arts".

African American Review .

47 (1): 161– 177.

doi : 10.1353/afa.2014.0005 .

JSTOR 24589802 .

S2CID 141987673 .

Project MUSE 561902 .

^ Rojas, Fabio (2006). "Social Movement Tactics, Organizational Change and the Spread of African-American Studies".

Social Forces .

84 (4): 2147– 2166.

doi : 10.1353/sof.2006.0107 .

JSTOR 3844493 .

S2CID 145777569 .

Project MUSE 200998 .

^ Higashida, Cheryl (2011).

Black Internationalist Feminism: Women Writers of the Black Left, 1945-1995 . University of Illinois Press. pp.

52– 53.

^ Nelson, Emmanuel S., The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Multiethnic American Literature: A — C , Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2005, p. 387.

^ "The Black Arts Movement (BAM)" .

African American Literature Book Club . Retrieved March 6, 2016 .

^ Crawford, Margo (2017).

Black Post-Blackness: The Black Arts Movement and Twenty-First-Century Aesthetics . University of Illinois Press.

Works cited [ edit ] Avilez, GerShun.

Radical Aesthetics and Modern Black Nationalism . Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2016.

Baraka, Amiri.

The LeRoi Jones/Amiri Baraka Reader . Edited by William J. Harris. New York: Basic Books, 2009.

Bracey, John H., Sonia Sanchez, and James Smethurst, eds.

SOS – Calling All Black People: A Black Arts Movement Reader . University of Massachusetts Press, 2014.

Clarke, Cheryl.

"After Mecca": Women Poets and the Black Arts Movement . New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 2005.

Crawford, Margo Natalie.

Black Post-Blackness: The Black Arts Movement and Twenty-First-Century Aesthetics . Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 2017.

Fenderson, Jonathan.

Building the Black Arts Movement: Hoyt Fuller and the Cultural Politics of the 1960s . Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 2019.

Lubiano, Wahneema. "Black Nationalism and Black Common Sense: Policing Ourselves and Others." In The House That Race Built: Black Americans, U.S. Terrain , edited by Wahneema Lubiano, 232–52. New York: Pantheon Books, 1997.

Salaam, Kalamu ya. "Black Arts Movement". In The Oxford Companion to African American Literature , edited by William L. Andrews, Frances Smith Foster, and Trudier Harris, 70–74. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.

Smethurst, James Edward.

The Black Arts Movement: Literary Nationalism in the 1960s and 1970s . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2005.

External links [ edit ] Black Arts Repertory Theatre/School Black Arts Movement Page at University of Michigan Amazing Street arts, Black street Arts West: Culture and Struggle in Postwar Los Angeles v t e Schools of poetry Acmeism Akhmatova's Orphans Angry Penguins Auden Group The Beats Black Arts Movement Black Mountain poets British Poetry Revival Cairo poets Castalian Band Cavalier poets Chhayavaad Churchyard poets Conceptismo Confessionalists Créolité Cubo-Futurism Culteranismo Cyclic Poets Dada Deep image Della Cruscans Dolce Stil Novo Dymock poets Ecopoetry Ego-Futurism The poets of Elan Flarf Fugitives Garip Gay Saber Generation of '27 Generation of the '30s Generation of '98 Georgian poets Goliard The Group Harlem Renaissance Harvard Aesthetes Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Informationist poetry İkinci Yeni Jindyworobaks Lake Poets Language poets Marinism Martian poetry Metaphysical poets Misty Poets Modernist poetry The Movement Négritude Neotericism New American Poetry New Apocalyptics New Formalism New York School Oberiu Objectivists Others Parnassian poets La Pléiade Précieuses Rhymers' Club San Francisco Renaissance Scottish Renaissance Sicilian School Sons of Ben Southern Agrarians Spasmodic poets Sung poetry Surrealism Symbolism Uranian poetry Zutiste Poetry portal v t e African Americans History Timeline Abolitionism African American founding fathers Afrocentrism American Civil War Atlantic slave trade Black Codes Black cowboys Black genocide Black Lives Matter Brown v. Board of Education (1954) Children of the plantation Civil Rights Acts 1964 Voting Rights Act of 1965 1968 Civil rights movement 1865–1896 Civil right movement 1896–1954 Civil rights movement 1954–1968 Montgomery bus boycott Browder v. Gayle (1956) Sit-in movement Freedom Riders Birmingham movement March on Washington Freedom Summer Selma to Montgomery marches Chicago Freedom Movement Post–civil rights era Cornerstone Speech COVID-19 impact Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857) Free Negro Free people of color George Floyd protests Great Migration Second New Exodusters Inauguration of Barack Obama 2009 / Inauguration of Barack Obama 2013 Jim Crow laws Lynching Military history Million Man March Nadir of American race relations The Negro Motorist Green Book Partus sequitur ventrem Plantations Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) Reconstruction Amendments Reconstruction era Redlining Separate but equal Silent Parade Slavery Treatment of slaves Tulsa race massacre Underground Railroad Women's suffrage movement Culture Afrofuturism Art Black mecca Businesses Dance Family structure Film Folktales Hair Harlem Renaissance New Negro Hoodoo Juneteenth Kwanzaa LGBTQ community Literature Music Musical theater Names Negro National Anthem Neighborhoods Newspapers Soul food Stereotypes Middle class Upper class Notable people Ralph Abernathy Maya Angelou Crispus Attucks James Baldwin James Bevel Julian Bond Amelia Boynton James Bradley Carol Moseley Braun Edward Brooke Blanche Bruce Ralph Bunche George Washington Carver Shirley Chisholm Claudette Colvin Frederick Douglass W. E. B. Du Bois Medgar Evers James Farmer Henry Highland Garnet Marcus Garvey Fred Gray Prathia Hall Fannie Lou Hamer Kamala Harris Jimi Hendrix Jesse Jackson Ketanji Brown Jackson Michael Jackson Harriet Jacobs Barbara Jordan Coretta Scott King Martin Luther King Jr.

Bernard Lafayette James Lawson Huddie Ledbetter John Lewis Joseph Lowery Malcolm X Thurgood Marshall Toni Morrison Bob Moses Diane Nash Barack Obama Michelle Obama Rosa Parks Adam Clayton Powell Jr.

Colin Powell Gabriel Prosser Joseph Rainey A. Philip Randolph Hiram Revels Paul Robeson Al Sharpton Fred Shuttlesworth Clarence Thomas Emmett Till Sojourner Truth Harriet Tubman Nat Turner Denmark Vesey C. T. Vivian David Walker Booker T. Washington Ida B. Wells Roy Wilkins Oprah Winfrey Andrew Young Whitney Young Education, science and technology Black studies Black schools Historically black colleges and universities Inventors and scientists Museums Women in computer science in medicine in STEM fields Religion African-American Jews Islam American Society of Muslims Nation of Islam Black church Azusa Street Revival Black Hebrew Israelites Black theology Doctrine of Father Divine Political movements Anarchism Back-to-Africa movement Black power Movement Capitalism Conservatism Leftism Pan-Africanism Populism Raised fist Self-determination Nationalism Socialism Civic and economic groups Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH) Black Panther Party Committee to Eliminate Media Offensive to African People (CEMOTAP) Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) Nashville Student Movement National Black Chamber of Commerce (NBCC) National Council of Negro Women (NCNW) National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) National Urban League (NUL) Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) Thurgood Marshall College Fund United Negro College Fund (UNCF) Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA-ACL) Sports Negro league baseball Baseball color line Black players in professional American football Black NFL quarterbacks Black players in ice hockey Muhammad Ali Arthur Ashe Jack Johnson Joe Louis Jesse Owens Jackie Robinson Serena Williams Athletic associations and conferences Central (CIAA) Mid-Eastern (MEAC) Southern (SIAC) Southwestern (SWAC) Ethnic subdivisions By African descent Fula Gullah Igbo Yoruba Alabama Creole Black Indians Black Seminoles Cherokee Freedmen Choctaw Freedmen Creek Freedmen Black Southerners Blaxicans Great Dismal Swamp maroons Louisiana Creole of color Melungeon Demographics Neighborhoods list U.S. cities with large populations 2000 majorities 2010 majorities Metropolitan areas States and territories Languages Afro-Seminole Creole American Sign Black American Sign English American English African-American English African-American Vernacular English social context Gullah Louisiana Creole By state/city Alabama Arkansas California Los Angeles San Francisco Florida Jacksonville Tallahassee Georgia Atlanta Hawaii Illinois Chicago Indiana Iowa Davenport Kansas Kentucky Lexington Louisiana Maryland Baltimore Massachusetts Boston Michigan Detroit Mississippi Nebraska Omaha New Jersey New York New York City North Carolina Ohio Cleveland Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Philadelphia Puerto Rico South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Austin Dallas–Fort Worth Houston San Antonio Utah Virginia West Virginia Diaspora Africa Gambia Ghana Liberia Sierra Leone America Canada Dominican Republic Haiti Mexico Trinidad and Tobago Israel Europe France Lists African Americans Activists Actors Astronauts Billionaires Journalists Jurists Mathematicians Republicans Singers Sportspeople Spingarn Medal winners US cabinet members US representatives US senators Visual artists Writers African-American firsts Mayors Sports firsts US state firsts Historic places Index of related articles Landmark African-American legislation Lynching victims Monuments Neighborhoods Topics related to the African diaspora Category United States portal v t e Counterculture of the 1960s ( timeline ) Arts Black Arts Movement Psychedelic art Psychedelic music Youthquake Cultural events San Francisco Renaissance Beatlemania British Invasion Mods and rockers Swinging Sixties Hippie movement Human Be-In Summer of Love Bed-Ins for Peace Woodstock Social and political movements American Indian Movement Anti-nuclear movement Back-to-the-land movement Black Power movement Civil rights movement Dialoguero Free school movement Free Speech Movement Gay liberation Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War protests Second-wave feminism Women's liberation movement Sexual revolution United States Media Underground press newspapers Subcultures Discordianism Freak scene Hippie Mod Rocker Rude boy UK underground Yippies v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4jddk
Cached time: 20250817051055
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.052 seconds
Real time usage: 1.265 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5747/1000000
Revision size: 54449/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 401606/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21486/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 441318/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.564/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8214470/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  889.994      1 -total
 50.22%  446.942      1 Template:Reflist
 16.80%  149.518      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.70%  130.848      8 Template:Cite_web
 10.65%   94.825     15 Template:Cite_book
  9.42%   83.856      1 Template:Black_Power_sidebar
  8.97%   79.836     12 Template:Cite_journal
  8.42%   74.966      1 Template:Short_description
  7.97%   70.900      1 Template:African_American_topics_sidebar
  7.32%   65.163      6 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:858784:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051055 and revision id 1300022113. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Black_Arts_Movement&oldid=1300022113 " Categories : Black Arts Movement 1964 introductions 20th-century American literature 20th-century art movements African and Black nationalism African-American poets American art movements American literary movements American poets Black Power Cultural organizations based in the United States Post–civil rights era in African-American history Art exhibitions in the United States African-American literature Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2021 Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove template Wikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove template with an id parameter Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 21:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Black Arts Movement 6 languages Add topic

