Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 Works 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Justus van Gent 23 languages Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Italiano Latina Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Татарча / tatarça Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Early Netherlandish painter (c. 1410–1480) Calvary Triptych , 1464 Justus van Gent or Joos van Wassenhove [ 1 ] ( c.

1410 – c.

1480 ) was an Early Netherlandish painter , perhaps from Ghent ,  who after training and working in Flanders later moved to Italy where he worked for Federico da Montefeltro , duke of Urbino , and was known as Giusto da Guanto , or in modern Italian Giusto di Gand etc.  The artist is known for his religious compositions executed in the early Netherlandish idiom and a series of portraits of famous men, which show the influence of early Italian Renaissance painting .

[ 2 ] Life [ edit ] Communion of the Apostles Very little is known about the early life of Joos van Wassenhove.  It is believed that the artist referred to by Vasari and Guicciardini as 'Giusto da Guanto' (i.e. 'Justus of Ghent') is the painter Joos van Wassenhove, who became a member of the Antwerp Guild of St. Luke in 1460 and a freemaster in the Ghent painters' guild in 1464.  While in Ghent, he vouched for Hugo van der Goes , Sanders Bening and Agnes van den Bossche when they entered the local painters' guild.  Van Wassenhove seems to have enjoyed an international reputation as in 1467–68 he received payment for the production of 40 coats of arms of the Pope. Van Wassenhove travelled to Rome around 1470.

[ 3 ] Between 1473 and 1475 he is documented in Urbino , where he operated a workshop.

[ 2 ] He was one of the court painters of duke Federico da Montefeltro , a leading politician and art patron of the Italian Renaissance.   Da Montefeltro gave him the commission for the Communion of the Apostles painted for the brotherhood of the Corpus Domini in Urbino between 1472 and 1474.   A portrait of da Montefeltro (with his broken nose in profile) in the company of Caterino Zeno , a Persian envoy to the court of Urbino, is included in the picture.  Van Wassenhove participated in the decoration of the ducal residences in Urbino and Gubbio .  This included a commission for a portrait series of 'uomini famosi' (famous men) for the study of da Montefeltro ( Louvre Museum , Paris and Galleria Nazionale, Urbino).  He died around 1480.

[ 3 ] Work [ edit ] Portrait of Federico da Montefeltro with His Son Guidobaldo , from the Famous men series Two works from the time before he left for Italy have been preserved: the monumental Crucifixion Altarpiece or Calvary Triptych (in the Saint Bavo Cathedral , Ghent) and the Adoration of the Magi ( Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York).  The latter painting was possibly commissioned for a convent near Burgos in Spain.  For this reason the picture was painted on canvas so it could be rolled up for easy transport.  The stage-like space and arrangement of the main figures in two parallel diagonal lines seem to suggest an inspiration by theatre reenactments of the story of the Epiphany .

[ 4 ] Both these early paintings are characterized by monumentality.  The facial features of the figures and colour spectrum are closely related to the oeuvre of Hugo van der Goes.  The two masters likely worked together before van Wassenhove left for Rome.  There is also a relationship with the work of Dieric Bouts .

[ 3 ] The Communion of the Apostles (a.k.a.

The Institution of the Eucharist , [ 5 ] sometimes called The Last Supper ) for the Confraternity of Corpus Domini in Urbino shows some adaptations from the characteristically Netherlandish high viewpoint and decoratively organized surface of the Calvary Triptych.  Van Wassenhove also increased the size of the figures relative to the picture space.  The work cites Dieric Bouts' The Martyrdom of St Erasmus in the figure of the Persian envoy.  An enlarged version of the Communion of the Apostles shows that Jesus Christ is depicted with light rays originating from his head which is also surrounded by a circular aureola both of which constitute a halo . All other works attributed to Joos van Wassenhove were painted on commission by Federico da Montefeltro.

Ptolemy with an armillary sphere model , from the Famous men series A series of 28 portraits of Famous men , which are still in existence and part of the collections of the Louvre and the Galleria Nazionale delle Marche in Urbino, have been attributed to Joos van Wassenhove.  There are many arguments for such attribution.  The paintings appear to be made by a painter grounded in Netherlandish technique who had become strongly influenced by Italian painting.  In addition, in his biography of Federico da Montefeltro, his former librarian, Vespasiano da Bisticci, attests that van Wassenhove made the series of 28 portraits of Famous men .  Technological examination of the Famous men has revealed similarities of these works with the other important earlier commission that van Wassenhove completed for the duke in Urbino, i.e. the Communion of the Apostles .  The underdrawing showed that there was stylistic continuity between these works.  The examination also disclosed a number of changes in composition and execution, which may point to a reworking by another artist.

[ 2 ] [ 6 ] The attribution to van Wassenhove of some or all of the works in the Famous men series has not received unanimous support.  Various other artists have been proposed as the author of the Famous men series, of whom the Spanish painter Pedro Berruguete has received strong support.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The case for Berruguete rests on various arguments including the mention of a 'Pietro Spagnuolo pittore' in Urbino in 1477, a reference to the Famous men by Pablo de Cespedes dating from 1604, which could be regarded as an attribution to Berruguete (although Cespedes specifically stated that they were by a Spanish painter 'other' than Berruguete), the depiction of a Spanish-language book in a painting in the series and stylistic similarities with later works of Berruguete.  Although the matter of attribution is still unresolved the known pictures of this Spanish artist are inferior in style and technique to those in the Famous men series and are unlikely the work of the same artist.

[ 2 ] Another hypothesis is that the work was a collaborative effort by the studio of van Wassenhove in Urbino, in which Berruguete may have worked as a collaborator.

[ 2 ] [ 9 ] Further attributed to Joos van Wassenhove are two paintings from a series on the liberal arts: Music and Rhetoric (both at the National Gallery London ).  Two other paintings from this series were destroyed during World War II .

[ 2 ] Adoration of the Magi Works [ edit ] Adoration of the Magi Calvary Triptych Communion of the Apostles Famous Men Liberal Arts References [ edit ] ^ in older sources Justus or Jodocus of Ghent ^ a b c d e f Paula Nuttall. "Justus of Ghent." Grove Art Online. Oxford Art Online. Oxford University Press. Web. 25 July 2014 ^ a b c Joos van Wassenhove at Flemish primitives ^ The Adoration of the Magi, Justus of Ghent (Joos van Wassenhove) at the Metropolitan Museum of Art website ^ "The Communion of the Apostles, article by Greg Peters on September 19, 2008" . Archived from the original on 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 19 May 2017 .

^ Gowing, Sir Lawrence, gen. ed. "Justus of Ghent." Biographical Encyclopedia of Artists, vol. 2. New York: Facts on File, Inc., 2005. Ancient and Medieval History Online. Facts on File, Inc. (accessed 25 July 2014) ^ Lauts, Jan; Herzner, Irmlind Luise: Federico da Montefeltro. Herzog von Urbino : Kriegsherr, Friedensfürst und Förderer der Künste. München 2001.

ISBN 3-422-06354-4 ^ Marcello Simonetta, Jonathan James Graham Alexander , Federico da Montefeltro and his library , Pierpont Morgan Library, Y.Press, 2007, p. 102 ^ Stefano Zuffi, European Art of the Fifteenth Century , Getty Publications, 2005, p. 296 External links [ edit ] Media related to Justus van Gent at Wikimedia Commons v t e Early Netherlandish art (c. 1420s–1530s) Early Netherlandish artists Active mainly in the Southern Netherlands (mostly present-day Belgium ) Luís Alimbrot Alexander Bening Simon Bening Ambrosius Benson Lancelot Blondeel Aelbert Bouts Dieric Bouts Melchior Broederlam Robert Campin Petrus Christus Pierre Coustain Jacques Daret Gerard David Jean Delemer Jan de Beer Colijn de Coter Jan Gossaert Gerard Horenbout Lucas Horenbout Adriaen Isenbrandt Cornelis Liefrinck Lambert Lombard Simon Marmion Quentin Matsys Hans Memling Jan de Molder Joachim Patinir Jan Provoost Aert van den Bossche Hugo van der Goes Vrancke van der Stockt Goswin van der Weyden Rogier van der Weyden Jan van Dornicke Hubert van Eyck Jan van Eyck Justus van Gent Lieven van Lathem Bernard van Orley Jacob van Utrecht Master of Affligem Master of the Antwerp Adoration Master of the Embroidered Foliage Master of the Legend of St. Barbara Master of the Legend of Saint Lucy Master of the Legend of St. Ursula (Bruges) Master of the Legend of the Magdalen Master of the Lille Adoration Master of the Lübeck Bible Master of the Mansi Magdalen Master of the Morrison Triptych Master of the Prodigal Son Master of the View of Ste-Gudule Active mainly in the Northern Netherlands (mostly present-day Netherlands ) Hieronymus Bosch Geertgen tot Sint Jans Jan Joest van Calcar Lucas van Leyden Jacob Cornelisz van Oostsanen Master of Alkmaar Master of the Amsterdam Death of the Virgin Master of the Figdor Deposition Main centres Antwerp Bruges Brussels Ghent Tournai The Hague General Early Netherlandish painting Works by Early Netherlandish masters Flemish Primitives Arts in the court of Philip the Good Guild of Saint Luke Netherlandish art International Gothic Northern Renaissance Netherlandish Renaissance Northern Mannerism Antwerp Mannerism Antwerp school Ghent–Bruges school Adoration of the Magi Nativity of Jesus in art ‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Artists ULAN RKD Artists People Netherlands Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Justus_van_Gent&oldid=1305895485 " Categories : 1410s births 1480 deaths People from the Burgundian State Early Netherlandish painters Flemish Renaissance painters Flemish history painters Flemish portrait painters Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 18:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Justus van Gent 23 languages Add topic

