Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Symbols 2 Christian art before 313 3 Christian architecture after 313 4 Christian art after 313 Toggle Christian art after 313 subsection 4.1 Gold glass 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Early Christian art and architecture 38 languages العربية Asturianu Български Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jesus healing the bleeding woman , Roman catacombs, 300–350 Early Christian art and architecture (or Paleochristian art ) is the art produced by Christians , or under Christian patronage, from the earliest period of Christianity to, depending on the definition, sometime between 260 and 525. In practice, identifiably Christian art only survives from the 2nd century onwards.

[ 1 ] After 550, Christian art is classified as Byzantine , or according to region.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is hard to know when distinctly Christian art began. Prior to 100, Christians may have been constrained by their position as a persecuted group from producing durable works of art. Since Christianity as a religion was not well represented in the public sphere, [ citation needed ] the lack of surviving art may reflect a lack of funds for patronage , and simply small numbers of followers. The Old Testament restrictions against the production of graven (an idol or fetish carved in wood or stone) images (see also Idolatry and Christianity ) may also have constrained Christians from producing art . Christians may have made or purchased art with pagan iconography , but given it Christian meanings, as they later did.  If this happened, "Christian" art would not be immediately recognizable as such.

Early Christianity used the same artistic media as the surrounding pagan culture. These media included fresco , mosaics , sculpture , and manuscript illumination . Early Christian art used not only Roman forms but also Roman styles. Late classical style included a proportional portrayal of the human body and impressionistic presentation of space. Late classical style is seen in early Christian frescos, such as those in the Catacombs of Rome , which include most examples of the earliest Christian art.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The Brescia Casket , 4th-century ivory Early Christian art and architecture adapted Roman artistic motifs and gave new meanings to what had been pagan symbols. Among the motifs adopted were the peacock , Vitis viniferavines , and the " Good Shepherd ". Early Christians also developed their own iconography ; for example, such symbols as the fish ( ikhthus ) were not borrowed from pagan iconography.

Early Christian art is generally divided into two periods by scholars: before and after either the Edict of Milan of 313, bringing the so-called Triumph of the Church under Constantine , or the First Council of Nicea in 325. The earlier period being called the Pre-Constantinian or Ante-Nicene Period and after being the period of the First seven Ecumenical Councils .

[ 6 ] The end of the period of early Christian art, which is typically defined by art historians as being in the 5th–7th centuries, is thus a good deal later than the end of the period of early Christianity as typically defined by theologians and church historians, which is more often considered to end under Constantine, around 313–325.

Symbols [ edit ] Good Shepherd from the Catacomb of Priscilla , 250–300 See also: Early Christian symbols During the persecution of Christians under the Roman Empire , Christian art was necessarily and deliberately furtive and ambiguous, using imagery that was shared with pagan culture but had a special meaning for Christians. The earliest surviving Christian art comes from the late 2nd to early 4th centuries on the walls of Christian tombs in the catacombs of Rome .  From literary evidence, there may well have been panel icons which, like almost all classical painting, have disappeared.  Initially Jesus was represented indirectly by pictogram symbols such as the Ichthys (fish), peacock , Lamb of God , or an anchor (the Labarum or Chi-Rho was a later development).  Later personified symbols were used, including Jonah , whose three days in the belly of the whale pre-figured the interval between the death and resurrection of Jesus , Daniel in the lion's den, or Orpheus ' charming the animals. The image of " The Good Shepherd ", a beardless youth in pastoral scenes collecting sheep , was the most common of these images, and was probably not understood as a portrait of the historical Jesus.

[ 7 ] These images bear some resemblance to depictions of kouros figures in Greco-Roman art.  The "almost total absence from Christian monuments of the period of persecutions of the plain, unadorned cross " except in the disguised form of the anchor, [ 8 ] is notable.  The Cross, symbolizing Jesus' crucifixion on a cross, was not represented explicitly for several centuries, possibly because crucifixion was a punishment meted out to common criminals, but also because literary sources noted that it was a symbol recognised as specifically Christian, as the sign of the cross was made by Christians from very early on.

The popular conception that the Christian catacombs were "secret" or had to hide their affiliation is probably wrong; catacombs were large-scale commercial enterprises, usually sited just off major roads to the city, whose existence was well known. The inexplicit symbolic nature of many early Christian visual motifs may have had a function of discretion in other contexts, but on tombs, they probably reflect a lack of any other repertoire of Christian iconography.

[ 9 ] The dove is a symbol of peace and purity. It can be found with a halo or celestial light. In one of the earliest known Trinitarian images, "the Throne of God as a Trinitarian image" (a marble relief carved c.

400 CE in the collection of the Prussian Cultural Heritage Foundation), the dove represents the Spirit. It is flying above an empty throne representing God, in the throne are a chlamys (cloak) and diadem representing the Son.  The Chi-Rho monogram, XP, apparently first used by Constantine I , consists of the first two characters of the name 'Christos' in Greek.

Christian art before 313 [ edit ] Noah praying in the Ark, from a Roman catacomb A general assumption that early Christianity was generally aniconic , opposed to religious imagery in both theory and practice until about 200, has been challenged by Paul Corby Finney's analysis of early Christian writing and material remains (1994). This distinguishes three different sources of attitudes affecting early Christians on the issue: "first that humans could have a direct vision of God; second that they could not; and, third, that although humans could see God they were best advised not to look, and were strictly forbidden to represent what they had seen". These derived respectively from Greek and Near Eastern pagan religions, from Ancient Greek philosophy, and from the Jewish tradition and the Old Testament. Of the three, Finney concludes that "overall, Israel's aversion to sacred images influenced early Christianity considerably less than the Greek philosophical tradition of invisible deity apophatically defined", so placing less emphasis on the Jewish background of most of the first Christians than most traditional accounts.

[ 10 ] Finney suggests that "the reasons for the non-appearance of Christian art before 200 have nothing to do with principled aversion to art, with other-worldliness, or with anti-materialism. The truth is simple and mundane: Christians lacked land and capital. Art requires both. As soon as they began to acquire land and capital, Christians began to experiment with their own distinctive forms of art".

[ 11 ] In the Dura-Europos church , of about 230–256, which is in the best condition of the surviving very early churches, there are frescos of biblical scenes including a figure of Jesus, as well as Christ as the Good Shepherd .  The building was a normal house apparently converted to use as a church.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The earliest Christian paintings in the Catacombs of Rome are from a few decades before, and these represent the largest body of examples of Christian art from the pre-Constantinian period, with hundreds of examples decorating tombs or family tomb-chambers. Many are simple symbols, but there are numerous figure paintings either showing orants or female praying figures, usually representing the deceased person, or figures or shorthand scenes from the bible and Christian history.

The style of the catacomb paintings, and the entirety of many decorative elements, are effectively identical to those of the catacombs of other religious groups, whether conventional pagans following Ancient Roman religion , or Jews or followers of the Roman mystery religions .  The quality of the painting is low compared to the large houses of the rich, which provide the other main corpus of painting surviving from the period, but the shorthand depiction of figures can have an expressive charm.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] A similar situation applies at Dura-Europos , where the decoration of the church is comparable in style and quality to that of the (larger and more lavishly painted) Dura-Europos synagogue and the Temple of Bel. At least in such smaller places, it seems that the available artists were used by all religious groups. It may also have been the case that the painted chambers in the catacombs were decorated in similar style to the best rooms of the homes of the better-off families buried in them,  with Christian scenes and symbols replacing those from mythology, literature, paganism and eroticism, although we lack the evidence to confirm this.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] We do have the same scenes on small pieces in media such as pottery or glass, [ 20 ] though less often from this pre-Constantinian period.

There was a preference for what are sometimes called "abbreviated" representations, small groups of say one to four figures forming a single motif which could be easily recognised as representing a particular incident. These vignettes fitted the Roman style of room decoration, set in compartments in a scheme with a geometrical structure (see gallery below).

[ 21 ] Biblical scenes of figures rescued from mortal danger were very popular; these represented both the Resurrection of Jesus , through typology , and the salvation of the soul of the deceased.

Jonah and the whale , [ 22 ] [ 23 ] the Sacrifice of Isaac , Noah praying in the Ark (represented as an orant in a large box, perhaps with a dove carrying a branch), Moses striking the rock, Daniel in the lion's den and the Three Youths in the Fiery Furnace ( [ 24 ] ) were all favourites, that could be easily depicted.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 21 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Early Christian sarcophagi were a much more expensive option, made of marble and often heavily decorated with scenes in very high relief , worked with drills. Free-standing statues that are unmistakably Christian are very rare, and never very large, as more common subjects such as the Good Shepherd were symbols appealing to several religious and philosophical groups, including Christians, and without context no affiliation can be given to them.  Typically sculptures, where they appear, are of rather high quality. One exceptional group that seems clearly Christian is known as the Cleveland Statuettes of Jonah and the Whale, [ 29 ] [ 21 ] and consists of a group of small statuettes of about 270, including two busts of a young and fashionably dressed couple, from an unknown find-spot, possibly in modern Turkey.  The other figures tell the story of Jonah in four pieces, with a Good Shepherd; how they were displayed remains mysterious.

[ 30 ] The depiction of Jesus was well-developed by the end of the pre-Constantinian period. He was typically shown in narrative scenes, with a preference for New Testament miracles, and few of scenes from his Passion.  A variety of different types of appearance were used, including the thin long-faced figure with long centrally-parted hair that was later to become the norm. But in the earliest images as many show a stocky and short-haired beardless figure in a short tunic, who can only be identified by his context. In many images of miracles Jesus carries a stick or wand, which he points at the subject of the miracle rather like a modern stage magician (though the wand is a good deal larger).

Saints are fairly often seen, with Peter and Paul , both martyred in Rome, by some way the most common in the catacombs there. Both already have their distinctive appearances, retained throughout the history of Christian art. Other saints may not be identifiable unless labelled with an inscription.  In the same way some images may represent either the Last Supper or a contemporary agape feast .

The Three Youths in the Fiery Furnace , [ 31 ] catacomb of Priscilla [ 32 ] Moses striking the rock in the desert, a prototype of baptism [ 33 ] 3rd-century cover for catacomb burial, engraved with the Adoration of the Magi (cast shown) Catacomb chamber with (from top): Orants, Jonah and the Whale, Moses striking the rock (left), Noah praying in the ark, Adoration of the Magi. 200–250 Christian architecture after 313 [ edit ] Santa Sabina , Rome, interior (5th century).

See also: Church architecture and Basilica In the 4th century, the rapidly growing Christian population, now supported by the state, needed to build larger and grander public buildings for worship than the mostly discreet meeting places they had been using, which were typically in or among domestic buildings. Pagan temples remained in use for their original purposes for some time and, at least in Rome, even when deserted were shunned by Christians until the 6th or 7th centuries, when some were converted to churches.

[ 34 ] Elsewhere this happened sooner.  Architectural formulas for temples were unsuitable, not simply for their pagan associations, but because pagan cult and sacrifices occurred outdoors under the open sky in the sight of the gods, with the temple, housing the cult figures and the treasury, as a windowless backdrop.

lnterior view of Santa Costanza , Rome The usable model at hand, when Emperor Constantine I wanted to memorialize his imperial piety, was the familiar conventional architecture of the basilica .  There were several variations of the basic plan of the secular basilica, always some kind of rectangular hall, but the one usually followed for churches had a center nave with one aisle at each side, and an apse at one end opposite to the main door at the other. In, and often also in front of, the apse was a raised platform, where the altar was placed and the clergy officiated.  In secular buildings this plan was more typically used for the smaller audience halls of the emperors, governors, and the very rich than for the great public basilicas functioning as law courts and other public purposes.

[ 35 ] This was the normal pattern used for Roman churches, and generally in the Western Empire, but the Eastern Empire, and Roman Africa, were more adventurous, and their models were sometimes copied in the West, for example in Milan .  All variations allowed natural light from windows high in the walls, a departure from the windowless sanctuaries of the temples of most previous religions, and this has remained a consistent feature of Christian church architecture . Formulas giving churches with a large central area were to become preferred in Byzantine architecture , which developed styles of basilica with a dome early on.

[ 36 ] Within the dome architecture Christian churches used them to venerate icons at a larger than life scale, while Christians remained covered and inside.

[ 37 ] Nave of San Lorenzo fuori le mura , Rome A particular and short-lived type of building, using the same basilican form, was the funerary hall , which was not a normal church, though the surviving examples long ago became regular churches, and they always offered funeral and memorial services, but a building erected in the Constantinian period as an indoor cemetery on a site connected with early Christian martyrs, such as a catacomb. The six examples built by Constantine outside the walls of Rome are: Old Saint Peter's Basilica , the older basilica dedicated to Saint Agnes of which Santa Costanza is now the only remaining element, San Sebastiano fuori le mura , San Lorenzo fuori le Mura , Santi Marcellino e Pietro al Laterano , and one in the modern park of Villa Gordiani .

[ 38 ] A martyrium was a building erected on a spot with particular significance, often over the burial of a martyr. No particular architectural form was associated with the type, and they were often small. Many became churches, or chapels in larger churches erected adjoining them.  With baptistries and mausolea, their often smaller size and different function made martyria suitable for architectural experimentation.

[ 39 ] Among the key buildings, not all surviving in their original form, are: Constantinian Basilicas : Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran St Mary Major Old Saint Peter's Basilica Church of the Holy Sepulchre Church of the Nativity Saint Sofia Church, Sofia Centralized Plan Santa Constanza , built as an Imperial mausoleum adjoining a funerary hall, part of the wall of which survives.

[ 40 ] Church of St. George, Sofia Exterior of the Basilica St. Sofia in Sofia, Bulgaria, 4th century CE Exterior of the Rotunda St. George , Sofia, Bulgaria, 3rd-4th century CE Christian art after 313 [ edit ] Detail - cast of the central sections of the Sarcophagus of Junius Bassus , with Traditio Legis and Jesus entering Jerusalem .

With the final legalization of Christianity, the existing styles of Christian art continued to develop, and take on a more monumental and iconic character.  Before long very large Christian churches began to be constructed, and the majority of the rich elite adapted Christianity, and public and elite Christian art became grander to suit the new spaces and clients.

Hans Belting wrote that "in late antiquity... Christianity adopted the cult images of the "pagans", in a complete reversal of its original attitude, and developed an image practice of its own."  But large free-standing sculpture, the medium for the most prominent pagan images, continued to be distrusted and largely shunned for some centuries, and virtually up to the present day in the Orthodox world .

[ 41 ] Although borrowings of motifs such as the Virgin and Child from pagan religious art had been pointed out as far back as the Protestant Reformation , when John Calvin and his followers gleefully used them as a stick with which to beat all Christian art, the belief of André Grabar , Andreas Alföldi , Ernst Kantorowicz and other early 20th-century art historians that Roman Imperial imagery was a much more significant influence "has become universally accepted".  A book by Thomas F. Mathews in 1994 attempted to overturn this thesis, very largely denying influence from Imperial iconography in favour of a range of other secular and religious influence, but was roughly handled by academic reviewers.

[ 42 ] More complex and expensive works are seen, as the wealthy gradually converted, and more theological complexity appears, as Christianity became subject to acrimonious doctrinal disputes. At the same time a very different type of art is found in the new public churches that were now being constructed.  Somewhat by accident, the best group of survivals of these is from Rome where, together with Constantinople and Jerusalem, they were presumably at their most magnificent.

Mosaic now becomes important; fortunately this survives far better than fresco , although it is vulnerable to well-meaning restoration and repair. It seems to have been an innovation of early Christian churches to put mosaics on the wall and use them for sacred subjects; previously, the technique had essentially been used for floors and walls in gardens. By the end of the period the style of using a gold ground had developed that continued to characterize Byzantine images, and many medieval Western ones.

With more space, narrative images containing many people develop in churches, and also begin to be seen in later catacomb paintings. Continuous rows of biblical scenes appear (rather high up) along the side walls of churches. The best-preserved 5th-century examples are the set of Old Testament scenes along the nave walls of Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome.  These can be compared to the paintings of Dura-Europos, and probably also derive from a lost tradition of both Jewish and Christian illustrated manuscripts, as well as more general Roman precedents.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] The large apses contain images in an iconic style, which gradually developed to centre on a large figure, or later just the bust, of Christ, or later of the Virgin Mary. The earliest apses show a range of compositions that are new symbolic images of the Christian life and the Church.

No panel paintings, or " icons " from before the 6th century have survived in anything like an original condition, but they were clearly produced, and becoming more important throughout this period.

Sculpture, all much smaller than lifesize, has survived in better quantities.  The most famous of a considerable number of surviving early Christian sarcophagi are perhaps the Sarcophagus of Junius Bassus and Dogmatic sarcophagus of the 4th century. A number of ivory carvings have survived, including the complex late-5th-century Brescia Casket , probably a product of Saint Ambrose 's episcopate in Milan , then the seat of the Imperial court, and the 6th-century Throne of Maximian from the Byzantine Italian capital of Ravenna .

Gold glass from the catacombs, with Saint Peter , Virgin Mary in orant pose, Saint Paul , 4th century Manuscripts Quedlinburg Itala fragment – 5th-century Old Testament Vienna Genesis Rossano Gospels Cotton Genesis Late Antique mosaics in Italy and Early Byzantine mosaics in the Middle East .

Gold glass [ edit ] Main article: Gold glass Gold sandwich glass or gold glass was a technique for fixing a layer of gold leaf with a design between two fused layers of glass, developed in Hellenistic glass and revived in the 3rd century.  There are a very fewer larger designs, but the great majority of the around 500 survivals are roundels that are the cut-off bottoms of wine cups or glasses used to mark and decorate graves in the Catacombs of Rome by pressing them into the mortar. The great majority are 4th century, extending into the 5th century. Most are Christian, but many pagan and a few Jewish, and had probably originally been given as gifts on marriage, or festive occasions such as New Year.  Their iconography has been much studied, although artistically they are relatively unsophisticated.

[ 45 ] Their subjects are similar to the catacomb paintings, but with a difference balance including more portraiture of the deceased (usually, it is presumed).  The progression to an increased number of images of saints can be seen in them.

[ 46 ] The same technique began to be used for gold tesserae for mosaics in the mid-1st century in Rome, and by the 5th century these had become the standard background for religious mosaics.

See also [ edit ] Oldest churches in the world Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Jensen 2000 , pp. 15–16.

^ van der Meer, F., 27 uses "roughly from 200 to 600".

^ Syndicus 1962 , p. 10–14.

^ Syndicus 1962 , pp. 30–32.

^ Jensen 2000 , p. 12-15.

^ Jensen 2000 , p. 16.

^ Syndicus 1962 , pp. 21–23.

^ Marucchi, Orazio. "Archæology of the Cross and Crucifix." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 4. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1908. 7 Sept. 2018 online ^ Jensen 2000 , p. 22.

^ Finney, viii–xii, viii and xi quoted ^ Finney, 108 ^ Weitzmann 1979 , p. 360.

^ Graydon F. Snyder, Ante pacem: archaeological evidence of church life before Constantine , p. 134,  Mercer University Press, 2003, google books ^ Syndicus 1962 , pp. 29–30.

^ Jensen 2000 , p. 24.

^ Beckwith 1979 , pp. 23–24.

^ Syndicus 1962 , pp. 10–11.

^ Jensen 2000 , pp. 10–15.

^ Balch, 183, 193 ^ Weitzmann 1979 , p. 377.

^ a b c Weitzmann 1979 , p. 396.

^ Weitzmann 1979 , p. 365.

^ Balch, 41 and chapter 6 ^ Daniel 3:10–30 ^ Syndicus 1962 , pp. 15–18.

^ Jensen 2000 , p. Chapter 3.

^ Weitzmann 1979 , p. no. 360-407.

^ Beckwith 1979 , pp. 21–24.

^ Weitzmann 1979 , pp. 362–367.

^ Weitzmann 1979 , p. 410.

^ Daniel 3:10–30 ^ Weitzmann 1979 , p. no. 383.

^ Weitzmann 1979 , pp. 424–425.

^ Syndicus 1962 , p. 39.

^ Syndicus 1962 , p. 40.

^ Syndicus 1962 , chapter II, covers the whole story of the Christianization of the basilica..

^ Kuban, Doğan (1987).

"The Style of Sinan's Domed Structures" .

Muqarnas .

4 : 72, 93.

doi : 10.2307/1523097 .

JSTOR 1523097 .

^ Webb, Matilda.

The churches and catacombs of early Christian Rome: a comprehensive guide , p. 251, 2001, Sussex Academic Press, ISBN 978-1-902210-58-2 , google books ^ Syndicus 1962 , chapter III.

^ Syndicus 1962 , pp. 69–70.

^ Belting, Hans , Likeness and Presence: A History of the Image Before the Era of Art , p. xxii, 1994, Chicago University Press (English trans.), ISBN 9780226042152 , google books ^ The Clash of Gods: A Reinterpretation of Early Christian Art by Thomas F. Mathews. Review by: W. Eugene Kleinbauer (quoted, from p. 937), Speculum , Vol. 70, No. 4 (Oct., 1995), pp. 937-941, Medieval Academy of America, JSTOR 2865390 ;  other reviews, all with criticisms along similar lines: Peter Brown , The Art Bulletin , Vol. 77, No. 3 (Sep., 1995), pp. 499–502;  RW. Eugene Kleinbauer, Speculum , Vol. 70, No. 4 (Oct., 1995), pp. 937–941,  Liz James, The Burlington Magazine , Vol. 136, No. 1096 (Jul., 1994), pp. 458–459;Annabel Wharton, The American Historical Review , Vol. 100, No. 5 (Dec., 1995), pp. 1518–1519 .

^ Syndicus 1962 , pp. 52–54.

^ Weitzmann 1979 , pp. 366–369.

^ Beckwith 1979 , pp. 25–26.

^ Grig, throughout References [ edit ] Balch, David L. (2000).

Roman Domestic Art & Early House Churches (Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament Series), Mohr Siebeck, ISBN 9783161493836 Beckwith, John (1979).

Early Christian and Byzantine Art (2nd ed.).

Yale University Press .

ISBN 0140560335 .

Bühren, Ralf van and Maciej Jan Jasiński (2024).

The invisible divine in the history of art. Is Erwin Panofsky (1892–1968) still relevant for decoding Christian iconography?

, in Church, Communication and Culture , vol. 9, pp. 1–36.

doi : 10.1080/23753234.2024.2322546 .

Finney, Paul Corby (1997).

The Invisible God: The Earliest Christians on Art , Oxford University Press, ISBN 9780195113815 Grig, Lucy (2004). "Portraits, Pontiffs and the Christianization of Fourth-Century Rome", Papers of the British School at Rome , Vol. 72, pp. 203–230, JSTOR 40311081 Honour, Hugh ; Fleming, J.

(2005).

The Visual Arts: A History (Seventh ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.

ISBN 0-13-193507-0 .

Jensen, Robin Margaret (2000).

Understanding Early Christian Art .

Routledge .

ISBN 0415204542 . Archived from the original on 25 December 2013.

Meer, F. van der (1967).

Early Christian Art , Faber and Faber Syndicus, Eduard (1962).

Early Christian Art . London: Burns & Oates .

OCLC 333082 .

"Early Christian art" . In Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

Weitzmann, Kurt (1979).

Age of spirituality : late antique and early Christian art, third to seventh century . New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Paleochristian art .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Paleochristian architecture .

267 plates from Wilpert, Joseph, ed., Die Malereien der Katakomben Roms (Tafeln) ("Paintings in the Roman catacombs, (Plates)") , Freiburg im Breisgau, 1903, from Heidelberg University Library] Early Christian art , introduction from the State University of New York at Oneonta Christian Contribution to Art and Architecture in India v t e History of Christianity Spread History of theology Historicity of the Bible List of martyrs Timeline Centuries 1st 2nd and 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st Early Christianity Origins and Apostolic Age Background Chronology of Jesus birth baptism ministry crucifixion resurrection Great Commission ascension historical Jesus Holy Spirit Apostles in the New Testament Jewish Christianity Split Paul the Apostle Council of Jerusalem Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period Diversity Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Donatism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Canon development Persecution Apostolic / Church Fathers Clement of Rome Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Tertullian Origen Great Church Early African Late antiquity Constantine Constantinian shift Roman state religion Monasticism Councils Nicaea I Creed Christianity Athanasius Jerome Augustine Constantinople I Ephesus I Chalcedon Chalcedonian / Non-Chalcedonian Biblical canon Catholicism ( Timeline ) Papacy Development of primacy Eastern Orthodox opposition Peace and Truce of God Crusading movement Lateran IV Art patronage of Julius II Leo X Counter-Reformation Trent Art Catholic Reformation Jesuits Xavier Thomas More Monastery dissolution Wars Mass rocks and priest holes Guadalupe Jansenists Molinists Neo-Scholasticism Teresa Modernism Independent Catholics Vatican I and Vatican II Ecclesial community Eastern Christianity Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Church of the East Chrysostom Nestorianism Icons Iconodulism Iconoclasm Great Schism Fall of Constantinople Armenia Georgia Greece Egypt Syriac Ethiopia Ottoman Empire Bulgaria Russia Serbia North America Middle Ages Pelagianism Gregory I Celtic Germanic Anglo-Saxon Franks Gothic Scandinavian Iceland Slavs Bohemia Bulgaria Kievan Rus' Moravia Poland Pomerania Investiture Anselm Abelard Bernard Bogomils Bosnian Cathars Apostolic Brethren Dulcinian Crusades Waldensians Inquisition Early Scholasticism Christian mysticism Dominic Francis Bonaventure Aquinas Five Ways Wycliffe Avignon Papal Schism Bohemian Reformation Hus Conciliarism Synods Reformation and Protestantism Erasmus Eucharist Calvinist–Arminian debate Arminianism Wars Resistance theories Separation of church and state Nicodemites Hymnody of continental Europe Formal and material principles Law and Gospel Literature Protestant work ethic Lutheranism Luther Ninety-five Theses Diet of Worms Theology Bible Melanchthon Book of Concord Orthodoxy Eucharist Art Calvinism Zwingli Calvin Huguenots Presbyterianism Scotland Knox TULIP Baptism Dort Three Forms of Unity Westminster Orthodoxy Metrical psalters Anglicanism ( Timeline ) Henry VIII Cranmer Elizabethan 39 Articles Puritans Civil War Church music Book of Common Prayer King James Version Anabaptism Theology Radical Reformation Grebel Swiss Brethren Müntzer Martyrs' Synod Menno Simons Smyth Martyrs Mirror Ausbund 1640–1789 Revivalism Missionaries timeline Baptists Separation of church and state Edicts of toleration Congregationalism First Great Awakening Methodism Millerism Pietism Fostering of early experimental science Neo- and Old Lutherans 1789–present Camp meeting Holiness movement Second Great Awakening Restorationists Jehovah's Witnesses Mormonism Seventh-day Adventist Adventism Oxford Movement Laestadianism Finnish Awakening Christian existentialism Third Great Awakening Azusa Revival Gospel music Fundamentalist – Modernist controversy Pacifism Ecumenism Five solae Jesus movement Pentecostalism Charismatics Liberation theology Reformed epistemology Fourth Great Awakening Evangelical and Mainline Protestants Christian right and left Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases International VIAF National United States 2 Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐2m2fv
Cached time: 20250814215640
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.727 seconds
Real time usage: 0.939 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4515/1000000
Revision size: 32537/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 217515/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5573/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 92749/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.382/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26815289/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  641.492      1 -total
 15.00%   96.214      1 Template:Reflist
 14.06%   90.194     35 Template:Sfn
 12.65%   81.118      2 Template:Lang
 10.41%   66.772      1 Template:History_of_Christianity
 10.18%   65.298      1 Template:Cite_journal
 10.07%   64.623      2 Template:Commons_category
  9.80%   62.893      2 Template:Sister_project
  9.59%   61.525      2 Template:Side_box
  9.44%   60.541      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:343611:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215640 and revision id 1299146118. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Early_Christian_art_and_architecture&oldid=1299146118 " Categories : Early Christian art Palaeo-Christian architecture Christian art Medieval art Ancient Roman art Christian iconography 3rd century in art 4th century in art 5th century in art 6th century in art 3rd-century architecture 4th-century architecture 5th-century architecture 6th-century architecture Art by period of creation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2013 Articles containing Italian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 20:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Early Christian art and architecture 38 languages Add topic

