Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Technique 3 Benefits 4 Biological aspects 5 Contraindications 6 Applications 7 Compared to other relaxation techniques 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Autogenic training 23 languages العربية Български Čeština Deutsch Español Français Հայերեն Íslenska Italiano Қазақша Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Relaxation technique For other uses of "Autogenic", see Autogenesis .

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(July 2023) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Autogenes Training]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Autogenes Training}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Medical intervention Autogenic training MeSH D001326 [ edit on Wikidata ] Autogenic training is a relaxation technique first published by the German psychiatrist Johannes Heinrich Schultz in 1932. The technique involves repetitions of a set of visualisations accompanied by vocal suggestions that induce a state of relaxation and is based on passive concentration of bodily perceptions like heaviness and warmth of limbs, which are facilitated by self-suggestions.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Autogenic training is used to alleviate many stress -induced psychosomatic disorders.

[ 2 ] Part of a series on Alternative medicine General information Alternative medicine History Terminology Alternative veterinary medicine Quackery (health fraud) Rise of modern medicine Pseudoscience Antiscience Skepticism Scientific Therapeutic nihilism Fringe medicine and science Acupressure Acupuncture Alkaline diet Anthroposophic medicine Apitherapy Applied kinesiology Aromatherapy Association for Research and Enlightenment Auriculotherapy Bates method Biological terrain assessment Black salve Bodywork Bone-setting Bowen technique Breathwork Fake COVID-19 treatments Camel urine Cancer treatments Charcoal cleanse Chiropractic Chiropractic treatment techniques Vertebral subluxation Christian Science Chromotherapy Colloidal silver Colon cleansing Coffee enema Colorpuncture Conversion therapy Craniosacral therapy Crystal healing Cupping therapy Dental amalgam controversy Detoxification Foot detox Dry needling Ear candling Energy medicine Correactology Esoteric energy Reiki Therapeutic touch Estrogen dominance Fabunan Antiviral Injection Facilitated communication FasciaBlaster Feldenkrais method Functional medicine Hair analysis Holistic dentistry Hologram bracelet Homeopathy Bach flower remedies Hydrotherapy Hypnotherapy Ionized jewelry Iridology Jilly Juice Lightning Process Lymphotherapy Magnet therapy Manual therapy Manual lymphatic drainage Medical intuitive Megavitamin therapy Mesmerism Mind–body interventions MMS Myofascial release NAET Naturopathy Oil pulling Orgone Orthomolecular medicine Orthopathy Osteomyology Osteopathy Ozone therapy Parapsychology Phrenology Postural Integration Psychic surgery Psychodermatology Quantum healing Radionics Rapid prompting method Reflexology RBOP Rolfing Scientific racism ThetaHealing Thomsonianism Thought Field Therapy Urophagia Vaginal steaming Vegetotherapy Vision therapy Vitalism Young blood transfusion Zero balancing Controversies Big Pharma conspiracy theories HIV/AIDS denialism OPV AIDS hypothesis Anti-vaccinationism Vaccine misinformation Vaccines and autism MMR vaccine and autism in chiropractic Water fluoridation controversy COVID-19 misinformation Turbo cancer Classifications Alternative medical systems Mind–body intervention Biologically based therapy Manipulative methods Energy therapy Traditional medicine African Muti Southern Africa Ayurveda Dosha MVAH Balneotherapy Brazilian Bush medicine Cambodian Chinese Blood stasis Chinese herbology Dit da Gua sha Gill plate trade Long gu Meridian Moxibustion Pressure point Qi San Jiao Tui na Zang-fu Chumash Curandero Faith healing Herbal medicine Hilot Iranian Jamu Kayakalpa Kambo Japanese Korean Maya Mien Shiang Mongolian Naftalan oil Prophetic medicine Shamanism Shiatsu Siddha Sri Lankan Thai massage Tibetan Unani Vietnamese Alternative diagnoses Adrenal fatigue Aerotoxic syndrome Candida hypersensitivity Chronic Lyme disease Electromagnetic hypersensitivity Heavy legs Leaky gut syndrome Multiple chemical sensitivity Vertebral subluxation Wilson's temperature syndrome v t e History [ edit ] Autogenic training (AT) was first presented by German psychiatrist Johannes Heinrich Schultz in 1926 to the Medical Society in Berlin.

[ 3 ] Disenchanted with psychoanalysis in the 1920s, Schultz began exploring new therapeutic methods.

[ 3 ] His search was heavily influenced by his  experience with German neurologist Oscar Vogt, with whom he researched sleep and hypnosis.

[ 4 ] Collecting data about hypnosis in his research with Vogt, Schultz found that the hypnotized often felt a feeling of heaviness in the extremities, as well as a feeling of pleasant warmth.

[ 5 ] Interested by this relationship, Schultz investigated whether imagining such heaviness and warmth in the limbs could lead to self-hypnosis.

[ 5 ] Under his guidance, Schultz's patients were able to go into a hypnotic state for a self-determined period of time by simply imagining a state of heaviness and warmth in one's limbs.

[ 5 ] These short-term mental exercises appeared to reduce stress or effects such as fatigue and tension while avoiding side effects such as headaches. Inspired by this research and Vogt's work, Johannes Heinrich Schultz became interested in the phenomenon of autosuggestion . He wanted to explore an approach to relaxation, which would avoid undesirable passivity of the patients and dependency on the therapist. To this end, Schultz developed a set of six exercises called autogenic training.

[ 5 ] Autogenic training was popularized in North America and the English-speaking world by Wolfgang Luthe , a German physician, who worked under Schultz and investigated the effects of autogenic training on physical and mental health issues.

[ 5 ] Later on, when Luthe immigrated to Canada, he wrote about autogenic training in English, thereby introducing the English-speaking world to AT.

[ 5 ] With help from Schultz, Luthe published Autogenic Therapy , a multi-volume text that described AT in detail, in 1969.

[ 5 ] The publication of Autogenic Therapy brought AT to North America.

[ 4 ] Later on, his disciple Luis de Rivera, a McGill University-trained psychiatrist, introduced psychodynamic concepts into Luthe's approach, developing autogenic analysis as a new method for uncovering the unconscious.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] More recently in 2015, biofeedback practitioners integrate basic elements of autogenic imagery and have simplified versions of parallel techniques that are used in combination with biofeedback. This was done at the Menninger Foundation by Elmer Green, Steve Fahrion, Patricia Norris, Joe Sargent, Dale Walters and others. They incorporated the hand warming imagery of autogenic training and used it as an aid to develop thermal biofeedback.

[ 8 ] Technique [ edit ] Autogenic training can be practiced in any comfortable posture, while keeping eyes closed.

[ 5 ] In autogenic training, the trainees engage in passive concentration.

[ 2 ] Passive concentration refers to concentrating on inner sensations rather than environmental stimuli.

[ 2 ] The technique consists of six standard exercises according to Schultz: [ 5 ] [ 9 ] Muscular relaxation by repetition of a verbal formula, "My right arm is heavy", emphasizing heaviness. During the initial stages of the training, the feeling of heaviness in the trained arm is more expressed and occurs more rapidly. The same feeling can be experienced in the other extremities at the same time in the other arm. Within a week, a short concentration can trigger the sensation of heaviness in a trainee's arms and legs.

[ 2 ] Passive concentration focuses on feeling warm, initiated by the instruction "My right arm is warm".

Initiation of cardiac activity using the formula "My heartbeat is calm and regular".

Passive concentration on the respiratory mechanism with the formula "It breathes me".

Concentration on the warmth in the abdominal region with "My solar plexus is warm" formula.

Passive concentration on coolness in the cranial region with the formula "My forehead is cool".

When a new exercise step is added in autogenic training, the trainee should always concentrate initially on the already learned exercises and then add a new exercise. In the beginning, a new exercise is added for only brief periods.

[ 2 ] According to the specific clinical needs, the training can be modified to include fewer formulas, or include a slightly different formula.

[ 2 ] Benefits [ edit ] The main benefit of autogenic training is the autonomic self-regulation achieved by removing environmental distraction, training imagery that accompanies autonomic self-regulation, and providing a facilitative set of exercises that are easy to learn and remember.

[ 8 ] A study by Laci Spencer [ 8 ] suggests that autogenic training restores the balance between the activity of the sympathetic (flight or fight) and the parasympathetic (rest and digest) branches of the autonomic nervous system . The author hypothesizes that this can have important health benefits, as the parasympathetic activity promotes digestion and bowel movements, lowers the blood pressure , slows the heart rate , and promotes the functions of the immune system .

A meta-analysis study by Friedhelm and Kupper found that autogenic training was effective in reducing symptoms of anxiety, depression, and insomnia. Additionally, autogenic training was found to have a positive effect on physical health outcomes, such as reducing pain and improving quality of life for individuals with chronic illnesses. They also found that AT was also effective in the following psychosomatic disorders: mild-to-moderate hypertension, coronary heart disease, Raynaud's disease, and tension headache and migraine.

[ 1 ] Biological aspects [ edit ] There is a lack of neurophysiological investigations addressing this topic; however, one EEG study from 1963 suggested that the decrease in afferent stimulation induces a reduction in reticulo-cortical activity, decrease in thalamo-cortical activity, and functional changes in the structures connected to reticular system ( hypothalamus , limbic system , red nucleus , globus pallidus ).

[ 10 ] The same study suggested that EEG patterns obtained from subjects with different level of practice are not similar.

Another study from 1958 hypothesized that autogenic state is between the normal waking state and sleep. It suggests that EEG patterns occurring during autogenic training are similar to electrophysiological changes occurring during initial stages of sleep .

[ 11 ] Contraindications [ edit ] Autogenic training is contra-indicated for children below the age of 5 and the individuals whose symptoms cannot be controlled.

[ 5 ] Applications [ edit ] Autogenic training has different applications and is used in a variety of pathophysiological conditions, such as bronchial asthma or hypertension , as well as psychological disorders e.g.

anxiety and depression .

[ 5 ] [ 9 ] Autogenic training has been subject to clinical evaluation from its early days in Germany, and from the early 1980s worldwide.  In 2002, a meta-analysis of 60 studies was published in Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback , [ 12 ] finding significant positive effects of treatment when compared to normals over a number of diagnoses; finding these effects to be similar to best recommended rival therapies; and finding positive additional effects by patients, such as their perceived quality of life. Autogenic training is recommended in the 2016 European Society of Cardiology Guideline for prevention of cardiovascular disease in persons who experience psychosocial problems.

[ 13 ] The International Journal of Dermatology conducted a study and found that Autogenic Training was potentially helpful for improving aged skin in women experiencing menopause.

[ 14 ] Compared to other relaxation techniques [ edit ] The principle of passive concentration in autogenic training makes this technique different from other relaxation techniques such as progressive muscle relaxation and biofeedback , in which trainees try to control physiological functions. As in biofeedback, bidirectional change in physiological activity is possible. Autogenic training is classified as a self-hypnotic technique. It is different from hetero-hypnosis, where trance is induced by another individual. Autogenic training emphasizes a trainee's independence and gives control from therapist to the trainee. By this, the need for physiological feedback devices or a hypnotherapist is eliminated.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Affirmations – Practice of positive thinking and self-empowerment Autosuggestion – Psychological technique related to the placebo effect Progressive muscle relaxation – Muscle relaxation technique Qigong – Chinese system of coordinated posture and movement, breathing, and meditation Suggestion – Psychological process of guiding a person The Relaxation Response – 1975 book by Herbert Benson Yoga nidra – State of consciousness between waking and sleeping References [ edit ] ^ a b Stetter, Friedhelm; Kupper, Sirko (2002-03-01). "Autogenic Training: A Meta-Analysis of Clinical Outcome Studies".

Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback .

27 (1): 45– 98.

doi : 10.1023/a:1014576505223 .

ISSN 1090-0586 .

PMID 12001885 .

S2CID 22876957 .

^ a b c d e f g h Principles and practice of stress management . Lehrer, Paul M., Woolfolk, Robert L., Sime, Wesley E. (3rd ed.). New York: Guilford Press. 2007.

ISBN 9781606230008 .

OCLC 144770991 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ a b "History of Autogenic Training" .

autogenic-training-online.com . Retrieved 2023-04-26 .

^ a b Pain management . Steven D. Waldman. Philadelphia: Saunders/Elsevier. 2007.

ISBN 978-1-4377-2144-7 .

OCLC 489079698 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Kanji, N. (1997-09-01). "Autogenic training".

Complementary Therapies in Medicine .

5 (3): 162– 167.

doi : 10.1016/s0965-2299(97)80060-x .

^ Rivera, José Luis González de (1997).

"Autogenic psychotherapy and psychoanalysis" (PDF) . In Guimón, J (ed.).

The body in psychotherapy: international congress, Geneva, February 1–3, 1996 . Basel; New York: Karger. pp.

176– 181.

ISBN 9783805562850 .

OCLC 36511904 .

^ Rivera, José Luis González de (2001).

"Autogenic analysis: the tool Freud was looking for" (PDF) .

International Journal of Psychotherapy .

6 (1): 67– 76.

doi : 10.1080/13569080120042216 .

^ a b c LACI., SPENCER (2015).

FLOTATION : a guide for sensory deprivation, relaxation, & isolation tanks . [S.l.]: LULU COM.

ISBN 9781329173750 .

OCLC 980240164 .

^ a b Autogenic therapy . Luthe, Wolfgang,, Schultz, J. H. (Johannes Heinrich), 1884-1970. New York: Grune & Stratton. 1969.

ISBN 9780808906643 .

OCLC 47990 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Luthe, W.; Jus, A.; Geissmann, P. (1963). "Autogenic State and Autogenic Shift: Psychophysiologic and Neurophysiologic Aspects".

Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics .

11 (1): 1– 13.

doi : 10.1159/000285660 .

ISSN 0033-3190 .

PMID 14044678 .

^ Israel,  L.,  &  Rohmer,  F.  (1958).  Variations électroencéphalographiques au cours de la relaxationautogène et hypnotique.In P. Aboulker, L. Chertok,& M. Sapir(Eds.), pp 88-98, La relaxation: Aspects théoriques et pratiques Paris: Expansion Scientifique Française.

^ Stetter, Friedhelm; Kupper, Sirko (March 2002). "Autogenic training: a meta-analysis of clinical outcome studies".

Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback .

27 (1): 45– 98.

doi : 10.1023/A:1014576505223 .

PMID 12001885 .

S2CID 22876957 .

^ "Sorry, requested page was not found" . Archived from the original on 2021-01-23 . Retrieved 2019-06-02 .

^ Sakai, Shingo; Inoue-Sato, Mayumi; Amemiya, Rei; Murakami, Motoko; Inagaki, Kazuki; Sakairi, Yosuke (2020).

"The influence of autogenic training on the physical properties of skin and cardiac autonomic activity in postmenopausal women: an exploratory study" .

International Journal of Dermatology .

59 (1): 103– 109.

doi : 10.1111/ijd.14582 .

PMID 31294461 .

S2CID 195879795 .

Retrieved 25 September 2019.

Further reading [ edit ] Bird, Jane; Pinch, Christine (2002).

Autogenic therapy: self-help for mind and body . Dublin: Newleaf.

ISBN 9780717134229 .

Greenberg.

Comprehensive Stress Mgmt 10E . McGraw-Hill Education (India) Pvt Limited. pp. 181–.

ISBN 978-0-07-067104-1 .

Luthe, Wolfgang; Schultz, Johannes Heinrich (1969).

Autogenic therapy . New York: Grune & Stratton.

ISBN 9780808906643 .

OCLC 47990 .

Republished in 2001 by The British Autogenic Society. In six volumes.

Vol. 1 Autogenic Methods Vol. 2 Medical Applications Vol. 3 Applications in Psychotherapy Vol. 4 Research and Theory Vol. 5 Dynamics of Autogenic Neutralisation Vol. 6 Treatment with Autogenic Neutralisation External links [ edit ] The British Autogenic Society v t e Psychotherapy Schools Psychodynamic Adlerian therapy Analytical therapy Mentalization-based treatment Psychoanalysis Transference focused psychotherapy Cognitive and behavioral Clinical behavior analysis Acceptance and commitment therapy Functional analytic psychotherapy Cognitive behavioral therapy Cognitive therapy Dialectical behavior therapy Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy Rational emotive behavior therapy Humanistic Emotionally focused therapy Existential therapy Focusing Gestalt therapy Logotherapy Person-centered therapy Other Art therapy Dance therapy Feminist therapy Music therapy Narrative therapy Play therapy Reality therapy Systemic therapy Transactional analysis List Integrative Eclectic psychotherapy Multimodal therapy Transtheoretical model Approaches Brief psychotherapy Counseling Online therapy Telephone therapy Residential treatment Self-help Support group Research Clinical formulation Clinical pluralism Common factors theory Discontinuation History Practitioner–scholar model Techniques Behaviour therapy Aversion therapy Chaining Contingency management Shaping Stimulus control Token economy Counterconditioning Desensitization / Exposure therapy Systematic desensitization Other individual therapy Autogenic training Biofeedback Clean language Cognitive restructuring Emotion regulation Affect labeling Free association Homework Hypnotherapy Modeling Group psychotherapy Co-therapy Couples therapy Family therapy Psychodrama Sensitivity training People Philippe Pinel Josef Breuer Sigmund Freud Pierre Janet Alfred Adler Sándor Ferenczi Carl Jung Ludwig Binswanger Melanie Klein Otto Rank Karen Horney Harry Stack Sullivan Fritz Perls Anna Freud Donald Winnicott Wilhelm Reich Milton H. Erickson Jacques Lacan Erik Erikson Carl Rogers Viktor Frankl George Kelly Rollo May Virginia Axline Carl Whitaker Albert Ellis Silvano Arieti James Bugental Joseph Wolpe Virginia Satir Aaron Beck Salvador Minuchin Paul Watzlawick Haim Ginott Ogden Lindsley Paul Watzlawick Arthur Janov Eugene Gendlin R. D. Laing Jean Baker Miller Otto F. Kernberg Nathan Azrin Irvin D. Yalom Arnold Lazarus Lorna Smith Benjamin Marsha M. Linehan Vittorio Guidano Les Greenberg William R. Miller Steven C. Hayes Michael White Jeffrey Young Peter Fonagy Associations Association for the Advancement of Psychotherapy Association for Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies Association for Behavior Analysis International European Association for Psychotherapy Society for Psychotherapy Research World Council for Psychotherapy Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Autogenic_training&oldid=1304123966 " Categories : Meditation Hypnosis Treatment of mental disorders Mind–body interventions Hidden categories: CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Science and technology articles needing translation from German Wikipedia This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 03:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Autogenic training 23 languages Add topic

