Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Honours and awards 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Peter Schuster (theoretical chemist) 7 languages العربية تۆرکجه Deutsch فارسی Italiano مصرى Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Austrian Theoretical Chemist For the Samoan rugby union player, see Peter Schuster (rugby union) .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Peter K. Schuster Born 7 March 1941 ( 1941-03-07 ) (age 84) Vienna , Austria Nationality Austrian Alma mater University of Vienna ( PhD , 1967) Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Known for Theory of molecular evolution Scientific career Fields Theoretical Biochemistry Institutions University of Vienna Doctoral students Martin Nowak Günter P. Wagner Erich Bornberg-Bauer Peter K. Schuster (born 7 March 1941) is a theoretical chemist known for his work with the German Nobel Laureate Manfred Eigen in developing the quasispecies model . His work has made great strides in the understanding of viruses and their replication, as well as theoretical mechanisms in the origin of life .

Biography [ edit ] Schuster was born in Vienna , Austria and graduated with highest honors from "gymnasium". He studied chemistry and physics at the University of Vienna and earned his PhD in 1967. He was a Postdoc at the Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry . Together with Eigen, Schuster developed the quasispecies model .
He is full professor of theoretical chemistry at the University of Vienna , the founding director of the Institute of Molecular Biotechnology in Jena , Germany , as well as the current head of its Department of Molecular Evolutionary Biology. He is an external faculty member at the Santa Fe Institute . Currently, Prof. Schuster is the President of the Austrian Academy of Sciences .

Honours and awards [ edit ] 1971: Theodor Körner promotion price 1971: Jubilee Award of the Chemical-Physical Society 1983: Erwin Schrödinger Prize of the Austrian Academy of Sciences 1989: Dr. Asen Zlatarov price of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences 1993: Austrian Decoration for Science and Art 1993: Member of the German Academy of Sciences Leopoldina [ 1 ] 1995: Philip Morris Research Prize 1995: Josef Loschmidt Medal of the Austrian Chemical Society 1997: City of Vienna Prize for Science 1997: Cardinal Innitzer Prize for Science 1999: Wilhelm Exner Medal of the Austrian Trade Association.

[ 2 ] 2010: Great Silver Medal for Service to the City of Vienna See also [ edit ] What is Life? (Schrödinger) References [ edit ] ^ "Peter Schuster" . German Academy of Sciences Leopoldina . Retrieved 1 June 2021 .

^ Editor, ÖGV. (2015). Wilhelm Exner Medal. Austrian Trade Association. ÖGV. Austria.

External links [ edit ] Schuster's personal homepage at the University of Vienna Curriculum vitae Interview regarding Cardinal Schönborn's statement on evolution Schuster's Profile from Santa Fe Institute Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Israel Academics CiNii ORCID Scopus Google Scholar Leopoldina People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peter_Schuster_(theoretical_chemist)&oldid=1300833406 " Categories : 1941 births Living people 20th-century Austrian people 21st-century Austrian people 20th-century Austrian biologists Austrian agnostics Theoretical biologists 21st-century Austrian biologists Scientists from Vienna Recipients of the Austrian Decoration for Science and Art Members of the Austrian Academy of Sciences Members of the European Academy of Sciences and Arts Foreign associates of the National Academy of Sciences Santa Fe Institute people Members of the German National Academy of Sciences Leopoldina Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 16:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peter Schuster (theoretical chemist) 7 languages Add topic

