Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Typical human attributes 3 Scientific investigation 4 Medicine 5 Nutrition 6 Other organisms 7 Social behaviour 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Human biology 43 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Jawa Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Novial Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Interdisciplinary area of study of the biology of the human species For the academic journal, see Human Biology (journal) . For the textbook, see Human Biology (textbook) .

Human biology is an interdisciplinary area of academic study that examines humans through the influences and interplay of many diverse fields such as genetics , evolution , physiology , anatomy , epidemiology , anthropology , ecology , nutrition , population genetics , and sociocultural influences.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is closely related to the biomedical sciences , biological anthropology and other biological fields tying in various aspects of human functionality. It wasn't until the 20th century when biogerontologist, Raymond Pearl , founder of the journal Human Biology , phrased the term "human biology" in a way to describe a separate subsection apart from biology.

[ 3 ] It is also a portmanteau term that describes all biological aspects of the human body, typically using the human body as a type organism for Mammalia , and in that context it is the basis for many undergraduate University degrees and modules.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Most aspects of human biology are identical or very similar to general mammalian biology. In particular, and as examples, humans : maintain their body temperature have an internal skeleton have a circulatory system have a nervous system to provide sensory information and operate and coordinate muscular activity.

have a reproductive system in which they bear live young and produce milk.

have an endocrine system and produce and eliminate hormones and other bio-chemical signalling agents have a respiratory system where air is inhaled into lungs and oxygen is used to produce energy.

have an immune system to protect against disease Excrete waste as urine and feces.

History [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( December 2022 ) The study of integrated human biology started in the 1920s, sparked by Charles Darwin 's theories which were re-conceptualized by many scientists. Human attributes, such as child growth and genetics, were put into question and thus human biology was created.

Typical human attributes [ edit ] The key aspects of human biology are those ways in which humans are substantially different from other mammals.

[ 6 ] Humans have a very large brain in a head that is very large for the size of the animal. This large brain has enabled a range of unique attributes including the development of complex languages and the ability to make and use a complex range of tools .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The upright stance and bipedal locomotion is not unique to humans but humans are the only species to rely almost exclusively on this mode of locomotion.

[ 9 ] This has resulted in significant changes in the structure of the skeleton including the articulation of the pelvis and the femur and in the articulation of the head.

In comparison with most other mammals, humans are very long lived [ 10 ] with an average age at death in the developed world of nearly 80 years old.

[ 11 ] Humans also have the longest childhood of any mammal with sexual maturity taking 12 to 16 years on average to be completed.

Humans lack fur . Although there is a residual covering of fine hair, which may be more developed in some people, and localised hair covering on the head, axillary and pubic regions, in terms of protection from cold, humans are almost naked. The reason for this development is still much debated.

The human eye can see objects in colour but is not well adapted to low light conditions. The sense of smell and of taste are present but are relatively inferior to a wide range of other mammals . Human hearing is efficient but lacks the acuity of some other mammals. Similarly human sense of touch is well developed especially in the hands where dextrous tasks are performed but the sensitivity is still significantly less than in other animals, particularly those equipped with sensory bristles such as cats .

Scientific investigation [ edit ] Human biology tries to understand and promotes research on humans as living beings as a scientific discipline. It makes use of various scientific methods , such as experiments and observations , to detail the biochemical and biophysical foundations of human life describe and formulate the underlying processes using models . As a basic science, it provides the knowledge base for medicine. A number of sub-disciplines include anatomy , cytology , histology and morphology .

Medicine [ edit ] The capabilities of the human brain and the human dexterity in making and using tools, has enabled humans to understand their own biology through scientific experiment, including dissection , autopsy , prophylactic medicine which has, in turn, enable humans to extend their life-span by understanding and mitigating the effects of diseases .

Understanding human biology has enabled and fostered a wider understanding of mammalian biology and by extension, the biology of all living organisms.

Nutrition [ edit ] Main article: Human nutrition Human nutrition is typical of mammalian omnivorous nutrition requiring a balanced input of carbohydrates , fats , proteins , vitamins , and minerals. However, the human diet has a few very specific requirements. These include two specific amino acids, alpha-linolenic acid and linoleic acid without which life is not sustainable in the medium to long term. All other fatty acids can be synthesized from dietary fats. Similarly, human life requires a range of vitamins to be present in food and if these are missing or are supplied at unacceptably low levels, metabolic disorders result which can end in death. The human metabolism is similar to most other mammals except for the need to have an intake of Vitamin C to prevent scurvy and other deficiency diseases. Unusually amongst mammals, a human can synthesize Vitamin D3 using natural UV light from the sun on the skin. This capability may be widespread in the mammalian world but few other mammals share the almost naked skin of humans. The darker the human's skin, the less it can manufacture Vitamin D3.

Other organisms [ edit ] Human biology also encompasses all those organisms that live on or in the human body. Such organisms range from parasitic insects such as fleas and ticks , parasitic helminths such as liver flukes through to bacterial and viral pathogens . Many of the organisms associated with human biology are the specialised biome in the large intestine and the biotic flora of the skin and pharyngeal and nasal region. Many of these biotic assemblages help protect humans from harm and assist in digestion, and are now known to have complex effects on mood, and well-being.

Social behaviour [ edit ] Humans in all civilizations are social animals and use their language skills and tool making skills to communicate.

These communication skills enable civilizations to grow and allow for the production of art , literature and music , and for the development of technology . All of these are wholly dependent on the human biological specialisms.

The deployment of these skills has allowed the human race to dominate the terrestrial biome [ 12 ] to the detriment of most of the other species.

References [ edit ] ^ Sara Stinson, Barry Bogin, Dennis O'Rourke.

Human Biology: An Evolutionary and Biocultural Perspective . Publisher John Wiley & Sons, 2012.

ISBN 1118108043 . Page 4-5.

^ Kuykendall, Kevin; Elton, Sarah (July 2014).

"The Human Biology of the Past" .

Annals of Human Biology .

41 (4): 283– 286.

doi : 10.3109/03014460.2014.924252 .

ISSN 0301-4460 .

^ "Human Biology - Definition, History and Major" .

Biology Dictionary . 2017-05-26 . Retrieved 2019-03-22 .

^ "BSc Human Biology" . Birmingham University. Archived from the original on 27 January 2022 . Retrieved 27 February 2021 .

^ "SK299 Human biology" . The Open University . Retrieved 27 February 2021 .

^ "The traits that make human beings unique" . BBC . Retrieved 27 February 2020 .

^ "What makes humans special?" . London School of Economics and Political Science. 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 27 February 2021 .

^ "We are humans" . Australian Museum. 2021 . Retrieved 27 February 2021 .

^ Harcourt-Smith, W.H.E. (2010).

"The First Hominins and the Origins of Bipedalism" .

Evo Edu Outreach 3 .

3 (3): 333– 340.

doi : 10.1007/s12052-010-0257-6 .

S2CID 1015247 .

^ "The tricks that help some animals live for centuries" . BBC. 31 March 2017 . Retrieved 28 February 2021 .

^ "Life expectancy for men and women" . WorldData.info. 2018 . Retrieved 28 February 2021 .

^ Vitousek, P. M. (25 July 1997).

"Human Domination of Earth's Ecosystems" .

Science .

277 (5325): 494– 499.

doi : 10.1126/science.277.5325.494 . Retrieved 28 February 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Human Biology Association Biology Dictionary v t e Branches of biology Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology See also History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry v t e Biology Introduction ( Genetics , Evolution ) Outline History Timeline Index Biology Overview Science Life Properties ( Adaptation , Energy processing , Growth , Order , Regulation , Reproduction ( Self-replication ), Response to environment ) Hierarchy of life ( Atom > Molecule > Organelle > Cell > Tissue > Organ > Organ system > Organism > Population > Community > Ecosystem > Biosphere ) Reductionistic Emergent property Mechanistic Scientific method Taxonomic rank Theory Law Peer review Biology journals Common name Chemical basis Atoms Amino acids Carbohydrates Chemical bond Chemical element Lipids Matter Quantum Molecules Monomer Nucleic acids Organic compounds pH Polymer Proteins Water Cells ATP Cell cycle Cell theory Cell signaling Cellular respiration Energy transformation Enzyme Eukaryote Fermentation Metabolism Meiosis Mitosis Photosynthesis Prokaryote Genetics DNA Epigenetics Evolutionary developmental biology Gene expression Gene regulation Genomes Mendelian inheritance Post-transcriptional modification Evolution Adaptation Earliest known life forms Function Genetic drift Gene flow History of life Macroevolution Microevolution Mutation Natural selection Phylogenetics Speciation Taxonomy Diversity Archaea Bacteria Eukaryote Alga Animal Fungus Plant Protist Virus Plant form and function Epidermis (botany) Flower Ground tissue Leaf Phloem Plant stem Root Shoot Vascular plant Vascular tissue Xylem Animal form and function Breathing Circulatory system Endocrine system Digestive system Homeostasis Immune system Internal environment Muscular system Nervous system Reproductive system Respiratory system Ecology Biogeochemical cycle Biological interaction Biomass Biomes Biosphere Climate Climate change Community Conservation Ecosystem Habitat niche Microbiome Population dynamics Resources Research methods Laboratory techniques Genetic engineering Transformation Gel electrophoresis Chromatography Centrifugation Cell culture DNA sequencing DNA microarray Green fluorescent protein vector Enzyme assay Protein purification Western blot Northern blot Southern blot Restriction enzyme Polymerase chain reaction Two-hybrid screening in vivo in vitro in silico Field techniques Belt transect mark and recapture species discovery curve Branches Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology Glossaries Biology Botanical terms Ecological terms Plant morphology terms Biology portal Category Commons WikiProject Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐zxjfk
Cached time: 20250812015415
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.435 seconds
Real time usage: 0.553 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1718/1000000
Revision size: 11093/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 92152/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1838/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 65588/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.288/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6101591/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  453.061      1 -total
 35.49%  160.794      1 Template:Reflist
 27.58%  124.940      4 Template:Navbox
 14.34%   64.951      1 Template:Branches_of_biology
 13.39%   60.670      1 Template:Biology_nav
 12.39%   56.125      8 Template:Cite_web
 11.61%   52.593      1 Template:Short_description
 11.14%   50.474      1 Template:ISBN
 10.64%   48.224      1 Template:Authority_control
  8.62%   39.055      1 Template:Expand_section Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:411951:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015415 and revision id 1292060606. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_biology&oldid=1292060606 " Categories : Human biology Humans Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be expanded from December 2022 All articles to be expanded Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 00:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Human biology 43 languages Add topic

