Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Secured 1.2 Unsecured 1.3 Demand 1.4 Subsidized 1.5 Concessional 2 Target markets Toggle Target markets subsection 2.1 Personal 2.2 Commercial 3 Loan payment 4 Abuses in lending 5 United States taxes Toggle United States taxes subsection 5.1 Income from discharge of indebtedness 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Loan 70 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Latviešu मराठी مصرى Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ଓଡ଼ିଆ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lending of money For other uses, see Loan (disambiguation) .

Loan document issued by the Bank of Petrevene , Bulgaria, dated 1936.

Part of a series on Finance Markets Assets Asset (economics) Bond Asset growth Capital asset Commodity Derivatives Domains Equity Foreign exchange Money Over-the-counter Private equity Real estate Spot Stock Participants Angel investor Bull (stock market speculator) Financial planner Investor institutional Retail Speculator Locations Financial centres Offshore financial centres Conduit and sink OFCs Instruments Bond Cash Collateralised debt obligation Credit default swap Time deposit ( certificate of deposit ) Credit line Deposit Derivative Futures contract Indemnity Insurance Letter of credit Loan Mortgage Option ( call exotic put ) Performance bonds Repurchase agreement Stock Security Syndicated loan Synthetic CDO Corporate General Accounting Audit Capital budgeting Capital structure Corporate finance Credit rating agency Enterprise risk management Enterprise value Risk management Financial statements Transactions Leveraged buyout Mergers and acquisitions Structured finance Venture capital Taxation Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) Corporate tax haven Tax inversion Tax haven Transfer pricing Personal Credit / Debt Employment contract Financial planning Retirement Student loan Public Government spending Final consumption expenditure Operations Redistribution Transfer payment Government revenue Taxation Deficit spending Budget ( balance ) Debt Non-tax revenue Warrant of payment Banking Central bank Deposit account Fractional-reserve Full-reserve Investment banking Loan Money supply Lists of banks Bank regulation Banking license Basel Accords Bank for International Settlements Financial Stability Board Deposit insurance Separation of investment and retail banking Regulation · Financial law International Financial Reporting Standards ISO 31000 Professional certification Fund governance Economic history Private equity and venture capital Recession Stock market bubble Stock market crash Accounting scandals Outline Business and Economics portal Money portal v t e Part of a series on financial services Banking Types of banks Advising Banq Bulge bracket Central Commercial Community development Cooperative Credit union Custodian Depository Development Direct Export credit agency Investment Industrial Merchant Middle market Money center Mutual savings Neobank Offshore Participation Payments Postal savings Private Public Retail Savings Savings and loan Universal Wholesale Bank holding company Lists of banks Accounts · Cards Accounts Christmas club Deposit Interest rate Money-market Savings Time deposit (Bond) Transaction (checking / current) Cards ATM Credit Debit Prepaid Funds transfer Cheque Card Electronic Bill payment Instant payment Mobile Wire RTGS NS Direct debit ACH Giro SWIFT Correspondent account CLS CIPS SPFS BRICS PAY Terms Asset allocation management Automated teller machine Bad debt Bank rate List Bank regulation Bank secrecy Asset growth Capital asset Cash Climate finance Corporate finance Disinvestment Diversification (finance) Eco-investing Economic bubble Economic expansion Enterprise value Enterprise risk management Environmental finance ESG Ethical banking Financial analysis analyst asset economics engineering forecast plan planner services Fractional-reserve banking Full-reserve banking Fundamental analysis Growth investing Hedge (finance) Impact investing Investment advisory Investment management Islamic banking Loan Mathematical finance Mobile banking Money creation Pension fund Private banking Sustainability Sustainable finance Speculation Statistical finance Strategic financial management Stress test (financial) Structured finance Structured product Toxic asset Related topics Asset pricing Bond (finance) Capital structure Corporate finance Cost of capital Equity (finance) Ethical banking Exchange-traded fund Financial law market participants regulation risk system History of banking List of banks Market risk Personal finance Public finance Security (finance) Shares Sustainable Development Goals Systematic risk Systemic risk Time value of money Too big to fail Too connected to fail Watered stock Category Commons Portal v t e In finance , a loan is the tender of money by one party to another with an agreement to pay it back. The recipient, or borrower, incurs a debt and is usually required to pay interest for the use of the money.

The document evidencing the debt (e.g., a promissory note ) will normally specify, among other things, the principal amount of money borrowed, the interest rate the lender is charging, and the date of repayment. A loan entails the reallocation of the subject asset (s) for a period of time, between the lender and the borrower .

The interest provides an incentive for the lender to engage in the loan. In a legal loan, each of these obligations and restrictions is enforced by contract , which can also place the borrower under additional restrictions known as loan covenants . Although this article focuses on monetary loans, in practice, any material object might be lent.

Acting as a provider of loans is one of the main activities of financial institutions such as banks and credit card companies. For other institutions, issuing of debt contracts such as bonds is a typical source of funding.

Types [ edit ] Further information: Paperless loan Secured [ edit ] See also: Loan guarantee A secured loan is a form of debt in which the borrower pledges some asset (i.e., a car, a house) as collateral .

A mortgage loan is a very common type of loan, used by many individuals to purchase residential or commercial property. The lender, usually a financial institution, is given security –  a lien on the title to the property –  until the mortgage is paid off in full. In the case of home loans, if the borrower defaults on the loan, the bank would have the legal right to repossess the house and sell it, to recover sums owing to it.

Loan modification can avoid defaults.

[ 1 ] Similarly, a loan taken out to buy a car may be secured by the car. The duration of the loan is much shorter –  often corresponding to the useful life of the car. There are two types of auto loans, direct and indirect. In a direct auto loan, a bank lends the money directly to a consumer. In an indirect auto loan, a car dealership (or a connected company) acts as an intermediary between the bank or financial institution and the consumer.

Other forms of secured loans include loans against securities – such as shares, mutual funds, bonds, etc. This particular instrument issues customers a line of credit based on the quality of the securities pledged. Gold loans are issued to customers after evaluating the quantity and quality of gold in the items pledged. Corporate entities can also take out secured lending by pledging the company's assets, including the company itself. The interest rates for secured loans are usually lower than those of unsecured loans. Usually, the lending institution employs people (on a roll or on a contract basis) to evaluate the quality of pledged collateral before sanctioning the loan.

Unsecured [ edit ] Unsecured loans are monetary loans that are not secured against the borrower's assets. These may be available from financial institutions under many different guises or marketing packages: Credit cards Personal loans Bank overdrafts Credit facilities or lines of credit Corporate bonds (may be secured or unsecured) Peer-to-peer lending The interest rates applicable to these different forms may vary depending on the lender and the borrower.  These may or may not be regulated by law. In the United Kingdom, when applied to individuals, these may come under the Consumer Credit Act 1974 .

Interest rates on unsecured loans are nearly always higher than for secured loans because an unsecured lender's options for recourse against the borrower in the event of default are severely limited, subjecting the lender to higher risk compared to that encountered for a secured loan. An unsecured lender must sue the borrower, obtain a money judgment for breach of contract, and then pursue execution of the judgment against the borrower's unencumbered assets (that is, the ones not already pledged to secured lenders). In insolvency proceedings, secured lenders traditionally have priority over unsecured lenders when a court divides up the borrower's assets. Thus, a higher interest rate reflects the additional risk that in the event of insolvency, the debt may be uncollectible.

Demand [ edit ] Demand loans are short-term loans [ 2 ] that typically do not have fixed dates for repayment. Instead, demand loans carry a floating interest rate , which varies according to the prime lending rate or other defined contract terms. Demand loans can be "called" for repayment by the lending institution at any time.

[ 3 ] Demand loans may be unsecured or secured.

Subsidized [ edit ] A subsidized loan is a loan on which the interest is reduced by an explicit or hidden subsidy . In the context of college loans in the United States , it refers to a loan on which no interest is accrued while a student remains enrolled in education.

[ 4 ] Concessional [ edit ] A concessional loan, sometimes called a "soft loan", is granted on terms substantially more generous than market loans either through below-market interest rates, by grace periods, or a combination of both.

[ 5 ] Such loans may be made by foreign governments to developing countries or may be offered to employees of lending institutions as an employee benefit (sometimes called a perk ).

Target markets [ edit ] Loans can also be categorized according to whether the debtor is an individual person (consumer) or a business.

Personal [ edit ] See also: Credit (finance) § Consumer credit Common personal loans include mortgage loans , car loans, home equity lines of credit, credit cards , installment loans , and payday loans . The credit score of the borrower is a major component in underwriting and interest rates ( APR ) of these loans. The monthly payments of personal loans can be decreased by selecting longer payment terms, but overall interest paid increases as well.

[ 6 ] A personal loan can be obtained from banks, alternative (non-bank) lenders, online loan providers and private lenders.

Commercial [ edit ] Main article: Business loan Loans to businesses are similar to the above but also include commercial mortgages and corporate bonds and government guaranteed loans Underwriting is not based upon credit score but rather credit rating .

Loan payment [ edit ] The most typical loan payment type is the fully amortizing payment in which each monthly rate has the same value over time.

[ 7 ] The fixed monthly payment P for a loan of L for n months and a monthly interest rate c is: P = L ⋅ ⋅ c ( 1 + c ) n ( 1 + c ) n − − 1 {\displaystyle P=L\cdot {\frac {c\,(1+c)^{n}}{(1+c)^{n}-1}}} For more information, see monthly amortized loan or mortgage payments .

Abuses in lending [ edit ] Predatory lending is one form of abuse in the granting of loans. It usually involves granting a loan in order to put the borrower in a position that one can gain advantage over them; subprime mortgage-lending [ 8 ] and payday-lending [ 9 ] are two examples, where the moneylender is not authorized or regulated , the lender could be considered a loan shark .

Usury is a different form of abuse, where the lender charges excessive interest. In different time periods and cultures, the acceptable interest rate has varied, from no interest at all as in the biblical prescript, [ 10 ] to unlimited interest rates. Credit card companies in some countries have been accused by consumer organizations of lending at usurious interest rates and making money out of frivolous "extra charges".

[ 11 ] Abuses can also take place in the form of the customer defrauding the lender by borrowing without intending to repay the loan.

United States taxes [ edit ] Most of the basic rules governing how loans are handled for tax purposes in the United States are codified by both Congress (the Internal Revenue Code) and the Treasury Department (Treasury Regulations –  another set of rules that interpret the Internal Revenue Code).

[ 12 ] : 111 A loan is not gross income to the borrower.

[ 12 ] : 111 Since the borrower has the obligation to repay the loan, the borrower has no accession to wealth.

[ 12 ] : 111 [ 13 ] The lender may not deduct (from own gross income) the amount of the loan.

[ 12 ] : 111 The rationale here is that one asset (the cash) has been converted into a different asset (a promise of repayment).

[ 12 ] : 111 Deductions are not typically available when an outlay serves to create a new or different asset.

[ 12 ] : 111 The amount paid to satisfy the loan obligation is not deductible (from own gross income) by the borrower.

[ 12 ] : 111 Repayment of the loan is not gross income to the lender.

[ 12 ] : 111 In effect, the promise of repayment is converted back to cash, with no accession to wealth by the lender.

[ 12 ] : 111 Interest paid to the lender is included in the lender's gross income.

[ 12 ] : 111 [ 14 ] Interest paid represents compensation for the use of the lender's money or property and thus represents profit or an accession to wealth to the lender.

[ 12 ] : 111 Interest income can be attributed to lenders even if the lender does not charge a minimum amount of interest.

[ 12 ] : 112 Interest paid to the lender may be deductible by the borrower.

[ 12 ] : 111 In general, interest paid in connection with the borrower's business activity is deductible, while interest paid on personal loans are not deductible.

[ 12 ] : 111 The major exception here is interest paid on a home mortgage.

[ 12 ] : 111 Income from discharge of indebtedness [ edit ] Although a loan does not start out as income to the borrower, it becomes income to the borrower if the borrower is discharged of indebtedness.

[ 12 ] : 111 [ 15 ] Thus, if a debt is discharged, then the borrower essentially has received income equal to the amount of the indebtedness. The Internal Revenue Code lists "Income from Discharge of Indebtedness" in Section 61(a)(12) as a source of gross income .

Example: X owes Y $50,000. If Y discharges the indebtedness, then X no longer owes Y $50,000. For purposes of calculating income, this is treated the same way as if Y gave X $50,000.

For a more detailed description of the "discharge of indebtedness", look at Section 108 ( Cancellation-of-debt income ) of the Internal Revenue Code .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] See also [ edit ] 0% finance Annual percentage rate (a.k.a.

Effective annual rate ) Auto loan Bank , Fractional-reserve banking , Building society Debt , Consumer debt , Debt consolidation , Government debt Default (finance) Finance , Personal finance , Settlement (finance) Interest-only loan , Negative amortization , PIK loan Legal financing Leveraged loan Loan agreement Loan guarantee Loan sale Loans and interest in Judaism Margin (finance) Pay it forward Payday loan Refund Anticipation Loan Sponsored repayment Smart contract Student loan Syndicated loan Title loan US specific: FAFSA Federal student loan consolidation Federal Perkins Loan George D. Sax and the Exchange National Bank of Chicago - Innovation of instant loans Stafford loan Student loan default References [ edit ] ^ Glancy, David; Kurtzman, Robert J.; Loewenstein, Lara (2022).

"Loan Modifications and the Commercial Real Estate Market" .

Finance and Economics Discussion Series ( 2022– 050): 1– 71.

doi : 10.17016/FEDS.2022.050 .

ISSN 1936-2854 .

^ Signoriello, Vincent J. (1991).

Commercial Loan Practices and Operations . Bankers.

ISBN 978-1-55520-134-0 .

^ CCH Incorporated (April 2008).

Federal Estate & Gift Taxes: Code & Regulations (Including Related Income Tax Provisions), As of March 2008 . CCH. pp. 631–.

ISBN 978-0-8080-1853-7 .

Archived from the original on 2021-04-14 . Retrieved 2020-11-18 .

^ Subsidized Loan - Definition and Overview Archived 2012-03-04 at the Wayback Machine at About.com . Retrieved 2011-12-21.

^ Concessional Loans, Glossary of Statistical Terms Archived 2013-10-31 at the Wayback Machine , oecd.org , Retrieved on 5/5/2013 ^ "Average new-car loan a record 65 months in fourth quarter" .

Reuters . August 6, 2017.

Archived from the original on 2017-08-06 . Retrieved 2017-08-06 .

^ Guttentag, Jack (October 6, 2007).

"The Math Behind Your Home Loan" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2012 . Retrieved May 11, 2010 .

^ "Predators try to steal home" .

CNN Money . 18 Apr 2000.

Archived from the original on 8 March 2018 . Retrieved 7 Mar 2018 .

^ Horsley, Scott; Arnold, Chris (2 Jun 2016).

"New Rules To Ban Payday Lending 'Debt Traps' " .

National Public Radio .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2018 . Retrieved 7 Mar 2018 .

^ Exodus 22:25 ^ "Credit cardholders pay Rs 6,000 cr 'extra' " .

The Financial Express (India) . Chennai, India. 3 May 2007. Archived from the original on January 20, 2019.

Alt URL Archived 2019-01-20 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Samuel A. Donaldson, Federal Income Taxation of Individuals: Cases, Problems and Materials, 2nd Ed. (2007).

^ See Commissioner v. Glenshaw Glass Co.

, 348 U.S. 426 (1955) (giving the three-prong standard for what is "income" for tax purposes: (1) accession to wealth, (2) clearly realized, (3) over which the taxpayer has complete dominion).

^ 26 U.S.C. 61(a)(4)(2007).

^ 26 U.S.C. 61(a)(12)(2007).

^ 26 U.S.C. 108(2007).

^ EUGENE A. LUDWIG AND PAUL A. VOLCKER, 16 November 2012 Banks Need Long-Term Rainy Day Funds Archived 2017-07-10 at the Wayback Machine v t e Debt Instruments Bonds Corporate Debenture Government Municipal Loans Business loan Consumer lending Loan shark Interest-only Negative amortization Payday loan Predatory lending Usury Vendor finance Management Bankruptcy Consolidation Management plan Relief ( history ) Restructuring Debt snowball method Debtor-in-possession (DIP) financing Negative equity Financial literacy Loan guarantee Collection · Evasion Bad debt Charge-off Compliance Debt bondage Debt crisis List Debtors' prison Default Sovereign default Distraint Garnishment Insolvency Interest Interest expense Interest rate Promissory note Phantom debt Strategic default Tax refund interception Markets Consumer Corporate List Corporate debt bubble Diplomacy Government debt List Government budget balance Unfunded mandate Medical Municipal Venture Buyer Deposit account Fixed income Money market Securitization Economics Consumer leverage ratio Debt-to-GDP ratio Debt-to-income ratio List of countries by household debt Debt monetization Global debt External List Internal Odious debt Leverage Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Latvia Israel Other NARA 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Loan&oldid=1287616254 " Categories : Loans Banking terms Notary Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 April 2025, at 11:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Loan 70 languages Add topic

