Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Lexicology 2 Borders 3 History 4 Countries, regions, and cities 5 References Toggle the table of contents Arabian plate 48 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Arabian Plate ) Minor tectonic plate Arabian plate Type Minor Approximate area 5,000,000 km 2 [ 1 ] Movement 1 North Speed 1 15–20 mm/year Features Arabian Peninsula , Gulf of Aden , Indian Ocean , Arabian/Persian Gulf , Red Sea 1 Relative to the African plate The Arabian plate is a minor tectonic plate in the Northern and Eastern Hemispheres .

It is one of the three continental plates (along with the African and Indian plates) that have been moving northward in geological history and colliding with the Eurasian plate . This collision is resulting in a mingling of plate pieces and mountain ranges extending in the west from the Pyrenees , crossing Southern Europe to Iranian plateau , forming the Alborz and the Zagros Mountains , to the Himalayas and ranges of Southeast Asia .

[ 2 ] Arabian plate showing general tectonic and structural features Lexicology [ edit ] The Arabian plate is a designation of the region, and it is also sometimes referred to as the Arab plate .

[ 3 ] Borders [ edit ] Eurasian, Anatolian, and Arabian (purple coloring) plates The Arabian plate consists mostly of the Arabian Peninsula ; it extends westward to the Sinai Peninsula and the Red Sea and northward to the Levant . The plate borders are: East, with the Indo-Australian plate , at the Owen fracture zone South, with the African plate to the west and the Somali plate and the Indo-Australian plate to the east West, a left lateral fault boundary with the African plate called the Dead Sea Transform (DST), and a divergent boundary with the African plate called the Red Sea Rift which runs the length of the Red Sea; North, convergent boundary with the Anatolian plate and Eurasian plate , [ 4 ] including the East Anatolian Fault , Zagros fold and thrust belt , and Makran Trench .

History [ edit ] The Arabian plate was part of the African plate during most of the Phanerozoic Eon ( Paleozoic – Cenozoic ), until the Oligocene Epoch of the Cenozoic Era. The Red Sea rifting began in the Eocene , and the separation of Africa and Arabia occurred approximately 25 million years ago in the Oligocene, and since then the Arabian plate has been moving toward the Eurasian plate.

[ 5 ] The opening of the Red Sea rift led to volcanic activity. There are volcanic fields called the Older Harrats, such as Harrat Khaybar and Harrat Rahat , cover parts of the western Arabian plate. Some activity still continues especially around Medina , [ 6 ] and there are regular eruptions within the Red Sea.

[ 7 ] The collision between the Arabian plate and Eurasia is pushing up the Zagros Mountains of Iran. Because the Arabian plate and Eurasian plate collide, some cities such as those in southeastern Turkey (which is on the Arabian plate) may undergo earthquakes, tsunamis, and volcanoes.

Countries, regions, and cities [ edit ] Countries within the plate include Bahrain , Djibouti , Iraq , Jordan , Kuwait , Oman , Qatar , Saudi Arabia , Syria , United Arab Emirates and Yemen . Regions include the Anti-Lebanon Mountains ( Lebanon ), parts of Awdal ( Somalia / Somaliland ), the Khuzestan province ( Iran ), the Southeastern Anatolia region ( Turkey ), and the Southern Denkalya subregion ( Eritrea ).

The largest cities in the Arabian plate, by population, are (not in order): Amman , Baghdad , Riyadh , Dubai , Jeddah , Doha , Aintab , and Halab .

References [ edit ] ^ "Sizes of Tectonic or Lithospheric Plates" . Geology.about.com. 2014-03-05. Archived from the original on 2016-06-05 . Retrieved 2016-01-23 .

^ Image Science and Analysis Laboratory, NASA-Johnson Space Center.

"Tectonics of the Arabian Plate" .

The Gateway to Astronaut Photography of Earth . NASA. Archived from the original on 6 July 2007 . Retrieved 21 July 2007 .

^ Unal, Bunyamin, Mucahit Eren, and M. Gurhan Yalcin. "Investigation of leakage at Ataturk dam and hydroelectric power plant by means of hydrometric measurements." Engineering Geology 93.1 (2007): 45-63.

^ arabia2 (2014-09-15).

"Plate Boundaries of the Arabian Plate – GEOS 309: Tectonics" . Geos309.community.uaf.edu. Archived from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2016-01-23 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Arabian Plate – African/Arabian Tectonic Plates" . Africa-arabia-plate.weebly.com . Retrieved 2016-01-23 .

^ "Volcanoes of Saudi Arabia" . 2016-03-07 . Retrieved 2016-03-24 .

^ Wenbin Xu; et al. (2015-05-26).

"Birth of two volcanic islands in the southern Red Sea" .

Nature Communications .

6 . Nature Communications 6, Article number: 7104: 7104.

Bibcode : 2015NatCo...6.7104X .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms8104 .

PMC 4455101 .

PMID 26010945 .

S2CID 15570438 .

v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arabian_plate&oldid=1302258814 " Categories : Arabian Peninsula Cenozoic geology of Africa Cenozoic geology of Asia Geology of Africa Geology of Asia Geology of the Indian Ocean Natural history of West Asia Tectonic plates Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 09:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arabian plate 48 languages Add topic

