Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Geography 3 Orientation 4 Scale and accuracy 5 Projection 6 Symbols 7 Design 8 Types Toggle Types subsection 8.1 General 8.2 Electronic 8.3 Climatic 8.4 Extraterrestrial 8.5 Topological 8.6 Extremely large maps 8.6.1 The Great Polish Map of Scotland 8.6.2 Challenger Relief Map of British Columbia 8.6.3 Relief map of Guatemala 8.7 List 9 Legal regulation 10 See also Toggle See also subsection 10.1 General 10.2 Map designing and types 10.3 Map history 10.4 Related topics 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Citations 11.2 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Map 133 languages Acèh Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Armãneashti অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Azərbaycanca বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Iñupiatun IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 Winaray Wolof 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Symbolic depiction of spatial relationships For other uses, see Map (disambiguation) , Maps (disambiguation) , and Mapping .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Physical map of Earth Political map of Earth A map is a symbolic depiction of interrelationships, commonly spatial, between things within a space . A map may be annotated with text and graphics. Like any graphic, a map may be fixed to paper or other durable media, or may be displayed on a transitory medium such as a computer screen. Some maps change interactively. Although maps are commonly used to depict geographic elements , they may represent any space, real or fictional. The subject being mapped may be two-dimensional such as Earth's surface, three-dimensional such as Earth's interior, or from an abstract space of any dimension.

Maps of geographic territory have a very long tradition and have existed from ancient times. The word "map" comes from the medieval Latin : Mappa mundi , wherein mappa meant 'napkin' or 'cloth' and mundi 'of the world'. Thus, "map" became a shortened term referring to a flat representation of Earth's surface.

History [ edit ] Main article: History of cartography Tabula Rogeriana , one of the most advanced early world maps , by Muhammad al-Idrisi , 1154 (north is down) Possibly the oldest surviving map was engraved on this mammoth tusk, dated to 25,000 BC, found in Pavlov in the Czech Republic .

[ 1 ] Maps have been one of the most important human inventions for millennia, allowing humans to explain and navigate their way through the world. The earliest surviving maps include cave paintings and etchings on tusk and stone. Later came extensive maps produced in ancient Babylon , Greece and Rome , China , and India . In their simplest forms, maps are two-dimensional constructs. Since the Classical Greek period , however, maps also have been projected onto globes . The Mercator Projection , developed by Flemish geographer Gerardus Mercator , was widely used as the standard for two-dimensional world maps until the late 20th century, when more accurate projections were more widely used. Mercator also was the first to use and popularize the concept of the atlas : a collection of maps.

Geography [ edit ] Celestial map by the cartographer Frederik de Wit , 17th century.

Cartography or map-making is the study and practice of crafting representations of the Earth upon a flat surface [ 2 ] (see History of cartography ), and one who makes maps is called a cartographer or mapmaker.

[ 2 ] Road maps are perhaps the most widely used maps today. They are a subset of navigational maps, which also include aeronautical and nautical charts , railroad network maps, and hiking and bicycling maps. In terms of quantity, the largest number of drawn map sheets is probably made up by local surveys, carried out by municipalities , utilities, tax assessors, emergency services providers, and other local agencies. Many national surveying projects have been carried out by the military, such as the British Ordnance Survey : a civilian government agency, internationally renowned for its comprehensively detailed work.

The location information showed by maps may include contour lines , indicating constant values of elevation , temperature, rainfall, etc.

[ example needed ] Orientation [ edit ] The Hereford Mappa Mundi , Hereford Cathedral , England, c.

1300 , a classic "T-O" map with Jerusalem at the center, east toward the top, Europe the bottom left and Africa on the right The orientation of a map is the geographical direction toward the top of the map. In the Middle Ages many Eurasian maps, including the T and O maps , were drawn with east at the top (meaning that the direction "up" on the map is eastward). The word " orient " is derived from Latin oriens , meaning east. The modern cartographic convention is to put north at the top of a map. This convention is only a few hundred years old.

[ 3 ] As no direction is inherently "up" on a spheroidal planet, a variety of orientations have been used on maps both historically and in the present day. Different factors may influence the preferred orientation of a map, depending both on its expected use and cultural factors affecting the perception of each direction. For instance, north and west had historically not been placed at the top of maps made in the Northern Hemisphere as these were the directions where the sun disappeared.

[ 3 ] Many maps were oriented to place a particularly significant or holy site at the top. Early Islamic maps often placed south at the top because this was the direction of Mecca relative to the map-makers. Similarly, European Christian maps like the T-O map placed east at the top as this was the direction of the Garden of Eden . Early Chinese maps placed north at the top (despite most Chinese compasses pointing south) due to the location of the imperial capital.

[ 3 ] Map of Utrecht , Netherlands (1695).

Other examples of maps with non-north orientations include: Portolan charts are oriented to the shores they describe.

Maps of cities bordering a sea are often conventionally oriented with the sea at the top.

[ citation needed ] Route and channel maps have traditionally been oriented to the road or waterway they describe.

[ citation needed ] Polar maps of the Arctic or Antarctic regions are conventionally centered on the pole; the direction North would be toward or away from the center of the map, respectively. Typical maps of the Arctic have 0° meridian toward the bottom of the page; maps of the Antarctic have the 0° meridian toward the top of the page.

South-up maps invert the North is up convention by having south at the top. Ancient Africans including in Ancient Egypt used this orientation, as some maps in Brazil do today.

[ 4 ] Buckminster Fuller 's Dymaxion maps are based on a projection of the Earth's sphere onto an icosahedron . The resulting triangular pieces may be arranged in any order or orientation.

Orienteering maps are oriented to magnetic north .

Scale and accuracy [ edit ] Main article: Scale (map) Cartogram of the EU – distorted to show population distributions as of 2008, while the rough shape of the continent is still discernible.

Many maps are drawn to a scale expressed as a ratio , such as 1:10,000, which means that 1 unit of measurement on the map corresponds to 10,000 of that same unit on the ground. The scale statement can be accurate when the region mapped is small enough for the curvature of the Earth to be neglected, such as a city map . Mapping larger regions, where the curvature cannot be ignored, requires projections to map from the curved surface of the Earth to the plane. The impossibility of flattening the sphere to the plane without distortion means that the map cannot have a constant scale. Rather, on most projections, the best that can be attained is an accurate scale along one or two paths on the projection. Because scale differs everywhere, it can only be measured meaningfully as point scale per location. Most maps strive to keep point scale variation within narrow bounds. Although the scale statement is nominal it is usually accurate enough for most purposes unless the map covers a large fraction of the Earth. At the scope of a world map, scale as a single number is practically meaningless throughout most of the map. Instead, it usually refers to the scale along the equator.

Some maps, called cartograms , have the scale deliberately distorted to reflect information other than land area or distance.

Another example of distorted scale is the famous London Underground map . The geographic structure is respected but the tube lines (and the River Thames ) are smoothed to clarify the relationships between stations. Near the center of the map, stations are spaced out more than near the edges of the map.

Further inaccuracies may be deliberate. For example, cartographers may simply omit military installations or remove features solely to enhance the clarity of the map. For example, a road map may not show railroads, smaller waterways, or other prominent non-road objects, and even if it does, it may show them less clearly (e.g. dashed or dotted lines/outlines) than the main roads. Known as decluttering, the practice makes the subject matter that the user is interested in easier to read, usually without sacrificing overall accuracy.

Software-based maps often allow the user to toggle decluttering between on, off and auto as needed. In auto the degree of decluttering is adjusted as the user changes the scale being displayed.

[ citation needed ] Projection [ edit ] Main article: Map projection Geographic maps use a projection to translate the three-dimensional real surface of the geoid to a two-dimensional picture. Projection always distorts the surface. There are many ways to apportion the distortion, and so there are many map projections. Which projection to use depends on the purpose of the map.

[ 5 ] Symbols [ edit ] Main article: Map symbol The various features shown on a map are represented by conventional signs or symbols. For example, colors can be used to indicate a classification of roads. Those signs are usually explained in a map legend on the margin of the map, or on a separately published characteristic sheet.

[ 6 ] Some cartographers prefer to make the map cover practically the entire screen or sheet of paper, leaving no room "outside" the map for information about the map as a whole. These cartographers typically place such information in an otherwise "blank" region "inside" the map— cartouche , map legend, title, compass rose , bar scale , etc.
In particular, some maps contain smaller maps inset into otherwise blank areas of the map: for example: a map at a much smaller scale showing the whole globe and the position of the main map on that globe, or showing "regions of interest" (such as cities) at a larger scale to show details that would not otherwise fit, or showing places that do not fit on the main map, such as Alaska and Hawaii on maps of the United States, or the Shetland and Orkney Islands on maps of Britain.

Design [ edit ] Main article: Cartographic design The design and production of maps is a craft that has developed over thousands of years, from clay tablets to geographic information systems . As a form of design , particularly closely related to graphic design , map making incorporates scientific knowledge about how maps are used, integrated with principles of artistic expression, to create an aesthetically attractive product, carries an aura of authority, and functionally serves a particular purpose for an intended audience.

Designing a map involves bringing together a number of elements and making a large number of decisions. The elements of design fall into several broad topics, each of which has its own theory, its own research agenda, and its own best practices. That said, there are synergistic effects between these elements, meaning that the overall design process is not just working on each element one at a time, but an iterative feedback process of adjusting each to achieve the desired gestalt .

Map projections : The foundation of the map is the plane on which it rests (whether paper or screen), but projections are required to flatten the surface of the Earth. All projections distort this surface, but the cartographer can be strategic about how and where distortion occurs.

[ 7 ] Generalization : All maps must be drawn at a smaller scale than reality, requiring that the information included on a map be a very small sample of the wealth of information about a place. Generalization is the process of adjusting the level of detail in geographic information to be appropriate for the scale and purpose of a map, through procedures such as selection, simplification, and classification.

Symbology : Any map visually represents the location and properties of geographic features using map symbols, graphical depictions composed of several visual variables , such as size, shape, color, and pattern.

Composition: As all of the symbols are brought together, their interactions have major effects on map reading, such as grouping and Visual hierarchy .

Typography or Labeling : Text serves a number of purposes on the map, especially aiding the recognition of features, but labels must be designed and positioned well to be effective.

[ 8 ] Layout : The map image must be placed on the page (whether paper, web, or other media), along with related elements, such as the title, legend, additional maps, text, images, and so on. Each of these elements has its own design considerations, as does their integration, which largely follows the principles of Graphic design .

Map type-specific design: Different kinds of maps, especially thematic maps , have their own design needs and best practices.

Types [ edit ] See also: Category:Map types A four-colored map of the states of the United States (ignoring lakes and oceans).

Bathymetry of the ocean floor showing the continental shelves and oceanic plateaus (red), the mid-ocean ridges (yellow-green) and the abyssal plains (blue to purple).

Geological map of the Moon.

General [ edit ] General-purpose maps provide many types of information on one map. Most atlas maps, wall maps, and road maps fall into this category. The following are some features that might be shown on general-purpose maps: bodies of water, roads, railway lines, parks, elevations, towns and cities, political boundaries, latitude and longitude, national and provincial parks. These maps give a broad understanding of the location and features of an area. The reader may gain an understanding of the type of landscape, the location of urban places, and the location of major transportation routes all at once.

Maps of the world or large areas are often either "political" or "physical". The most important purpose of the political map is to show territorial borders and administrative regions ; the purpose of the physical map is to show features of geography such as mountains, soil type, or land use including infrastructures such as roads, railroads, and buildings.

Topographic maps show elevations and relief with contour lines or shading.

Geological maps show not only the physical surface, but characteristics of the underlying rock, fault lines, and subsurface structures.

Electronic [ edit ] Further information: Web page , PDF § Optional Content Groups (layers) , MapQuest , Google Maps , Google Earth , OpenStreetMap , and Yahoo! Maps A USGS digital raster graphic .

Relief map of the Sierra Nevada (Spain) .

A world map in PDF format.

From the last quarter of the 20th century, the indispensable tool of the cartographer has been the computer. Much of cartography, especially at the data-gathering survey level, has been subsumed by geographic information systems (GIS). The functionality of maps has been greatly advanced by technology simplifying the superimposition of spatially located variables onto existing geographic maps. Having local information such as rainfall level, distribution of wildlife, or demographic data integrated within the map allows more efficient analysis and better decision making. In the pre-electronic age such superimposition of data led Dr. John Snow to identify the location of an outbreak of cholera . Today, it is used by agencies around the world, as diverse as wildlife conservationists and militaries.

Even when GIS is not involved, most cartographers now use a variety of computer graphics programs to generate new maps.

Interactive, computerized maps are commercially available, allowing users to zoom in or zoom out (respectively meaning to increase or decrease the scale), sometimes by replacing one map with another of different scale, centered where possible on the same point. In-car global navigation satellite systems are computerized maps with route planning and advice facilities that monitor the user's position with the help of satellites. From the computer scientist's point of view, zooming in entails one or more of: replacing the map by a more detailed one enlarging the same map without enlarging the pixels , hence showing more detail by removing less information compared to the less detailed version enlarging the same map with the pixels enlarged (replaced by rectangles of pixels); no additional detail is shown, but, depending on the user's vision, possibly more detail can be seen. If a computer display does not show adjacent pixels really separately, but overlapping instead (this does not apply for an LCD , but may apply for a cathode-ray tube ), then replacing a pixel by a rectangle of pixels does show more detail. A variation of this method is interpolation .

For example: Typically (2) applies to a Portable Document Format (PDF) file or other format based on vector graphics . The increase in detail is limited to the information contained in the file: enlargement of a curve may eventually result in a series of standard geometric figures such as straight lines, arcs of circles, or splines .

(2) may apply to text and (3) to the outline of a map feature such as a forest or building.

(1) may apply to the text as needed (displaying labels for more features), while (2) applies to the rest of the image. Text is not necessarily enlarged when zooming in. Similarly, a road represented by a double line may or may not become wider when one zooms in.

The map may also have layers that are partly raster graphics and partly vector graphics . For a single raster graphics image (2) applies until the pixels in the image file correspond to the pixels of the display, thereafter (3) applies.

Climatic [ edit ] Mean Annual Temperature map of Ohio from Geography of Ohio 1923.

The maps that reflect the territorial distribution of climatic conditions based on the results of long-term observations are called climatic maps .

[ 9 ] These maps can be compiled both for individual climatic features (temperature, precipitation, humidity) and for combinations of them at the earth's surface and in the upper layers of the atmosphere. Climatic maps show climatic features across a large region and permit values of climatic features to be compared in different parts of the region. When generating the map, spatial interpolation can be used to synthesize values where there are no measurements, under the assumption that conditions change smoothly.

Climatic maps generally apply to individual months and the year as a whole, sometimes to the four seasons, to the growing period, and so forth. On maps compiled from the observations of ground meteorological stations, atmospheric pressure is converted to sea level. Air temperature maps are compiled both from the actual values observed on the surface of the Earth and from values converted to sea level. The pressure field in the free atmosphere is represented either by maps of the distribution of pressure at different standard altitudes—for example, at every kilometer above sea level—or by maps of baric topography on which altitudes (more precisely geopotentials) of the main isobaric surfaces (for example, 900, 800, and 700 millibars) counted off from sea level are plotted. The temperature, humidity, and wind on aero climatic maps may apply either to standard altitudes or to the main isobaric surfaces.

Isolines are drawn on maps of such climatic features as the long-term mean values (of atmospheric pressure, temperature, humidity, total precipitation, and so forth) to connect points with equal values of the feature in question—for example, isobars for pressure, isotherms for temperature, and isohyets for precipitation. Isoamplitudes are drawn on maps of amplitudes (for example, annual amplitudes of air temperature—that is, the differences between the mean temperatures of the warmest and coldest month). Isanomals are drawn on maps of anomalies (for example, deviations of the mean temperature of each place from the mean temperature of the entire latitudinal zone). Isolines of frequency are drawn on maps showing the frequency of a particular phenomenon (for example, the annual number of days with a thunderstorm or snow cover). Isochrones are drawn on maps showing the dates of onset of a given phenomenon (for example, the first frost and appearance or disappearance of the snow cover) or the date of a particular value of a meteorological element in the course of a year (for example, passing of the mean daily air temperature through zero). Isolines of the mean numerical value of wind velocity or isotachs are drawn on wind maps (charts); the wind resultants and directions of prevailing winds are indicated by arrows of different lengths or arrows with different plumes; lines of flow are often drawn. Maps of the zonal and meridional components of wind are frequently compiled for the free atmosphere. Atmospheric pressure and wind are usually combined on climatic maps. Wind roses, curves showing the distribution of other meteorological elements, diagrams of the annual course of elements at individual stations, and the like are also plotted on climatic maps.

Maps of climatic regionalization, that is, division of the earth's surface into climatic zones and regions according to some classification of climates, are a special kind of climatic map.

Climatic maps are often incorporated into climatic atlases of varying geographic ranges (globe, hemispheres, continents, countries, oceans) or included in comprehensive atlases. Besides general climatic maps, applied climatic maps and atlases have great practical value. Aero climatic maps, aero climatic atlases, and agro climatic maps are the most numerous.

Extraterrestrial [ edit ] Maps exist of the Solar System , and other cosmological features such as star maps . In addition maps of other bodies such as the Moon and other planets are technically not geo graphical maps.

Floor maps are also spatial but not necessarily geospatial.

Topological [ edit ] Main article: Topological map In a topological map , like this one showing inventory locations, the distances between locations are not important. Only the layout and connectivity between them matters.

Diagrams such as schematic diagrams and Gantt charts and tree maps display logical relationships between items, rather than geographic relationships.

Topological in nature, only the connectivity is significant. The London Underground map and similar subway maps around the world are a common example of these maps.

Extremely large maps [ edit ] This section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a particular audience .

Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Great Polish Map of Scotland [ edit ] The Great Polish Map of Scotland at Barony Castle, Scotland.

Polish general Stanisław Maczek had once been shown an impressive outdoor map of land and water in the Netherlands demonstrating the working of the waterways (which had been an obstacle to the Polish forces progress in 1944). This had inspired Maczek and his companions to create Great Polish Map of Scotland as a 70-ton permanent three-dimensional reminder of Scotland's hospitality to his compatriots. In 1974, the coastline and relief of Scotland were laid out by Kazimierz Trafas, a Polish student geographer-planner, based on existing Bartholomew Half-Inch map sheets. Engineering infrastructure was put in place to surround it with a sea of water and at the General's request some of the main rivers were even arranged to flow from headwaters pumped into the mountains. The map was finished in 1979, but had to be restored between 2013 and 2017.

[ 10 ] Challenger Relief Map of British Columbia [ edit ] The Challenger Relief Map of British Columbia is a hand-built topographic map of the province, 80 feet by 76 feet. Built by George Challenger and his family from 1947 to 1954, it features all of B.C.'s mountains, lakes, rivers and valleys in exact-scaled topographical detail. Residing in the British Columbia Pavilion at the Pacific National Exhibition (PNE) in Vancouver from 1954 to 1997 it was viewed by millions of visitors. The Guinness Book of Records cites the Challenger Map as the largest of its kind in the world. The map in its entirety occupies 6,080 square feet (1,850 square metres) of space. It was disassembled in 1997; there is a project to restore it in a new location.

[ 11 ] Relief map of Guatemala [ edit ] Mapa en Relieve de Guatemala.

The Relief map of Guatemala was made by Francisco Vela in 1905 and still exists. This map (horizontal scale 1:10,000; vertical scale 1:2,000) measures 1,800 m 2 , and was created to educate children in the scape of their country.

[ 12 ] List [ edit ] This section is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this section , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( July 2025 ) Aeronautical chart Atlas Cadastral map Climatic map Geological map Historical map Linguistic map Nautical map Physical map Political map Relief map Resource map Road map Star map Street map Thematic map Topographic map Train track map Transit map Weather map World map Legal regulation [ edit ] Some countries required that all published maps represent their national claims regarding border disputes . For example: Within Russia, Google Maps shows Crimea as part of Russia.

[ 13 ] Both the Republic of India and the People's Republic of China require that all maps show areas subject to the Sino-Indian border dispute in their own favor.

[ 14 ] In 2010, the People's Republic of China began requiring that all online maps served from within China be hosted there, making them subject to Chinese laws .

[ 15 ] In 2017, Turkey banned the terms " Kurdistan " and "Kurdish regions". In 2018, the government had a user-generated map of Kurdistan, which it deemed "terrorist propaganda", removed from Google Maps.

[ 16 ] In Pakistan, the Surveying and Mapping (Amendment) Act, 2020 made printing, displaying, or using any unofficial or "incorrect" map of Pakistan a crime punishable by 5 years in jail and a fine of 5 million rupees . It asserts that India is illegally occupying some Pakistani territory along the northern India–Pakistan border .

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] General [ edit ] Counter-mapping Map–territory relation Censorship of maps List of online map services Map collection Map designing and types [ edit ] Automatic label placement City map Compass rose Contour map Estate map Fantasy map Floor plan Geological map Hypsometric tints Map design Orthophotomap —A map created from orthophotography Pictorial maps Plat Road atlas Strip map Transit map Page layout (cartography) Map history [ edit ] Early world maps History of cartography List of cartographers Related topics [ edit ] Aerial landscape art Digital geological mapping Economic geography Geographic coordinate system Index map Global Map List of online map services Map database management References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Wolodtschenko, Alexander; Forner, Thomas (Spring 2007).

"Prehistoric and Early Historic Maps in Europe: Conception of Cd-Atlas" (PDF) .

E-perimetron .

2 (2): 114– 116.

ISSN 1790-3769 . Retrieved 24 January 2015 .

^ a b "Map" .

education.nationalgeographic.org . Retrieved 10 May 2024 .

^ a b c Williams, Caroline (15 June 2016).

"Maps have 'north' at the top, but it could've been different" .

BBC . Retrieved 20 April 2025 .

^ "The orientation of the world in the African thought" . Archived from the original on 1 July 2019 . Retrieved 16 January 2019 .

^ "Commonly Used Map Projections" . Retrieved 8 August 2022 .

^ Ordnance Survey, Explorer Map Symbols Archived 3 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine ; Swisstopo, Conventional Signs Archived 28 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine ; United States Geological Survey, Topographic Map Symbols Archived 1 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Albrecht, Jochen.

"Maps projections" . Retrieved 13 August 2013 .

^ Jill Saligoe-Simmel, "Using Text on Maps: Typography in Cartography" ^ Evert, Klaus-Jürgen; Ballard (deceased), Edward B.; Elsworth, David J.; Oquiñena, Icíar, eds. (2010), "833 climatic map [n]" , Encyclopedic Dictionary of Landscape and Urban Planning , Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, p. 136, doi : 10.1007/978-3-540-76435-9_1966 , ISBN 978-3-540-76455-7 , retrieved 25 January 2023 ^ Mapa Scotland.

Story of the Map .

^ The Challenger Relief Map of British Columbia .

^ Petermanns Geographische Mitteilungen , annual 72, 1926, pp. 212–214.

^ Chappell, Bill (12 April 2014).

"Google Maps Displays Crimean Border Differently In Russia, U.S." NPR.org . Retrieved 6 September 2018 .

^ Wagstaff, Jeremy (23 March 2012).

"Google charts a careful course through Asia's maps" .

Reuters . Retrieved 6 September 2018 .

^ Guanqun, Wang (19 May 2010).

"China issues new rules on Internet map publishing" .

Xinhua News Agency . Archived from the original on 27 May 2016 . Retrieved 27 July 2016 .

^ After Turkey Complains, Google Removes Offending ‘Kurdistan’ Map ^ Use of Pakistan’s unofficial map a crime punishable by jail term, fine Bibliography [ edit ] David Buisseret, ed., Monarchs, Ministers and Maps: The Emergence of Cartography as a Tool of Government in Early Modern Europe.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992, ISBN 0-226-07987-2 Denis E. Cosgrove (ed.) Mappings . Reaktion Books, 1999 ISBN 1-86189-021-4 Freeman, Herbert, Automated Cartographic Text Placement.

White paper.

Ahn, J. and Freeman, H., "A program for automatic name placement," Proc. AUTO-CARTO 6, Ottawa, 1983. 444–455.

Freeman, H., "Computer Name Placement," ch. 29, in Geographical Information Systems, 1, D.J. Maguire, M.F. Goodchild, and D.W. Rhind, John Wiley, New York, 1991, 449–460.

Mark Monmonier, How to Lie with Maps , ISBN 0-226-53421-9 O'Connor, J.J. and E.F. Robertson, The History of Cartography . Scotland : St. Andrews University, 2002.

External links [ edit ] International Cartographic Association (ICA) , the world body for mapping and GIScience professionals Geography and Maps, an Illustrated Guide , by the staff of the U.S.

Library of Congress .

The History of Cartography Project at the University of Wisconsin, a comprehensive research project in the history of maps and mapping v t e Atlas Cartography Geography Geovisualization Map Map projection Topography Early world maps History of cartography List of cartographers Animated mapping Cartogram Choropleth map Geological map Linguistic map Nautical chart Pictorial map Thematic map Topographic map Weather map Category:Maps Portal:Atlas v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering v t e Orienteering History of orienteering List of orienteering events Sport disciplines IOF - governed Foot orienteering Mountain bike orienteering Ski orienteering Trail orienteering IARU - governed Amateur radio direction finding Fox Oring Radio Orienteering in a Compact Area Other sports Canoe orienteering Car orienteering Mountain marathon Mounted orienteering Rogaining Related Adventure racing Alleycat race Fell running Relay race Transmitter hunting Equipment Event Control point Course Map Personal Compass hand protractor thumb Eye protectors Gaiters Headlamp Exceptions Backpacking Satellite navigation Whistle Software Proprietary OCAD Condes SportSoftware Open-source OpenOrienteering Mapper Purple Pen MeOS Video games Catching Features Suunnistussimulaattori WinOL / WinOL II Oriantica Fundamentals Map orienteering map Navigation cardinal direction resection route choice wayfinding waypoint Racing hiking running walking skiing mountain biking Organisations / lists International Orienteering Federation members List of clubs List of orienteers by country innovators List of events Non-sport related Adventure travel Bicycle touring Climbing Hiking Hunting Location-based game geocaching poker run Scoutcraft orienteering wilderness Competitions Foot orienteering World Championships Junior Masters University World Cup World Games European Championships Youth University North American Championships Open events O-Ringen Jukola Tiomila Kainuu Orienteering Week Jan Kjellström Festival Ski orienteering World Championships Junior World Cup Mountain bike orienteering World Championships Trail orienteering World Championships Category WikiProject Map at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Travel guides from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States 2 3 France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia 2 Israel Other NARA 2 İslâm Ansiklopedisi NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐bv2t9
Cached time: 20250818110423
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.813 seconds
Real time usage: 1.036 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3749/1000000
Revision size: 36714/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 136780/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4804/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 92325/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.484/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22304942/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  826.110      1 -total
 21.85%  180.468      1 Template:Reflist
 14.11%  116.568      1 Template:Langx
 13.29%  109.771      8 Template:Navbox
 10.31%   85.189      1 Template:Atlas
  8.95%   73.965      1 Template:Cite_journal
  8.63%   71.312      1 Template:Sister_bar
  7.69%   63.562      1 Template:Short_description
  6.33%   52.312      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.29%   51.992      7 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19877:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818110423 and revision id 1306552425. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Map&oldid=1306552425 " Categories : Maps Cartography Geodesy Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from April 2014 Articles containing Latin-language text All articles needing examples Articles needing examples from July 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Wikipedia articles that are excessively detailed from July 2025 All articles that are excessively detailed Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2025 All articles with style issues Articles needing cleanup from July 2025 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from July 2025 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 11:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Map 133 languages Add topic

