Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Function and functioning 2 History 3 Notable subjects of investigation Toggle Notable subjects of investigation subsection 3.1 Copernicus 3.2 Galileo 3.3 John Bargrave 3.4 Others 4 Inquisition in Italy and Malta 5 Historiography and witchcraft accusations 6 Notes 7 See also 8 References 9 Short bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Roman Inquisition 16 languages العربية Български Čeština Cymraeg Español فارسی Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands Polski Português Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Italian Inquisition ) System of tribunals enforcing Catholic orthodoxy Part of a series on the Roman Curia of the Holy See Secretariat of State Section for Relations with States Dicasteries Evangelization Doctrine of the Faith Pontifical Commission for the Protection of Minors International Theological Commission Pontifical Biblical Commission Service of Charity Eastern Churches Divine Worship and Discipline of the Sacraments Causes of Saints Bishops Pontifical Commission for Latin America Clergy Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Laity, Family and Life Promoting Christian Unity Commission for Religious Relations with the Jews Interreligious Dialogue Commission for Religious Relations with Muslims Culture and Education Promoting Integral Human Development Legislative Texts Communication Vatican Press L'Osservatore Romano Holy See Press Office Institutions of justice Apostolic Penitentiary Apostolic Signatura Roman Rota Institutions of finance Council for the Economy Secretariat for the Economy Administration of the Patrimony of the Apostolic See Office of the Auditor General Commission for Confidential Matters Committee for Investments Offices Prefecture of the Papal Household Office for the Liturgical Celebrations of the Supreme Pontiff Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church Institutes Labour Office of the Apostolic See Vatican Apostolic Archive Vatican Apostolic Library Fabric of Saint Peter Pontifical Commission for Sacred Archaeology Pontifical academies AVEPRO Supervisory and Financial Information Authority Domus Vaticanae Interdicasterial commissions Particular Churches Church in Eastern Europe Consecrated Religious Candidates to Sacred Order Revision of the General Regulations of the Roman Curia Commissions and committees International Eucharistic Congresses Historical Sciences Advocates Swiss Guard Disciplinary Financial Security Institute for the Works of Religion Healthcare Sector Verification and Application of Mitis Iudex in the Churches of Italy History Roman Inquisition Immensa aeterni Dei Reform by Pius X Reform by Paul VI Reform by John Paul II Reform by Francis Former dicasteries Congregation of Bishops and Regulars Congregation for Borders Congregation of Ceremonies Sacred Congregation of the Index Congregation for Indulgences and Sacred Relics Congregation of the Vatican Press Sacred Congregation of the Consulta Sacred Congregation of Rites Apostolic Chancery Apostolic Dataria Secretariate of Briefs to Princes and of Latin Letters Special Administration of the Holy See Pontifical Commission for the Cultural Heritage of the Church Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei Pontifical Council for Social Communications Pontifical Council for the Family Pontifical Council for the Laity Cor Unum Justice and Peace Pastoral Care of Migrants and Itinerant People Pastoral Assistance to Health Care Workers Evangelization of Peoples Promoting the New Evangelization Catholic Education Culture Apostolic Camera Related topics Pontifical commission Dicastery Acta Apostolicae Sedis Advocates of Roman congregations Archive of the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith Catholicism portal v t e The Roman Inquisition , formally Suprema Congregatio Sanctae Romanae et Universalis Inquisitionis ( Latin for 'the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition '), was a system of partisan tribunals developed by the Holy See of the Catholic Church , during the second half of the 16th century, responsible for prosecuting individuals accused of a wide array of crimes according to Catholic law and doctrine , relating to Catholic religious life or alternative religious or secular beliefs. It was established in 1542 by the leader of the Catholic Church, Pope Paul III . In the period after the Medieval Inquisition , it was one of three different manifestations of the wider Catholic Inquisition , the other two being the Spanish Inquisition and Portuguese Inquisition .

Function and functioning [ edit ] The main function of the institution was to maintain and implement papal bulls and other church rulings, in addition to their function of administering legalistic ramifications upon deviants of Catholic orthodoxy within states that cooperated with the pope and ostensibly exhibiting proper procedure to Catholic states in the process of formulating the Counter-Reformation.

[ 1 ] The papal bull Ad abolendam , by Lucius III , prescribed penalties for heretical clerics and laymen and established a procedure of systematic inquisition by bishops; the third canon of the fourth Lateran Council (1215) specified procedures against heretics and their accomplices. Clerics were to be degraded from their orders, lay persons were to be branded as infamous and not be admitted to public offices or councils or to run a business, will not have the freedom to make a will nor shall succeed to an inheritance, goods were to be confiscated. A secular leader who "neglects to cleanse his territory of this heretical filth" would be excommunicated and the supreme pontiff could declare his vassals absolved from their fealty to him and make the land available for occupation by Catholics who would possess it unopposed and preserve it in the purity of the faith.

[ 2 ] The organisational system of the Roman Inquisition did differ essentially from that of the Medieval Inquisition. Typically, the pope appointed one cardinal to preside over meetings of the Congregation. Though often referred to in historical literature as Grand Inquisitors , the role was substantially different from the formally appointed Grand Inquisitor of the Spanish Inquisition. There were usually ten other cardinals who were members of the Congregation, as well as a prelate and two assistants all chosen from the Dominican Order . The Holy Office also had an international group of consultants ; experienced scholars of theology and canon law who advised on specific questions. The congregation, in turn, presided over the activity of local tribunals.

History [ edit ] The Roman Inquisition began in 1542 as part of the Catholic Church's Counter-Reformation against the spread of Protestantism, but it represented a less harsh affair than the previously established Spanish Inquisition.

[ 3 ] In 1588, [ 4 ] Pope Sixtus V established, with Immensa Aeterni Dei , 15 congregations of the Roman Curia , of which the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition was one. In 1908, it was renamed the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office . In 1965, it was renamed again to the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith and later renamed once again in 2022 to the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith .

[ 5 ] While the Roman Inquisition was originally designed to combat the spread of Protestantism in Italy, the institution outlived that original purpose, and the system of tribunals lasted until the mid 18th century, when pre- unification Italian states began to suppress the local inquisitions, effectively eliminating the power of the church to prosecute heretical crimes.

Notable subjects of investigation [ edit ] Copernicus [ edit ] Main article: Nicolaus Copernicus Nicolaus Copernicus circulated for scholarly discussion his hypothesis of a cosmos that was heliocentric and an Earth that rotated around its own axis, first, in 1514 in a manuscript essay, " De hypothesibus motuum coelestium commentariolus " (Brief Commentary on the Hypotheses of Heavenly Movements), and then more robustly in the book De revolutionibus orbium coelestium ( On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres ), in 1543. The book was dedicated to Pope Paul III , who was known for his interests in astronomy . Both works were known in Rome, and neither attracted adverse theological responses in the sixteenth century.

Some seven decades following Copernicus's death, specialists in mathematics, philosophy, and Catholic theology, whom the Roman Inquisition consulted in response to complaints made against Galileo in 1616, judged the proposition that the sun is immobile and at the center of the universe and that the Earth moves around it, to be "foolish and absurd in philosophy" and that the first was "formally heretical" while the second was "at least erroneous in faith".

[ note 1 ] [ 6 ] While the Inquisition refrained from condemning either Copernicus or his book (or Galileo) on the basis of this assessment, several theological claims in De revolutionibus were ordered to be excised in future publications. Unexpurgated versions of On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres were placed on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum (Index of Forbidden Books).

Galileo [ edit ] Main articles: Galileo affair and Robert Bellarmine § The Galileo case Galileo Galilei revised the Copernican theories and was admonished for his views on heliocentrism in 1615. The Roman Inquisition concluded that his theory could only be supported as a possibility, not as an established fact.

[ 7 ] Galileo later defended his views in Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (1632), which attacked Pope Urban VIII and thus alienated him and the Jesuits , who had both supported Galileo up until that point.

[ 7 ] He was tried by the Inquisition in 1633. Galileo was found "vehemently suspect of heresy", forced to recant, and the Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems was placed on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum (Index of Forbidden Books). He spent the rest of his life under house arrest at his villa in Arcetri near the city of Florence .

[ 8 ] John Bargrave [ edit ] 17th century English traveler and author, John Bargrave , gave an account of his interactions with the Roman Inquisition.

[ 9 ] Arriving in the city of Reggio (having travelled from Modena ), Bargrave was stopped by the city guard who inspected his books on suspicion some may have been on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum . Bargrave was brought before the city's chief inquisitor who suggested they converse in Latin rather than Italian so that the guards might be prevented from understanding them. The inquisitor told him that the inquisition were not accustomed to stopping visitors or travellers unless someone had suggested they do so (Bargrave suspected that Jesuits in Rome had made accusations against him). Nonetheless, Bargrave was told he was required to hold a license from the inquisition. Even with a license, Bargrave was prohibited from carrying any books "printed at any heretical city, as Geneva , Amsterdam , Leyden , London, or the like".

[ 9 ] Bargrave provided a catalogue of his books to the inquisition and was provided with a license to carry them for the rest of his journey.

Others [ edit ] Among the subjects of this Inquisition were Franciscus Patricius , Giordano Bruno , Tommaso Campanella , Gerolamo Cardano , Cesare Cremonini and Camilla Erculiani an Italian apothecary, writer, natural philosopher, and a women's advocate. Of these, only Bruno was executed, in 1600.  The miller Domenico Scandella was also burned at the stake on the orders of Pope Clement VIII in 1599 for his belief that God was created from chaos.

[ 10 ] The friar Fulgenzio Manfredi , who had preached against the pope, was tried by the Inquisition and executed in 1610.

The Inquisition also concerned itself with the Benandanti in the Friuli region, but considered them a lesser danger than the Protestant Reformation and only handed out light sentences.

Inquisition in Italy and Malta [ edit ] The Inquisition in Malta (1561 to 1798) is generally considered to have been gentler.

[ 11 ] Italian historian Andrea Del Col estimates that out of 51,000–75,000 cases judged by Inquisition in Italy after 1542, around 1,250 resulted in a death sentence .

[ 12 ] Historiography and witchcraft accusations [ edit ] The Inquisitions have long been one of the primary subjects in the scholarly debates regarding witchcraft accusations of the early modern period. Historian Henry Charles Lea places an emphasis on torture methods employed to force confessions from the convicted.

[ 13 ] Carlo Ginzburg , in The Night Battles , discussed how Inquisitorial propaganda of demonology distorted popular folk beliefs.

[ 14 ] In similar light, Elliott P. Currie saw the Inquisitions as one singular, ongoing phenomenon, which drove the witch-hunt to its peak. Currie argued that the methods pioneered by the Inquisition indirectly guided continental Europe to a series of persecutions motivated by profit. Second-wave feminism also saw a surge of historical interpretation of the witch-hunt.

[ 15 ] A number of 100,000 to 9,000,000 executions was given, all of which was attributed to the Inquisition. Feminist scholars Claudia Honeger and Nelly Moia saw the early modern witch-craze as a product of Inquisitorial influence, namely the Malleus Maleficarum .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Feminist writers Mary Daly, Barbara Walker, and Witch Starhawk argued that the Inquisitions were responsible for countless, "hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions", deaths, most of them women. This notion was similarly echoed by Third-wave feminist writer Elizabeth Connor, who agreed with the notion of "gynocide", or "woman hunting", inaugurated by the Malleus .

[ 13 ] The same sentiment regarding the Inquisition's notorious reputation of torture was shared by American writer and attorney Jonathan Kirsch. In his book, The Grand Inquisitor's Manual: A History of Terror in the Name of God , Kirsch argued that the Inquisition's use of torture not only applied to the witch-craze which peaked in early 17th century, but also to the Salem witch trials . This model of repressive system, Kirsch argued, was also applied in Nazism , Soviet Russia, Japanese internment camps , McCarthyism , and most recently, the War on Terror .

[ 18 ] Through further research and available evidence, the Roman Inquisition was seen in a different light. In contrast with feminist arguments historians like Clarke Garrett, Brian P. Levack , John Tedeschi, Matteo Duni, and Diane Purkiss pointed out that most witch trials and executions were conducted by local and secular authorities.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Clarke Garrett mentioned the quick decline and insignificance of the Malleus Maleficarum . In-depth historical research regarding minor details of different types of magic, theological heresies, and political climate of The Reformation further revealed that Inquisitorial procedures greatly restrained witch hunting in Italy. Scholars specializing in the Renaissance and Early Modern period such as Guido Ruggiero , Christopher F. Black, and Mary O'Neil also discussed the importance of proper procedures and sparse use of torture. The low rate of torture and lawful interrogation, Black argued, means that trials tended to focus more on individual accusation, instead of groups. For the same reason, the notion of the Black Sabbath was much less accepted in contemporary Italian popular culture.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] The Holy Office's function in the disenchantment of popular culture also helped advance rationalism by getting rid of superstitions. Jeffrey R. Watt refutes the feminist claim that the Inquisition was responsible for the death of so many women. Watt points out that in 1588 the Roman Curia stated it would only allow testimony about participation in a Sabbath by the practitioners themselves and not by outside witnesses.  Additionally, the Inquisition would eventually ban torture for the procurement of a witchcraft confession.  The Holy Office also began seeking less harsh punishment for witches and viewed witches as those who had simply lost their way and who could be redeemed, not as apostates deserving death.

[ when?

] [ 27 ] Historians who leaned toward the witch-hunt-restraining argument were more inclined to differentiate different Inquisitions, and often drew contrast between Italy versus Central Europe. The number of executed witches is also greatly lowered, to between 45,000 and 60,000. Those who argued for the fault of the Inquisition in the witch-craze are more likely to contrast continental Europe to England, as well as seeing the Inquisitions as one singular event which lasted 600 years since its founding in the 11th or 12th century. The significance and emphasis of the Malleus Maleficarum is seen more frequently in arguments which hold the Inquisition accountable for the witch-craze.

Notes [ edit ] ^ The original assessment document from the Inquisition was made available to the public in 2014.

See also [ edit ] Pomponio Algerio , attracted attention of the Inquisition and finally executed by civil authorities Francesco Barberini (1597–1679), secretary of the Inquisition 1633-79 Sébastien Bourdon (1616–1671), a French Protestant painter forced to flee Italy Cornelio Da Montalcino , a Franciscan friar who had embraced Judaism, and was burned alive on the Campo dei Fiori Counter-Reformation Tommaso Crudeli , freemason imprisoned by the Inquisition Diego de Enzinas , Protestant burnt to the stake in 1547 Madonna Oriente case in 1390 Pietro Ottoboni (1667–1740), secretary of the Inquisition 1726-40 References [ edit ] ^ Catholic Encyclopedia.

"Fourth Lateran Council (1215)" .

ewtn.com . Eternal Word Television Network, Inc.

^ Steven Kreis, Fourth Lateran Council (1215): Canon 3 – On Heresy , The History Guide – Lectures on Ancient and Medieval European History, 2006.

^ "Hsu, Jeremy. "Sloppy Records Cast Galileo's Trial in New Light", Live Science , September 30, 2010" .

Live Science . 30 September 2010.

^ [1] Archived 2015-01-22 at the Wayback Machine Dissertation C. Beaudet , The Catholic University of America, 2010 ^ " "Praedicate Evangelium" on the Roman Curia and its service to the Church and to the World (19 March 2022) | Francis" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 2023-02-14 .

^ Domínguez, Nuño (28 Feb 2014).

"Una errata reproducida durante siglos cambia la censura de la Iglesia a Galileo".

EsMateria.com.; also arXiv:1402.6168 ^ a b Hannam, James. "The Genesis of Science". 2011. pp. 329–344.

^ Finnocchiaro, Maurice (1989).

The Galileo Affair . Berkeley and Los Angeles, California: University of California Press. p. 291.

^ a b Pope Alexander the Seventh and the College of Cardinals by John Bargrave , edited by James Craigie Robertson (reprint; 2009) ^ Ginzburg, Carlo (1980) The Cheese and the Worms: The Cosmos of a Sixteenth Century Miller (translated by John and Anne Tedeschi), Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, ISBN 0-8018-4387-1 ^ "The Archives of the Roman Inquisition in Malta" . Archived from the original on 2008-07-20 . Retrieved 2008-08-27 .

^ Andrea Del Col: L'Inquisizione in Italia.

Milan: Oscar Mondadori , 2010, pp. 779–780.

ISBN 978-88-04-53433-4 .

^ a b Connor, E. (January 31, 1990). "Burning times: The inquisition's reign of terror".

WomenWise , 12, 5 ^ Ginzburg, Carlo. 1983.

The Night Battles: Witchcraft & Agrarian Cults in the Sixteenth & Seventeenth Centuries . London; Melbourne: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

^ Currie, Elliott P.. 1968. "Crimes Without Criminals: Witchcraft and Its Control in Renaissance Europe".

Law & Society Review 3 (1). [Wiley, Law and Society Association]: 7–32 ^ Honegger, Claudia. 1979. "Comment on Garrett's 'women and Witches'". Signs 4 (4). University of Chicago Press: 792–798 ^ Moia, Nelly. 1979. "Comment on Garrett's 'women and Witches ' ". Signs 4 (4). University of Chicago Press: 798–802.

^ Kirsch, Jonathan. 2008.

The Grand Inquisitor's Manual: A History of Terror in the Name of God . New York: HarperOne.

^ Tedeschi, John (1983). "The Roman Inquisition and Witchcraft: An Early Seventeenth-century 'Instruction' on Correct Trial Procedure".

Revue de l'Histoire des Religions .

200 (2). Armand Colin: 163– 188.

doi : 10.3406/rhr.1983.4520 .

^ Garrett, Clarke. 1979. "Reply to Honegger and Moia". Signs 4 (4). University of Chicago Press: 802–804.

^ Purkiss, Diane. "A Holocaust of one's own: The myth of the Burning Times".

The Witch in History .  Routledge, London: 1996.

^ Bailey., Michael D. (2009).

"Under the Devil's Spell: Witches, Sorcerers, and the Inquisition in Renaissance Italy (review)" .

Magic, Ritual, and Witchcraft .

4 (1): 104– 107.

doi : 10.1353/mrw.0.0133 .

S2CID 54861464 .

^ Bailey, Michael D. (2007).

"The Witch-Hunt in Early Modern Europe (review)" .

Magic, Ritual, and Witchcraft .

2 (1): 101– 103.

doi : 10.1353/mrw.0.0133 .

S2CID 54861464 .

^ Black, Christopher F. 2009. The Italian Inquisition. New Haven: Yale University Press.

^ Ruggiero, Guido (1993).

Binding Passions: Tales of Magic, Marriage and Power at the End of the Renaissance . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.

^ Haliczer, Stephen (1986).

Inquisition and Society in Early Modern Europe . London: Croom Helm.

^ Watt, Jeffrey (2012). "Review of The Italian Inquisition by Christopher F. Black".

The English Historical Review .

524 : 164.

Short bibliography [ edit ] Christopher Black, The Italian Inquisition , Yale University Press, New Haven–London 2009 Costantino Corvisieri, "Compendio dei processi del Santo Uffizio di Roma (da Paolo III a Paolo IV)," Archivio della Società romana di storia patria 3 (1880), 261–290; 449-471 Andrea Del Col, L'Inquisizione in Italia. Dall'XI al XXI secolo , Mondadori, Milan 2006 Dizionario storico dell'Inquisizione , edited by V. Lavenia, A. Prosperi, J. Tedeschi, 4 vol., Edizioni della Normale, Pisa 2010 Massimo Firpo, Inquisizione romana e Controriforma. Studi sul cardinal Giovanni Morone (1509–1580) e il suo processo d'eresia , 2nd edition, Morcelliana, Brescia 2005 Massimo Firpo, Vittore Soranzo vescovo ed eretico. Riforma della Chiesa e Inquisizione nell'Italia del Cinquecento , Laterza, Rome–Bari 2006 Giovanni Romeo , Inquisitori, esorcisti e streghe nell'Italia della Controriforma , Sansoni, Florence, 1990 Giovanni Romeo , Ricerche su confessione dei peccati e Inquisizione nell'Italia del Cinquecento , La Città del Sole, Naples, 1997 Giovanni Romeo , L'Inquisizione nell'Italia moderna , Laterza, Rome-Bari, 2002 Giovanni Romeo , Amori proibiti. I concubini tra Chiesa e Inquisizione , Laterza, Rome-Bari, 2008 John Tedeschi, The prosecution of heresy: collected studies on the Inquisition in early modern Italy , Medieval & Renaissance texts & studies, Binghamton, New York 1991.

Maria Francesca Tiepolo, "Venezia", La Guida generale degli Archivi di Stato , IV, Ministero per i beni culturali e ambientali, Ufficio centrale per i beni archivistici, Roma, 1994, pp. 857–1014, 1062–1070, 1076–1140 External links [ edit ] Works by or about Roman Inquisition at the Internet Archive Works by Roman Inquisition at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) v t e Antisemitism See also: Massacres or pogroms against Jews Core topics Canards Economics Eliminationist antisemitism Geography History Religious antisemitism Persecution of Jews Antisemitism studies Nazism Adolf Hitler Americas Propaganda New antisemitism Three Ds Working definition Racial antisemitism Rootless cosmopolitan Secondary antisemitism Stereotypes of Jews Timeline 19th C.

20th 21st Antisemitism and Christianity New Testament Healthcare Islam Middle Ages Nation of Islam Olympic Games Soviet mathematics Social media Reddit Universities Columbia Related topics Anti-Indigenous sentiment Anti-Slavic sentiment Anti-Polish sentiment Anti-Romani sentiment Anti-Zionism Christian Identity Cultural Marxism Double genocide theory International Jewish conspiracy The International Jew Jewish Bolshevism Żydokomuna Khazar theory Ku Klux Klan Mein Kampf in Arabic in English Normalization of antisemitism Persecution of Jews during the Black Death On the Jews and Their Lies Philosemitism The Protocols of the Elders of Zion Contemporary imprints Racism Rothschild conspiracy theories The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews Self-hating Jew George Soros conspiracy theories Xenophobia Weaponization White genocide conspiracy theory Zhyd Zionist antisemitism Religious antisemitism Anti-Judaism Jewish deicide Catholic Inquisition Portuguese Inquisition Roman Inquisition Spanish Inquisition Rhineland massacres Martin Luther Blood curse Blood libel Host desecration Judensau Pogrom Antisemitic laws, policies and government actions Ghetto benches Hep-Hep riots Pogroms in the Russian Empire May Laws 1968 Polish political crisis Jewish Anti-Zionist League Leo Frank trial (US) Expulsions of Poles and Jews by Germany (DE/PL) Prussian deportations Act of 5th November Generalplan Ost Dreyfus affair (FR) Beilis trial (Russian Empire) Farhud (Iraq) Anti-Zionist League (IQ) General Order No. 11 (US, 1862) Racial policy of Nazi Germany Madagascar Plan Final Solution The Holocaust Anti-cosmopolitan campaign Night of the Murdered Poets Slánský trial Doctors' plot Holocaust denial Yellow badge ZOG conspiracy Antisemitism on the internet Bible Believers The Daily Stormer Institute for Historical Review Jew Watch Metapedia Podblanc QAnon Radio Islam Redwatch The Right Stuff (blog) Stormfront Terrorgram Wikipedia and antisemitism Persecution Rhineland massacres Black Death persecutions Boycotts Expulsions Jewish quarter Ghettos in Europe Mellah The Holocaust Jewish hat Jewish quota Judensau Martyrdom in Judaism Nuremberg Laws Pale of Settlement Pogroms Refuseniks Segregation Spanish Inquisition Expulsion Yellow badge Organizations working against antisemitism Anti-Defamation League (ADL) Bay Area Holocaust Oral History Project (BAHOHP) Community Security Trust Middle East Media Research Institute (MEMRI) Simon Wiesenthal Center (SWC) Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) Stephen Roth Institute Yad Vashem By region Arab world Saudi Arabia Argentina Australia Canada China Chile Costa Rica Europe Austria Belgium France 21st century Germany Greece Hungary Italy Norway Romania Russia Imperial Soviet Spain Sweden Ukraine United Kingdom Conservative Party Labour Party Japan Mexico New Zealand Palestinian Territories Pakistan South Africa Turkey United States History 21st century Venezuela v t e Roman Curia of the Holy See Secretariat Secretariat of State Section for General Affairs Section for Relations with States Secretary for Pontifical Representations Dicasteries Evangelization Doctrine of the Faith Service of Charity Eastern Churches Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments Causes of Saints Bishops Clergy Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Laity, Family and Life Christian Unity Interreligious Dialogue Culture and Education Integral Human Development Legislative Texts Communication Tribunals Apostolic Penitentiary Apostolic Signatura Roman Rota Economics Council for the Economy Secretariat for the Economy Administration of the Patrimony of the Apostolic See Office of the Auditor General Commission for Confidential Matters Committee for Investments Offices Prefecture of the Papal Household Office for the Liturgical Celebrations of the Supreme Pontiff Apostolic Camera Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church Institutes Labour Office of the Apostolic See Vatican Apostolic Archive Vatican Apostolic Library Fabric of Saint Peter Pontifical Commission for Sacred Archaeology AVEPRO Supervisory and Financial Information Authority Domus Vaticanae Interdicasterial commissions Particular Churches Church in Eastern Europe Consecrated Religious Candidates to Sacred Order Revision of the General Regulations of the Roman Curia Commissions and committees International Eucharistic Congresses Historical Sciences Advocates Swiss Guard Disciplinary Financial Security Commission of Cardinals overseeing the Institute for Works of Religion Activities of Public Juridical Persons of the Church in the Healthcare Sector Verification and Application of Mitis Iudex in the Churches of Italy Other organizations Councils, commissions, and offices Evangelization International Council for Catechesis Doctrine of the Faith Pontifical Commission for the Protection of Minors International Theological Commission Pontifical Biblical Commission College for the review of appeals by clergy accused of delicta reservata Bishops Pontifical Commission for Latin America Clergy Pontifical Work for Priestly Vocations Christian Unity Commission for Religious Relations with the Jews Interreligious Dialogue Commission for Religious Relations with Muslims Culture and Education Pontifical Work for Ecclesiastical Vocations Communication Vatican Publishing House Vatican Media Vatican Radio L'Osservatore Romano Holy See Press Office Pontifical academies Arcadia Alphonsian Ecclesiastical Fine Arts and Letters of the Virtuosi al Pantheon Sciences Theology Archaeology Martyrs Saint Thomas Aquinas Immaculate Conception Mary Life Social Sciences Latin Papal See of Rome Vicar General for the Vatican City State Vicar General for the Vicariate of Rome Auxiliary Bishops of the Vicariate of Rome Prelate Secretary of the Vicariate of Rome History Roman Inquisition (1542) Reform by Sixtus V (1588) Reform by Paul VI (1967) Reform by John Paul II (1988) Reform by Francis (2022) Former dicasteries Congregation for Borders Congregation for Catholic Education Congregation of Ceremonies Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples Sacred Congregation of the Index Congregation of the Vatican Press Sacred Congregation of the Consulta Congregation for Indulgences and Sacred Relics Congregation of Rites Apostolic Chancery Apostolic Dataria Office of Papal Charities Secretariate of Briefs to Princes and of Latin Letters Special Administration of the Holy See Pontifical Council for Culture Pontifical Commission for the Cultural Heritage of the Church Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei Pontifical Council for Promoting the New Evangelization Pontifical Council for Social Communications Pontifical Council for the Family Pontifical Council for the Laity Pontifical Council Cor Unum Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace Pontifical Council for the Pastoral Care of Migrants and Itinerant People Pontifical Council for the Pastoral Care of Health Care Workers Vatican City portal Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐7vl7l
Cached time: 20250814215546
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.510 seconds
Real time usage: 0.672 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2174/1000000
Revision size: 22686/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 122174/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2430/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 84755/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.317/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16936024/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  537.257      1 -total
 26.57%  142.757      2 Template:Reflist
 15.61%   83.856      1 Template:Roman_Curia_sidebar
 15.29%   82.150      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.44%   77.577      1 Template:Langnf
 14.02%   75.346      4 Template:Cite_web
 10.91%   58.597      1 Template:Short_description
  5.97%   32.053      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.90%   31.717      1 Template:Antisemitism_footer
  5.67%   30.455      1 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26154:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215546 and revision id 1291166336. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Roman_Inquisition&oldid=1291166336 " Categories : Roman Inquisition 1542 establishments in the Papal States History of the Catholic Church Inquisition Italian Renaissance Witch trials in Italy Witchcraft in Italy Canon law history Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from April 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from May 2017 Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 19 May 2025, at 14:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Roman Inquisition 16 languages Add topic

