Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Obama years, 2009–2017 1.2 Trump years, 2017–2021 1.2.1 America's Frontline Doctors event 1.2.2 March to Save America 2 Finances 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Tea Party Patriots 3 languages Español Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Right wing American political organization Tea Party Patriots Formation 2009 Type 501(c)(4) non-profit Headquarters Atlanta, Georgia Co-founders Jenny Beth Martin and Mark Meckler Website TeaPartyPatriots.org This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Tea Party Patriots is an American conservative [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] political organization founded in 2009 as part of the Tea Party movement . It is known for organizing citizen opposition to the Affordable Care Act during the presidency of Barack Obama , and more recently for supporting Donald Trump .

In 2020, Tea Party Patriots hosted and funded the "America's Frontline Doctors" event promoting use of the drug hydroxychloroquine as a cure to COVID-19 . In 2021, Tea Party Patriots was among 11 groups listed on the website of the "March to Save America" , the pro-Trump rally that led to the storming of the United States Capitol .

History [ edit ] Obama years, 2009–2017 [ edit ] Representative Ron Paul of Texas addressing the Tea Party Patriots American Policy Summit in Phoenix, Arizona in 2011 Rick Santelli , an editor for the CNBC Business News network, is credited as being a catalyst in the early formation of the Tea Party movement through a statement he made on February 19, 2009.

[ 4 ] The organization was founded by Jenny Beth Martin , Mark Meckler , and Amy Kremer in March 2009.

[ 5 ] Tea Party Patriots was a co-sponsor of the 9/12 March on Washington , [ 6 ] but refused to participate in the National Tea Party Convention .

[ 7 ] Tea Party Patriots is most notable for organizing citizen opposition at the healthcare town hall meetings of 2009.

[ 8 ] In 2010, Tea Party Patriots was among the 12 most influential groups in the Tea Party movement according to the National Journal , [ 9 ] and among the top five according to The Washington Post .

[ 10 ] In September 2010, the group announced it had received a $1 million donation from an anonymous donor.

[ 11 ] The money was distributed to its affiliated groups and must be spent by Election Day , though it could not be used to directly support any candidate.

[ 11 ] In 2010, the group reportedly included over 2,200 local chapters.

[ 12 ] In 2012, the group along with the Southern Republican Leadership Conference organized a presidential primary debate that aired on CNN .

[ 13 ] Along with various other conservative and libertarian organizations the Tea Party Patriots developed a Contract from America that echoed the Republican Contract with America of 1994 stating some of the core principles and several specific goals shared by organizations and individuals involved with the tea parties.

[ 14 ] [ failed verification ] In July 2012, the group's Atlanta chapter partnered with the Sierra Club and the NAACP to defeat a proposed transit tax in Atlanta. The referendum was defeated by a margin of 63 percent.

[ 15 ] Trump years, 2017–2021 [ edit ] Amid the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States , the Tea Party Patriots were reported to have assisted in lobbying efforts by hospitals against restrictions on elective surgeries and procedures.

[ 2 ] [ 16 ] America's Frontline Doctors event [ edit ] Main article: America's Frontline Doctors On July 27, 2020, amid the COVID-19 pandemic , the Tea Party Patriots hosted and funded a press conference in Washington, D.C., at which they introduced "America's Frontline Doctors", a group founded by Simone Gold that promotes misleading and erroneous medical advice regarding the COVID-19 pandemic . Video of the press conference, published by Breitbart News , was promoted by Donald Trump and viewed millions of times before it was removed by Facebook , YouTube and Twitter for spreading misinformation.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] March to Save America [ edit ] The Tea Party Patriots were among 11 groups listed on the website of the March to Save America, the pro-Trump rally in 2021 that led to the storming of the Capitol .

[ 19 ] Finances [ edit ] The organization was once run with the help of FreedomWorks , a conservative nonprofit.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] A 2011 investigation by the magazine Mother Jones alleged that the Tea Party Patriots organization was using its 501(c)(4) status to avoid disclosing its expenditures both to the IRS and to local contributors. The magazine reported that when local Tea Party groups pressed for more details on the group's expenses, they were removed from the umbrella organization and threatened with legal action.

[ 24 ] The magazine reported that Tea Party Patriots "has started to resemble the Beltway lobbying operations its members have denounced." [ 25 ] In 2014, The Washington Post reported that Tea Party Patriots president Jenny Beth Martin was receiving two salaries from the organization: a $15,000 per month fee for strategic consulting and a $272,000 salary as president, with total annual compensation over $450,000.

[ 26 ] Richard Uihlein , CEO of the Uline business supplies company, donated $4.3 million in the five years leading up to 2020 to the Tea Party Patriots Citizens Fund , the group's political action committee.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Conservatism portal United States elections, 2010 Tea Party Patriots Citizens Fund Contract from America References [ edit ] ^ a b "Don't fall for this video: Hydroxychloroquine is not a COVID-19 cure" .

PolitiFact . July 28, 2020 . Retrieved July 29, 2020 .

^ a b c Frenkel, Sheera; Alba, Davey (July 28, 2020).

"Misleading Virus Video, Pushed by the Trumps, Spreads Online" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved July 29, 2020 .

^ a b Goodman, Christopher Giles, Shayan Sardarizadeh and Jack (July 28, 2020).

"Why a video promoted by Trump was pulled on social media" .

BBC News . Retrieved July 29, 2020 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Fed-Bashing Three Ways Slate , Bethany McLean. November 9, 2010 ^ Burghart, Devin, and Leonard Zeskind. Tea Party Nationalism: A Critical Examination of the Tea Party Movement and the Size, Scope, and Focus of Its National Factions. Rep. Institute for Research and Education on Human Rights, Fall 2010. Web.

"Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on November 24, 2011 . Retrieved January 4, 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Tea Party Patriots: 912 March and Rally" . Archived from the original on 2011-07-16 . Retrieved 2010-02-14 .

^ Brant-Zawadzki, Alex; Advocate, ContributorIndustrial Hemp (March 18, 2010).

"Tea Party Convention Loses Main Sponsor" .

HuffPost .

{{ cite web }} : |first2= has generic name ( help ) ^ Urbina, Ian (August 7, 2009).

"Beyond Beltway, Health Debate Turns Hostile" .

The New York Times .

^ Snow Hopkins, Christopher; Mahanta, Siddhartha; Poulson, Theresa (February 4, 2010).

"12 Tea Party Players To Watch" .

National Journal . Retrieved April 17, 2015 .

^ "The top national players in the tea party" .

The Washington Post . September 26, 2010 . Retrieved April 17, 2015 .

^ a b Jensen, Kristin (September 21, 2010).

"Tea Party Patriots to Hand out $1 Million for Election Spending" .

Bloomberg.com . Retrieved September 7, 2020 .

^ Zernike, Kate. Boiling Mad: Inside Tea Party America. New York: Times /Henry Holt and, 2010. Print.

^ "Presidential Debate" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Contract from America: About Us" . Archived from the original on 2010-05-03 . Retrieved 2010-04-16 .

^ "How tea party and its unlikely allies nixed Atlanta's transit tax" .

Christian Science Monitor . August 1, 2012.

^ "Hospitals, Doctors Get Conservatives' Push for Elective Care" .

Bloomberg Law . Retrieved July 29, 2020 .

^ Passantino, Jon; Darcy, Oliver.

"Social media giants remove viral video with false coronavirus claims that Trump retweeted" .

CNN . Retrieved July 29, 2020 .

^ "Coronavirus disease (COVID-19): Solidarity Trial and hydroxychloroquine" .

www.who.int . Retrieved 2021-05-15 .

^ a b "Chicago-Area Billionaire Gave Millions To 'Patriots' Group That Backed Pro-Trump Rally" .

WBEZ Chicago . 2021-01-12 . Retrieved 2021-01-16 .

^ Jacobs, Lawrence; Skocpol, Theda (2016-01-07).

"Health Care Reform and American Politics" . Oxford University Press: 193.

doi : 10.1093/wentk/9780190262037.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-026203-7 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ The Tea Party and the Remaking of Republican Conservatism . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. 2016-08-01. pp.

9– 10, 108– 109.

ISBN 978-0-19-063366-0 .

^ "FreedomWorks Says Jump, Tea Partiers Ask How High" .

Talking Points Memo . August 11, 2009.

^ Dickinson, Tim (Sep 23, 2009).

"The Lie Machine" .

Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on September 28, 2009.

^ Mencimer, Stephanie.

"Tea Party Patriots Investigated: Don't Ask, Don't Tell" .

^ "Tea Party Patriots Investigated: They Use You and Abuse You," Mother Jones , February 14, 2011 , retrieved November 10, 2016.

^ "Tea Party PACs reap money for midterms but spend little on candidates," The Washington Post , April 26, 2014 , retrieved November 10, 2016.

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Tea Party movement Issues American exceptionalism Popular constitutionalism Contract from America Originalism Paleoconservatism Free market FairTax Flat taxation Opposition to taxation History Electoral history of the Tea Party movement Right America: Feeling Wronged – Some Voices from the Campaign Trail Taxpayer March on Washington Restoring Honor rally Tea Party protests People Justin Amash Dick Armey Michele Bachmann Glenn Beck Matt Bevin Herman Cain Keli Carender Ted Cruz Jim DeMint Karl Denninger Matt Gaetz Trey Gowdy Sean Hannity Matt Kibbe Charles Koch David Koch Amy Kremer Mark Levin Rush Limbaugh Mark Meckler Sarah Palin Dan Patrick Rand Paul Ron Paul Rick Santelli Joe Walsh Allen West List of Tea Party politicians Organizations Americans for Prosperity Americans for Tax Reform Club for Growth DontGo FreedomWorks National Tea Party Federation Senate Conservatives Fund Tea Party Express Tea Party Patriots Tea Party Nation Related topics Breitbart News Freedom Caucus Libertarian Republican Liberty Caucus Second Amendment Caucus Tea Party Caucus Tea Party Community TheBlaze Women for Trump (founded by Kremer) 9-12 Project Conservatism portal Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tea_Party_Patriots&oldid=1304834368 " Categories : Organizations established in 2009 Tea Party movement 501(c)(4) nonprofit organizations Conservative organizations in the United States Libertarian organizations 2009 establishments in the United States Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 errors: generic name All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from June 2011 This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 12:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tea Party Patriots 3 languages Add topic

