Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Distribution and habitat Toggle Distribution and habitat subsection 1.1 Subspecies 2 Life cycle Toggle Life cycle subsection 2.1 Colony life cycle 2.2 Individual bee life cycle 3 Social caste Toggle Social caste subsection 3.1 Queens 3.2 Workers 3.3 Drones 4 Queen–worker conflict 5 Behavior Toggle Behavior subsection 5.1 Thermoregulation 5.2 Aging 5.3 Communication 5.3.1 Pheromones 5.4 Sociality 6 Domestication 7 Beekeeping Toggle Beekeeping subsection 7.1 Products 7.2 Honey bees 7.3 Pollination 7.4 Honey 7.5 Beeswax 7.6 Bee pollen 7.7 Bee brood 7.8 Propolis 7.9 Royal jelly 8 Genome 9 Hazards and survival Toggle Hazards and survival subsection 9.1 Parasites, diseases and pesticides 9.2 Milkweed 9.3 Predators 10 Immune mechanisms Toggle Immune mechanisms subsection 10.1 Innate immune mechanisms 10.2 Social immune mechanisms 10.2.1 Grooming 10.2.2 Hygienic behavior 11 As an environmental threat 12 Close relatives 13 See also 14 References Toggle References subsection 14.1 Bibliography 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Western honey bee 83 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Аԥсшәа العربية Armãneashti Asturianu Azərbaycanca Basa Bali Беларуская Български Boarisch Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kaszëbsczi Kongo Кыргызча Лакку Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پښتو Picard Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Seeltersk Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia European honey bee Western honey bee Temporal range: Oligocene–Recent PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N Conservation status Data Deficient ( IUCN 3.1 ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Arthropoda Class: Insecta Order: Hymenoptera Family: Apidae Genus: Apis Species: A. mellifera Binomial name Apis mellifera Linnaeus , 1758 Subspecies [ 3 ] 31 currently recognized, see list Synonyms Apis mellifica Linnaeus, 1761 Apis gregaria Geoffroy, 1762 Apis cerifera Scopoli, 1770 Apis daurica Fischer von Waldheim, 1843 Apis mellifica germanica Pollmann, 1879 Apis mellifica nigrita Lucas, 1882 Apis mellifica mellifica lehzeni Buttel-Reepen, 1906 (Unav.) Apis mellifica mellifica silvarum Goetze, 1964 (Unav.) The western honey bee or European honey bee ( Apis mellifera ) is the most common of the 7–12 species of honey bees worldwide.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The genus name Apis is Latin for 'bee', and mellifera is the Latin for 'honey-bearing' or 'honey-carrying', referring to the species' production of honey.

[ 6 ] Like all honey bee species, the western honey bee is eusocial , creating colonies with a single fertile female (or " queen "), many normally non-reproductive females or "workers", and a small proportion of fertile males or " drones ". Individual colonies can house tens of thousands of bees. Colony activities are organized by complex communication between individuals, through both pheromones and the waggle dance .

The western honey bee was one of the first domesticated insects, and it is the primary species maintained by beekeepers to this day for both its honey production and pollination activities. With human assistance, the western honey bee now occupies every continent except Antarctica. Western honey bees are threatened by pests and diseases , especially the Varroa mite and colony collapse disorder . There are indications that the species is rare, if not extinct in the wild in Europe and as of 2014, the western honey bee was assessed as "Data Deficient" on the IUCN Red List . Numerous studies indicate that the species has undergone significant declines in Europe; however, it is not clear if they refer to population reduction of wild or managed colonies. Further research is required to enable differentiation between wild and non-wild colonies in order to determine the conservation status of the species in the wild, meaning self-sustaining, without treatments or management.

[ 7 ] Western honey bees are an important model organism in scientific studies, particularly in the fields of social evolution , learning, and memory; they are also used in studies of pesticide toxicity , especially via pollen, to assess non-target impacts of commercial pesticides .

Distribution and habitat [ edit ] Visualization showing the various importations of the western honey bee into the United States.

[ 8 ] The western honey bee can be found on every continent except Antarctica .

[ 9 ] The species is believed to have originated in Africa [ 10 ] or Asia, [ 11 ] and it spread naturally through Africa, the Middle East and Europe.

[ 9 ] Humans are responsible for its considerable additional range, introducing European subspecies into North America (early 1600s), [ 12 ] South America, Australia, New Zealand, and eastern Asia.

[ 13 ] Subspecies [ edit ] Main article: List of Apis mellifera subspecies Western honey bees adapted to the local environments as they spread geographically.

[ 10 ] These adaptations include synchronizing colony cycles to the timing of local flower resources, forming a winter cluster in colder climates, migratory swarming in Africa, and enhanced foraging behavior in desert areas. All together, these variations resulted in 31 recognized subspecies .

[ 3 ] Previously it was believed that the various subspecies were all cross-fertile , but in 2013 it was found that the A. m. mellifera queens do not mate with non- A. m. mellifera drones.

[ 14 ] The subspecies are divided into four major branches, based on work by Ruttner and confirmed by mitochondrial DNA analysis. African subspecies belong to branch A, northwestern European subspecies branch M, southwestern European subspecies branch C and Middle Eastern subspecies branch O.

[ citation needed ] Life cycle [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main article: Honey bee life cycle Colony life cycle [ edit ] A bee swarm. Bees are unaggressive in this state, since they have no hive to protect.

Unlike most other bee species, western honey bees have perennial colonies which persist year after year. Because of this high degree of sociality and permanence, western honey bee colonies can be considered superorganisms . This means that reproduction of the colony, rather than individual bees, is the biologically significant unit. Western honey bee colonies reproduce through a process called " swarming ".

[ 15 ] In most climates, western honey bees swarm in the spring and early summer, when there is an abundance of blooming flowers from which to collect nectar and pollen . In response to these favorable conditions, the hive creates one to two dozen new queens. Just as the pupal stages of these "daughter queens" are nearly complete, the old queen and approximately two-thirds of the adult workers leave the colony in a swarm, traveling some distance to find a new location suitable for building a hive (e.g., a hollow tree trunk). In the old colony, the daughter queens often start "piping", just prior to emerging as adults, [ 16 ] and, when the daughter queens eventually emerge, they fight each other until only one remains; the survivor then becomes the new queen. If one of the sisters emerges before the others, she may kill her siblings while they are still pupae, before they have a chance to emerge as adults.

Once she has dispatched all of her rivals, the new queen, the only fertile female , lays all the eggs for the old colony, which her mother has left. Virgin females are able to lay eggs, which develop into males (a trait found in bees, wasps, and ants because of haplodiploidy ). However, she requires a mate to produce female offspring, which comprise 90% or more of bees in the colony at any given time. Thus, the new queen goes on one or more nuptial flights , each time mating with 1–17 drones.

[ 17 ] Once she has finished mating, usually within two weeks of emerging, she remains in the hive, playing the primary role of laying eggs.

Throughout the rest of the growing season, the colony produces many workers, who gather pollen and nectar as cold-season food; the average population of a healthy hive in midsummer may be as high as 40,000 to 80,000 bees. Nectar from flowers is processed by worker bees , who evaporate it until the moisture content is low enough to discourage mold, transforming it into honey , which can then be capped over with wax and stored indefinitely. In the temperate climates to which western honey bees are adapted, the bees gather in their hive and wait out the cold season, during which the queen may stop laying. During this time, activity is slow, and the colony consumes its stores of honey used for metabolic heat production in the cold season. In mid- through late winter, the queen starts laying again. This is probably triggered by day length . Depending on the subspecies, new queens (and swarms) may be produced every year, or less frequently, depending on local environmental conditions and a number of characteristics inside the hive.

Individual bee life cycle [ edit ] Larvae ( left ) and eggs ( right ) Like other insects that undergo complete metamorphosis , the western honey bee has four distinct life stages: egg , larva , pupa and adult. The complex social structure of western honey bee hives means that all of these life stages occur simultaneously throughout much of the year. The queen deposits a single egg into each cell of a honeycomb prepared by worker bees. The egg hatches into a legless, eyeless larva fed by "nurse" bees (worker bees who maintain the interior of the colony). After about a week, the larva is sealed in its cell by the nurse bees and begins its pupal stage. After another week, it emerges as an adult bee. It is common for defined regions of the comb to be filled with young bees (also called " brood "), while others are filled with pollen and honey stores.

Worker bees secrete the wax used to build the hive, clean, maintain and guard it, raise the young and forage for nectar and pollen; the nature of the worker's role varies with age. For the first 10 days of their lives, worker bees clean the hive and feed the larvae. After this, they begin building comb cells. On days 16 through 20, workers receive nectar and pollen from older workers and store it. After the 20th day, a worker leaves the hive and spends the remainder of its life as a forager. Although worker bees are usually infertile females, when some subspecies are stressed they may lay fertile eggs. Since workers are not fully sexually developed, they do not mate with drones and thus can only produce haploid (male) offspring.

Queens and workers have a modified ovipositor called a stinger , with which they defend the hive. Unlike those of bees of any other genus and of the queens of their species, the stinger of worker western honey bees is barbed. Contrary to popular belief, a bee does not always die soon after stinging; this misconception is based on the fact that a bee will usually die after stinging a human or other mammals . The stinger and its venom sac , with musculature and a ganglion allowing them to continue delivering venom after they are detached, are designed to pull free of the body when they lodge. This apparatus (including barbs on the stinger) is thought to have evolved in response to predation by vertebrates, since the barbs do not function (and the stinger apparatus does not detach) unless the stinger is embedded in elastic material. The barbs do not always "catch", so a bee may occasionally pull its stinger free and fly off unharmed (or sting again).

[ 15 ] Although the average lifespan of a queen in most subspecies is three to five years, reports from the German honey bee subspecies ( A. m. mellifera ) previously used for beekeeping indicate that a queen can live up to eight years.

[ 18 ] Because a queen's store of sperm is depleted near the end of her life, she begins laying more unfertilised eggs; for this reason, beekeepers often replace queens every year or two.

The lifespan of workers varies considerably over the year in regions with long winters. Workers born in spring and summer work hard, and live only a few weeks, but those born in autumn remain inside for several months as the colony clusters. On average during the year, about 1% of a colony's worker bees die naturally per day.

[ 19 ] Except for the queen, all of a colony's workers are replaced about every four months.

Social caste [ edit ] Western honey bee on a lavender blossom Behavioral and physiological differences between castes and subcastes arise from phenotypic plasticity , which relies on gene expression rather than heritable genotypic differences.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Queens [ edit ] Main article: Queen bee The queen bee is a fertile female, who, unlike workers (which are also female), has a fully developed reproductive system . She is larger than her workers, and has a characteristic rounder, longer abdomen. A female egg can become either a queen or a worker bee. Workers and queen larvae are both fed royal jelly , which is high in protein and low in flavonoids , during the first three days. After that, larval prospective workers are switched to a diet of mixed pollen and nectar (often called "bee bread"), while prospective queens continue to receive royal jelly. In the absence of flavonoids and the presence of a high-protein diet, female bees grow into queens by developing the vigorous reproductive system [ 22 ] necessary to maintain a colony of tens of thousands of daughter workers.

Periodically, the colony determines that a new queen is needed. There are three general causes: The hive is filled with honey, leaving little room for new eggs. This will trigger a swarm, where the old queen will take about half the worker bees to establish a new colony, and leave a new queen with the other half of the workers to continue the old one.

The old queen begins to fail, which is thought to be demonstrated by a decrease in queen pheromones throughout the hive. This is known as supersedure, and at its end, the old queen is usually killed.

The old queen dies suddenly, a situation known as emergency supersedure. The worker bees find several eggs (or larvae) of the appropriate age range and feed them royal jelly to try to develop them into new queens.

Emergency supersedure can generally be recognized because new queen cells are built out from comb cells, instead of hanging from the bottom of a frame. Regardless of the trigger, workers develop existing larvae into queens by continuing to feed them royal jelly, rather than switching them to bee bread, and by extending the selected larvae's cells to house the developing larger-bodied queens.

Peanut-like queen brood cells extend outward from the brood comb Queens are not raised in the typical horizontal brood cells of the honeycomb. A queen cell is larger and oriented vertically. If workers sense that an old queen is weakening, they produce emergency cells (known as supersedure cells) from cells with eggs or young larvae and which protrude from the comb. When the queen finishes her larval feeding and pupates, she moves into a head-downward position and later chews her way out of the cell. At pupation, workers cap (seal) the cell. The queen asserts control over the worker bees by releasing a complex suite of pheromones, known as queen scent.

After several days of orientation in and around the hive, the young queen flies to a drone congregation area – a site near a clearing and generally about 30 feet (9.1 m) above the ground – where drones from different hives congregate. They detect the presence of a queen in their congregation area by her smell, find her by sight and mate with her in midair; drones can be induced to mate with "dummy" queens with the queen pheromone. A queen will mate multiple times, and may leave to mate several days in a row (weather permitting) until her spermatheca is full.

The queen lays all the eggs in a healthy colony. The number and pace of egg-laying is controlled by weather, resource availability and specific racial characteristics. Queens generally begin to slow egg-laying in the early fall, and may stop during the winter. Egg-laying generally resumes in late winter when the days lengthen, peaking in the spring. At the height of the season, the queen may lay over 2,500 eggs per day (more than her body mass).

She fertilizes each egg (with stored sperm from the spermatheca) as it is laid in a worker-sized cell. Eggs laid in drone-sized (larger) cells are left unfertilized; these unfertilized eggs, with half as many genes as queen or worker eggs, develop into drones.

Workers [ edit ] Workers are females produced by the queen that develop from fertilized, diploid eggs. Workers are essential for social structure and proper colony functioning. They carry out the main tasks of the colony, because the queen is occupied solely with reproducing. These females raise their sister workers and future queens that eventually leave the nest to start their own colony. They also forage and return to the nest with nectar and pollen to feed the young, and defend the colony.

Drones [ edit ] Development of a drone pupa Pupae of drones Main article: Drone (bee) Drones are the colony's male bees. Since they do not have ovipositors, they do not have stingers. Drone honey bees do not forage for nectar or pollen. The primary purpose of a drone is to fertilize a new queen. Many drones mate with a given queen in flight; each dies immediately after mating, since the process of insemination requires a lethally convulsive effort. Drone honey bees are haploid (single, unpaired chromosomes) in their genetic structure, and are descended only from their mother (the queen). In temperate regions, drones are generally expelled from the hive before winter, dying of cold and starvation since they cannot forage, produce honey or care for themselves. Given their larger size (1.5 times that of worker bees), inside the hive it is believed that drones may play a significant role in thermoregulation . Drones are typically located near the center of hive clusters for unclear reasons. It is postulated that it is to maintain sperm viability , which may be compromised at cooler temperatures. Another possible explanation is that a more central location allows drones to contribute to warmth, since at temperatures below 25 °C (77 °F) their ability to contribute declines.

[ 23 ] Queen–worker conflict [ edit ] Main article: Worker policing When a fertile female worker produces drones, a conflict arises between her interests and those of the queen. The worker shares one-half of her genes with the drone and one-quarter with her brothers, favouring her offspring over those of the queen. The queen shares one-half of her genes with her sons and one-quarter with the sons of fertile female workers.

[ 24 ] This pits the worker against the queen and other workers, who try to maximize their reproductive fitness by rearing the offspring most related to them. This relationship leads to a phenomenon called "worker policing". In these rare situations, other worker bees in the hive, who are genetically more related to the queen's sons than those of the fertile workers, patrol the hive and remove worker-laid eggs.

Another form of worker policing is aggression toward fertile females.

[ 25 ] Some studies suggest a queen pheromone which may help workers distinguish worker-laid and queen-laid eggs, but others indicate egg viability as the key factor in eliciting the behavior.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Worker policing is an example of forced altruism , where the benefits of worker reproduction are minimized and that of rearing the queen's offspring maximized.

In very rare instances, workers subvert the policing mechanisms of the hive, laying eggs faster than other workers remove them; this is known as anarchic syndrome. Anarchic workers can activate their ovaries at a higher rate and contribute a greater proportion of males to the hive. Although an increase in the number of drones decreases the overall productivity of the hive, it increases the reproductive fitness of the drones' mother. Anarchic syndrome is an example of selection working in opposite directions at the individual and group levels for the stability of the hive.

[ 28 ] Under ordinary circumstances, if the queen dies or is removed, reproduction in workers increases because a significant proportion of workers then have activated ovaries. The workers produce a last batch of drones before the hive collapses. Although during this period worker policing is usually absent, in certain groups of bees it continues.

[ 29 ] According to the strategy of kin selection , worker policing is not favored if a queen mates just once. In that case, workers are related by three-quarters of their genes, and the sons of workers are related more than usual to sons of the queen. Then the benefit of policing is negated. Experiments confirming this hypothesis have shown a correlation between higher mating rates and increased rates of worker policing in many species of social hymenoptera .

[ 30 ] Behavior [ edit ] Thermoregulation [ edit ] Foraging honey bee The western honey bee needs an internal body temperature of 35 °C (95 °F) to fly; this temperature is maintained in the nest to develop the brood, and is the optimal temperature for the creation of wax. The temperature on the periphery of the cluster varies with outside air temperature, and the winter cluster 's internal temperature may be as low as 20–22 °C (68–72 °F).

Western honey bees can forage over a 30 °C (86 °F) air-temperature range because of behavioral and physiological mechanisms for regulating the temperature of their flight muscles. From low to high air temperatures, the mechanisms are: shivering before flight and stopping flight for additional shivering, passive body-temperature regulation based on work, and evaporative cooling from regurgitated honey-sac contents. Body temperatures differ, depending on caste and expected foraging rewards.

[ 31 ] The optimal air temperature for foraging is 22–25 °C (72–77 °F). During flight, the bee's relatively large flight muscles create heat which must be dissipated. The honey bee uses evaporative cooling to release heat through its mouth. Under hot conditions, heat from the thorax is dissipated through the head; the bee regurgitates a droplet of warm internal fluid — a "honeycrop droplet" – which reduces the temperature of its head by 10 °C (18 °F).

[ 32 ] Below 7–10 °C (45–50 °F) bees are immobile, and above 38 °C (100 °F) their activity slows. Western honey bees can tolerate temperatures up to 50 °C (122 °F) for short periods.

[ citation needed ] They lack the thermal defense exhibited by Apis cerana , but at least one subspecies, Apis mellifera cypria , is capable of killing invading hornets through asphyxiation , despite not being able to attain lethal temperatures.

[ 33 ] Aging [ edit ] Apis mellifera honey bees with high amounts of flight experience exhibit increased DNA damage in flight muscle, as measured by elevated 8-Oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine , compared to bees with less flight experience.

[ 34 ] This increased DNA damage is likely due to an imbalance of pro- and anti-oxidants during flight-associated oxidative stress .  Flight induced oxidative DNA damage appears to hasten senescence and limit lifespan in A. mellifera .

[ 34 ] Communication [ edit ] Main article: Bee learning and communication A large honey bee swarm on a fallen tree trunk Western honey bee behavior has been extensively studied.

Karl von Frisch , who received the 1973 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his study of honey bee communication, noticed that bees communicate with dance. Through these dances, bees communicate information regarding the distance, the situation, and the direction of a food source by the dances of the returning (honey bee) worker bee on the vertical comb of the hive.

[ 35 ] Honey bees direct other bees to food sources with the round dance and the waggle dance . Although the round dance tells other foragers that food is within 50 metres (160 ft) of the hive, it provides insufficient information about direction. The waggle dance, which may be vertical or horizontal, provides more detail about the distance and direction of a food source. Foragers are also thought to rely on their olfactory sense to help locate a food source after they are directed by the dances.

[ citation needed ] Western honey bees also change the precision of the waggle dance to indicate the type of site that is set as a new goal. Their close relatives, dwarf honey bees , do not.

[ 36 ] Therefore, western honey bees seem to have evolved a better means of conveying information than their common ancestors with the dwarf honey bee.

[ 37 ] Another means of communication is the shaking signal, also known as the jerking dance, vibration dance or vibration signal. Although the shaking signal is most common in worker communication, it also appears in reproductive swarming. A worker bee vibrates its body dorsoventrally while holding another bee with its front legs. Jacobus Biesmeijer, who examined shaking signals in a forager's life and the conditions leading to its performance, found that experienced foragers executed 92% of observed shaking signals and 64% of these signals were made after the discovery of a food source. About 71% of shaking signals occurred before the first five successful foraging flights of the day; other communication signals, such as the waggle dance, were performed more often after the first five successes. Biesmeijer demonstrated that most shakers are foragers and the shaking signal is most often executed by foraging bees on pre-foraging bees, concluding that it is a transfer message for several activities (or activity levels). Sometimes the signal increases activity, as when active bees shake inactive ones. At other times, such as the end of the day, the signal is an inhibitory mechanism. However, the shaking signal is preferentially directed towards inactive bees. All three forms of communication among honey bees are effective in foraging and task management.

[ citation needed ] Pheromones [ edit ] Main article: Honey bee pheromones Pheromones (substances involved in chemical communication) are essential to honey bee survival. Western honey bees rely on pheromones for nearly all behaviors, including mating , alarm, defense , orientation, kin and colony recognition, food production and integrating colony activities.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] The alarm pheromone has shown to be attractive to the small hive beetle . Therefore, there is a tradeoff between recruiting guards bees to defend the invaders and attract more beetles. The small hive beetle has a lower sensing threshold for the honeybee pheromone, which exacerbates the damage to honeybee hive.

[ 40 ] Sociality [ edit ] There is some variability in social behavior among individual honey bees.

[ 41 ] For example, when the duration of liquid exchanges ( trophallaxis ) was measured, individual bees showed consistent long-term patterns in how long they engaged in interactions, [ 41 ] resembling stable social tendencies seen in humans. However, the degree of variation between individuals was smaller than in humans, possibly due to the higher genetic relatedness within colonies.

[ 41 ] Domestication [ edit ] A honey hunter in a cave painting at Cuevas de la Araña , Spain, c. 8,000–6,000 BC Bee hieroglyph from the tomb complex of Senusret I (d. 1,926 BC) Further information: Domestication Humans have been collecting honey from western honey bees for thousands of years, with evidence in the form of rock art found in France and Spain , [ 42 ] dating to around 7,000 BCE.

[ 43 ] The western honey bee is one of the few invertebrate animals to have been domesticated . Bees were likely first domesticated in ancient Egypt , where tomb paintings depict beekeeping, before 2600 BC.

[ 44 ] Europeans brought bees to North America in 1622.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Beekeepers have selected western honey bees for several desirable features: [ 45 ] the ability of a colony to survive periods with little food [ 45 ] the ability of a colony to survive cold weather [ 45 ] resistance to disease [ 45 ] increased honey production [ 45 ] reduced aggressiveness [ 45 ] reduced tendency to swarm [ 45 ] reduced nest building [ 45 ] easy pacification with smoke [ 45 ] These modifications, along with artificial change of location, have improved western honey bees from the point of view of the beekeeper, and simultaneously made them more dependent on beekeepers for their survival. In Europe, cold weather survival was likely selected for, consciously or not, while in Africa, selection probably favoured the ability to survive heat, drought, and heavy rain.

[ 45 ] Authors do not agree on whether this degree of artificial selection constitutes genuine domestication. In 1603, John Guillim wrote "The Bee I may well reckon a domestic insect, being so pliable to the benefit of the keeper." [ 47 ] More recently, many biologists working on pollination take the domesticated status of western honey bees for granted.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] For example, Rachael Winfree and colleagues write "We used crop pollination as a model system, and investigated whether the loss of a domesticated pollinator (the honey bee) could be compensated for by native, wild bee species." [ 50 ] Similarly, Brian Dennis and William Kemp write: "Although the domestication of the honey bee is closely connected to the evolution of food-based socio-economic systems in many cultures throughout the world, in current economic terms, and in the U.S. alone, the estimated wholesale value of honey, more than $317 million dollars in 2013, pales in comparison to aggregate estimated annual value of pollination services, variously valued at $11–15 billion." [ 51 ] On the other hand, P. R. Oxley and B. P. Oldroyd (2010) consider the domestication of western honey bees, at best, partial.

[ 52 ] Oldroyd observes that the lack of full domestication is somewhat surprising, given that people have kept bees for at least 7,000 years. Instead, beekeepers have found ways to manage bees using hives, while the bees remain "largely unchanged from their wild cousins".

[ 53 ] Leslie Bailey and B. V. Ball, in their book Honey Bee Pathology , call western honey bees "feral insects", in contrast to the domestic silk moth ( Bombyx mori ) which they call "the only insect that has been domesticated", and refer to the "popular belief among many biologists as well as beekeepers that bees are domesticated". They argue that western honey bees are able to survive without human help, and in fact require to "be left at liberty" to survive. Further, they argue that even if bees could be raised away from the wild, they would still have to fly freely to gather nectar and pollinate plants. Therefore, they argue, beekeeping is "the exploitation of colonies of a wild insect", with little more than the provision of a weatherproof cavity for them to nest in.

[ 54 ] Likewise, Pilar de la Rua and colleagues argue that western honey bees are not fully domesticated, because "endemic subspecies-specific genetic footprints can still be identified in Europe and Africa", making conservation of wild bee diversity important. Further, they argue that the difficulty of controlling drones for mating is a serious handicap and a sign that domestication is not complete, in particular as "extensive gene flow usually occurs between wild/feral and managed honeybee populations".

[ 55 ] Beekeeping [ edit ] Main article: Beekeeping This section needs additional citations for verification .

Relevant discussion may be found on Talk:Western honey bee . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( March 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Queen bee with workers The western honey bee is a colonial insect which is housed, transported by and sometimes fed by beekeepers. Honey bees do not survive and reproduce individually, but as part of the colony (a superorganism ).

Western honey bees collect flower nectar and convert it to honey , which is stored in the hive. The nectar, transported in the bees' stomachs, is converted with the addition of digestive enzymes and storage in a honey cell for partial dehydration. Nectar and honey provide the energy for the bees' flight muscles and for heating the hive during the winter. Western honey bees also collect pollen which, after being processed to bee bread , supplies protein and fat for the bee brood to grow. Centuries of selective breeding by humans have created western honey bees which produce far more honey than the colony needs, and beekeepers (also known as apiarists) harvest the surplus honey.

Honey bees removed from the hive for inspection by a beekeeper Beekeepers provide a place for the colony to live and store honey. There are seven basic types of beehive : skeps , Langstroth hives , top-bar hives , box hives , log gums , D. E. hives, and miller hives.

[ 15 ] All U.S. states require beekeepers to use movable frames to allow bee inspectors to check the brood for disease. This allows beekeepers to keep Langstroth, top-bar and D.E. hives without special permission, granted for purposes such as museum use. Modern hives also enable beekeepers to transport bees, moving from field to field as crops require pollinating (a source of income for beekeepers).

In cold climates, some beekeepers have kept colonies alive (with varying degrees of success) by moving them indoors for winter. While this can protect the colonies from extremes of temperature and make winter care and feeding more convenient for the beekeeper, it increases the risk of dysentery and causes an excessive buildup of carbon dioxide from the bees' respiration . Inside wintering has been refined by Canadian beekeepers, who use large barns solely for the wintering of bees; automated ventilation systems assist in carbon dioxide dispersal.

Products [ edit ] Western honey bee in a park in Tokyo Beehives set up for pollination Video of western honey bee collecting pollen from blue crocuses Western honey bee carrying pollen in a basket back to the hive Honey bees [ edit ] Honey bees are one of the products of a beehive. They can be purchased as mated queens, in spring packages of a queen along with two to five pounds (0.91 to 2.27 kg) of honey bees, as nucleus colonies (which include frames of brood), or as full colonies. Commerce of western honey bees dates back to as early as 1622, when the first colonies of bees were shipped from England to Virginia . Modern methods of producing queens and dividing colonies for increase date back to the late 1800s. Honey was extracted by killing off the hive, and bees and bee products were mainly an object of local trade. The first commercial beekeeper in the United States is considered Moses Quinby of New York , who experimented with movable box hives, which allow extraction without killing the hive. The improvements in roads and motor vehicles after World War I allowed commercial beekeepers to expand the size of their businesses.

[ 56 ] Pollination [ edit ] Western honey bee pollinating a flower Main articles: Pollination management and List of crop plants pollinated by bees The western honey bee is an important pollinator of crops; this service accounts for much of the species' commercial value. In 2005, the estimated commercial value of western honey bees was just under $200 billion worldwide.

[ 57 ] A large number of the crop species farmed worldwide depend on it.

[ 58 ] Although orchards and fields have increased in size, wild pollinators have dwindled . In a number of regions the pollination shortage is addressed by migratory beekeepers, who supply hives during a crop bloom and move them after the blooming period. Commercial beekeepers plan their movements and wintering locations according to anticipated pollination services. At higher latitudes it is difficult (or impossible) to overwinter sufficient bees, or to have them ready for early blooming plants. Much migration is seasonal, with hives wintering in warmer climates and moving to follow the bloom at higher latitudes.

In California , almond pollination occurs in February, early in the growing season before local hives have built up their populations. Almond orchards require two hives per acre, or 2,000 m 2 (22,000 sq ft) per hive, for maximum yield, and pollination is dependent on the importation of hives from warmer climates. Almond pollination (in February and March in the U.S.) is the largest managed pollination event in the world, requiring more than one-third of all managed honey bees in the country. Bees are also moved en masse for pollination of apples in New York , Michigan , and Washington . Despite honey bees' inefficiency as blueberry pollinators, [ 59 ] large numbers are moved to Maine because they are the only pollinators who can be easily moved and concentrated for this and other monoculture crops. Bees and other insects maintain flower constancy by transferring pollen to other biologically specific plants; [ 60 ] this prevents flower stigmas from being clogged with pollen from other species.

[ 61 ] In 2000, Drs.

Roger Morse and Nicholas Calderone of Cornell University attempted to quantify the effects of the western honey bee on American food crops. Their calculations came up with a figure of US$14.6 billion in food crop value.

[ 62 ] Honey [ edit ] Main article: Honey Honey is the complex substance made from nectar and sweet deposits from plants and trees, which are gathered, modified and stored in the comb by honey bees.

[ 63 ] Honey is a biological mixture of inverted sugars, primarily glucose and fructose . It has antibacterial and anti-fungal properties. Honey from the western honey bee, along with the bee Tetragonisca angustula , has specific antibacterial activity towards an infection-causing bacteria, Staphylococcus aureus .

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Honey will not rot or ferment when stored under normal conditions, but it will crystallize over time. Although crystallized honey is acceptable for human use, bees can only use liquid honey and will remove and discard any crystallized honey from the hive.

Western honey bee with its proboscis partially extended Western honey bee on a honeycomb Bees produce honey by collecting nectar , a clear liquid consisting of nearly 80 percent water and complex sugars. The collecting bees store the nectar in a second stomach and return to the hive, where worker bees remove the nectar. The worker bees digest the raw nectar for about 30 minutes, using digestive enzymes to break down the complex sugars into simpler ones. Raw honey is then spread in empty honeycomb cells to dry, reducing its water content to less than 20 percent. When nectar is being processed, honey bees create a draft through the hive by fanning with their wings . When the honey has dried, the honeycomb cells are sealed (capped) with wax to preserve it.

Beeswax [ edit ] Main article: Beeswax Mature worker bees secrete beeswax from glands on their abdomen, using it to form the walls and caps of the comb.

[ 66 ] When honey is harvested, the wax can be collected for use in products like candles and seals .

Bee pollen [ edit ] Further information: Bee pollen Bees collect pollen in a pollen basket and carry it back to the hive where, after undergoing fermentation and turning into bee bread , it becomes a protein source for brood-rearing.

[ 67 ] Excess pollen can be collected from the hive. Although it is sometimes consumed as a dietary supplement by humans, bee pollen may cause an allergic reaction in susceptible individuals.

Bee brood [ edit ] Main article: Bee brood § As food Bee brood, the eggs, larvae, or pupae of honey bees, is edible and highly nutritious. Bee brood contains the same amount of protein that beef or poultry does. Bee brood is often harvested as a byproduct when the beekeeper has excess bees and does not wish to have any more.

Propolis [ edit ] Main article: Propolis Propolis is a resinous mixture collected by honey bees from tree buds, sap flows or other botanical sources, which is used as a sealant for unwanted open spaces in the hive.

[ 68 ] Although propolis is alleged to have health benefits (tincture of propolis is marketed as a cold and flu remedy), it may cause severe allergic reactions in some individuals.

[ 69 ] Propolis is also used in wood finishes, and gives a Stradivarius violin its unique red color.

[ 70 ] Royal jelly [ edit ] Main article: Royal jelly Royal jelly is a honey bee secretion used to nourish the larvae and queen.

[ 71 ] It is marketed for its alleged but unsupported claims of health benefits.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] On the other hand, it may cause severe allergic reactions in some individuals.

[ 74 ] Genome [ edit ] See also: Honey Bee Genome Sequencing Consortium and List of Apis mellifera subspecies Further information: DNA methylation Female bees are diploid and have 32 chromosomes , whereas males are haploid and have only 16.

As of October 28, 2006, the Honey Bee Genome Sequencing Consortium fully sequenced and analyzed the genome of Apis mellifera, the western honey bee. Since 2007, attention has been devoted to colony collapse disorder , a decline in western honey bee colonies in a number of regions.

The western honey bee is the third insect, after the fruit fly and the mosquito , whose genome has been mapped. According to scientists who analyzed its genetic code, the honey bee originated in Africa and spread to Europe in two ancient migrations.

[ 10 ] Scientists have found that genes related to smell outnumber those for taste, and the European honey bee has fewer genes regulating immunity than the fruit fly and the mosquito.

[ 75 ] The genome sequence also revealed that several groups of genes, particularly those related to circadian rhythm , resembled those of vertebrates more than other insects. Another significant finding from the honey bee genome study was that the western honey bee was the first insect to be discovered with a functional DNA methylation system since functional key enzymes ( DNA methyltransferase-1 and -3 ) were identified in the genome. DNA methylation is one of the important mechanisms in epigenetics to study gene expression and regulation without changing the DNA sequence, but modifications on DNA activity.

[ 76 ] DNA methylation later was identified to play an important role in gene regulation and gene splicing .

[ 77 ] The genome is unusual in having few transposable elements , although they were present in the evolutionary past (remains and fossils have been found) and evolved more slowly than those in fly species.

[ 75 ] Since 2018 a new version of the honey bee genome is available on NCBI (Amel_HAv3.1, BioProject ID: PRJNA471592).

[ 78 ] This assembly contains full chromosome length scaffolds, which means that the sequence data for each chromosome is contiguous, and not split between multiple pieces called scaffolds. The existence of a highly contiguous reference genome for a species enables more detailed investigations of evolutionary processes that affect the genome as well as more accurate estimations of for example differentiation between populations and diversity within populations.

An important process that shapes the honey bee genome is meiotic recombination , the rate of which is strongly elevated in honey bees and other social insects of the Hymenoptera order compared to most other eukaryotic species except fungi and protozoa .

[ 79 ] The reason for elevated recombination rates in social Hymenoptera is not fully understood, but one theory is that it is related to their social behaviour. The increased genetic diversity resulting from high recombination rates could make the workers less vulnerable to parasites and facilitate their specialisations to different tasks in the colony.

[ 79 ] Hazards and survival [ edit ] Parasites, diseases and pesticides [ edit ] Dead Cape honey bees (Apis mellifera capensis) piled up outside the entrance of a hive.

Western honey bee populations face threats to their survival, increasing interests into other pollinator species, like the common eastern bumblebee .

[ 80 ] North American and European populations were severely depleted by Varroa mite infestations during the early 1990s, and U.S.

beekeepers were further affected by colony collapse disorder in 2006 and 2007.

[ 81 ] Some subspecies of Apis mellifera show naturally varroa sensitive hygiene , for example Apis mellifera lamarckii [ 82 ] and Apis mellifera carnica .

[ 83 ] Improved cultural practices and chemical treatments against Varroa mites saved most commercial operations; new bee breeds are beginning to reduce beekeeper dependence on acaricides . Feral bee populations were greatly reduced during this period; they are slowly recovering, primarily in mild climates, due to natural selection for Varroa resistance and repopulation by resistant breeds. Although it is generally believed that insecticides have also depleted bee populations, particularly when used in excess of label directions, as bee pests and diseases (including American foulbrood and tracheal mites ) are becoming resistant to medications, research in this regard has not been conclusive. A 2012 study of the effect of neonicotinoid -based insecticides showed "no effects observed in field studies at field-realistic dosages." [ 84 ] A new study in 2020 found that neonicotinoid insecticides affected the developmental stability of honey bees, particularly haploid males were more susceptible to neonicotinoids than diploid females.

[ 85 ] The 2020 study also found that heterozygosity may play a key role in buffering insecticide exposure.

[ 85 ] Milkweed [ edit ] A dead honey bee on a milkweed flower In North America, various native milkweed species may be found with dead western honey bees stuck to their flowers. The non-native western honey bees are attracted to the flowers but are not adapted to their pollination mechanisms. The milkweed pollinium is collected when the tarsus (foot) of an insect falls into one of the flower's stigmatic slits as it obtains nectar from the flower's hood. If the insect is unable to remove its tarsus from the stigmatic slit it is likely to die due to predation or starvation/exhaustion. If the insect is able to escape with damaged or missing tarsi it may also be likely to die from its injuries. Western honey bees which escape with their tarsi intact may have their nectar gathering ability obstructed by parts of the pollinia being stuck to the bee's proboscis , resulting in starvation. The pollinia may also stick to the bee's tarsal claws, causing a lack of climbing ability and honey gathering which may result in expulsion from the colony leading to death. Native butterflies, moths, flies, beetles, bees and wasps are common milkweed visitors which are often able to escape without issue, though some species of Megachile , Halictus , Astata , Lucilia , Trichius , Pamphila and Scepsis have been found dead on the flowers. After removing over 140 dead bees from a patch of A. sullivantii , entomologist Charles Robertson quipped "... it seems that the flowers are better adapted to kill hive-bees than to produce fruit through their aid." [ 86 ] Predators [ edit ] Insect predators of western honey bees include the Asian hornet [ 87 ] , Asian giant hornet [ 88 ] and other wasps including the European beewolf , [ 89 ] dragonflies such as the green darner , [ 90 ] and other entomophagous (such as robber flies ) or opportunistic (such as water striders [ 91 ] ) predators.

Arachnid predators of western honey bees include fishing spiders , lynx spiders , goldenrod spiders [ 92 ] and St. Andrew's cross spiders .

Reptile and amphibian predators of western honey bees include the black girdled lizard , anoles , and other lizards, and various anuran amphibians including the American toad , the American bullfrog and the wood frog .

Specialist bird predators of western honey bees include the bee-eaters ; other birds that may take western honey bees include grackles , hummingbirds , tyrant flycatchers and the summer tanager . Most birds that eat bees do so opportunistically; however, summer tanagers will sit on a limb and catch dozens of bees from the hive entrance as they emerge.

[ 93 ] Mammals that sometimes predators of western honey bees include giant armadillos , [ 94 ] opossums , raccoons , skunks , the North American least shrew and the honey badger .

Immune mechanisms [ edit ] Innate immune mechanisms [ edit ] Humoral and cellular immune mechanisms of western honey bees are similar to those of other insects. Trans-generational immune priming (TGIP) is an approach that insects use to pass specific immunity from one generation to the next. The offspring are more likely to overcome pathogens that their parents have encountered. TGIP resembles adaptive immune responses but with different underlying mechanisms. TGIP against Paenibacillus larvae , which causes American foulbrood, has been demonstrated. The egg-yolk protein Vitellogenin (Vg) plays an important role in TGIP in honey bees, as it participates in the information transmitted between queen and offspring.

[ 6 ] Immune elicitors such as fragments or microbes are considered pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). Vg can bind and deliver PAMPs to offspring and thereafter lead to the induction of immunity-related genes.

[ 8 ] In laboratory experiments, injecting heat-killed P. larvae into honey bee queens can prevent 26% of death in their offspring.

[ 11 ] Offspring produced by queens orally vaccinated in this way were 30%–50% more likely to survive infection. Immune priming in queens triples differentiated hemocytes in their offspring.

[ 12 ] Social immune mechanisms [ edit ] Grooming [ edit ] The behavior of bees using their legs and mandibles to remove parasites like mites and dust-like materials from their bodies is referred to as grooming. Grooming includes self-grooming (auto-grooming) and inter-grooming (allo-grooming) between nest mates.

[ 13 ] Self-grooming involves pulling on antennae, rubbing the head with the forelegs, and rubbing the thorax or abdomen with the middle or hind legs. Inter-grooming is a colony-level behavior, and individuals within the colony gain benefits from their nest mates in this manner. By exhibiting a grooming dance, other nest mates are attracted and assist to remove parasites via stroking with antennae or legs and licking. Grooming limits ectoparasite load within colonies, especially eliminating Varroa mites.

[ 14 ] [ 16 ] Hygienic behavior [ edit ] Hygienic behavior targeting brood cells consists of three main steps: detection, uncapping and removal. Adults are able to identify the distinct odors associated with healthy or unhealthy broods and subsequently remove the unhealthy ones from the hive. Hygienic behavior effectively responds to Varroa mites, the fungus Ascosphaera apis which causes chalkbrood diseases, and the P. larvae .

[ 18 ] Freeze-killed brood assay is a simple strategies to assess the hygienic behavior of honey bee colonies.

[ 17 ] As an environmental threat [ edit ] Some entomologists have observed that non-native, feral western honey bees can have negative impacts within their non-native environment. Imported bees may displace native bees, and may also promote reproduction of invasive plants ignored by native pollinators.

[ 95 ] Other experts are concerned that the established positive association in the public's mind between honeybees and the environment may be misplaced.

[ 96 ] Honey bees are not native to the Americas , arriving with colonists in North America in the 18th century.

Thomas Jefferson mentioned this in his Notes on the State of Virginia : The honey-bee is not a native of our continent.

Marcgrave indeed mentions a species of honey-bee in Brasil. But this has no sting, and is therefore different from the one we have, which resembles perfectly that of Europe. The Indians concur with us in the tradition that it was brought from Europe; but, when, and by whom, we know not. The bees have generally extended themselves into the country, a little in advance of the white settlers. The Indians therefore call them the white man's fly, and consider their approach as indicating the approach of the settlements of the whites.

[ 97 ] With an increased number of honey bees in a specific area due to beekeeping, domesticated bees and native wild bees often have to compete for the limited habitat and food sources available.

[ 98 ] Western honey bees may become defensive in response to the seasonal arrival of competition from other colonies, particularly Africanized bees which may be on the offence and defence year round due to their tropical origin.

[ 99 ] In the United Kingdom , honey bees are known to compete with native bumblebees such as Bombus hortorum , because they forage at the same sites. To resolve the issue and maximize both their total consumption during foraging, bumblebees forage early in the morning, while honey bees forage during the afternoon.

[ 100 ] A 2017 systematic review examined the impacts of managed bees – honeybees, bumble bees, and some solitary bees – on wild bee populations, including effects on competition, changes in plant communities, and pathogen transmission.

[ 101 ] It found that "the majority of studies reach the conclusion that managed bees negatively affect, or have the potential to negatively affect, wild bees through competition, changes in plant communities, or transmission of pathogens", but it found many studies were insufficiently long-term or failed to measure direct effects.

[ 102 ] Regarding competition, the review concluded: "there is evidence for the presence of competition between managed bees and wild bees, though there is little evidence that this competition can lead to wild bee population declines"; it stated that more studies need to be done which measure "wild bee reproductive success or abundance as a function of managed bees" to fully assess this potential impact.

[ 103 ] It found an equal number of studies reporting both positive and negative effects on plant communities but concluded due to aforementioned issues with methodology that managed bees' effect on wild bees through this mechanism "remains speculative".

[ 103 ] Lastly, studies were found to  "provide strong evidence for the transmission of pathogens between managed and wild bees", but the effects of this transmission are not yet well-understood.

[ 103 ] The USDA does not presently list Western honey bees as an invasive species.

[ 104 ] Most flowering plants depend on specialized pollinators to efficiently fertilize them.

Cucurbits , for example, are pollinated by squash bees that specifically visit the early-blooming male flowers before sunrise, when honey bees are inactive, and then return to pollinate the female flowers later in the day. Such symbiotic relationships also mean that the specialized pollinator will be covered mainly in its host's specific pollen.

[ citation needed ] Unlike native bees, they do not properly extract or transfer pollen from plants with pore anthers (anthers which only release pollen through tiny apical pores); this requires buzz pollination , a behavior rarely exhibited by honey bees. Honey bees reduce fruiting in Melastoma affine , a plant with pore anthers, by robbing its stigmas of previously deposited pollen.

[ 105 ] Close relatives [ edit ] Apart from Apis mellifera , there are six other species in the genus Apis . These are Apis andreniformis , Apis cerana , Apis dorsata , Apis florea , Apis koschevnikovi , and Apis nigrocincta .

[ 106 ] These species all originated in southern and southeastern Asia. Only Apis mellifera is thought to have originated in Europe, Asia, and Africa.

[ 107 ] See also [ edit ] Apitherapy Bee bearding Beeline Characteristics of common wasps and bees Worker policing References [ edit ] ^ De la Rúa, P., Paxton, R.J., Moritz, R.F.A., Roberts, S., Allen, D.J., Pinto, M.A., Cauia, E., Fontana, P., Kryger, P., Bouga, M., Buechler, R., Costa, C., Crailsheim, K., Meixner, M., Siceanu, A. & Kemp, J.R. (2014).

" Apis mellifera " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2014 : e.T42463639A42463665 . Retrieved 23 July 2017 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) {{ cite iucn }}: old-form url ( help ) ^ "Western honey bee" .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2019 . 2019.

ISSN 2307-8235 . Retrieved 1 May 2019 .

^ a b c Michael S Engel (1999).

"The taxonomy of recent and fossil honey bees (Hymenoptera: Apidae; Apis)" .

Journal of Hymenoptera Research .

8 (2): 165– 196 . Retrieved 20 January 2023 .

^ Lo, N.; Golag, R.S.; Anderson, D.L.; Oldroyd, B.P. (2010). "A molecular phylogeny of the genus Apis suggests that the Giant Honey Bee of the Philippines, A. breviligula Maa, and the Plains Honey Bee of southern India, A. indica Fabricius, are valid species".

Systematic Entomology .

35 (2): 226– 233.

Bibcode : 2010SysEn..35..226L .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-3113.2009.00504.x .

S2CID 84531938 .

^ Bonoan, Rachael E.; Starks, Philip T. (2021). "Western Honey Bee (Apis mellifera". In Starr, Christopher K. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Social Insects . Springer, Cham. pp.

1021– 1027.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-28102-1_181) .

ISBN 978-3-030-28102-1 .

^ a b "Western Honeybees: Facts, Prevention & Honey Bee Control" .

www.orkin.com . Retrieved 2022-05-13 .

^ "The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species" .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . Retrieved 2019-05-11 .

^ a b Marcelino, Jose; Braese, Charles; Christmon, Krisztina; Evans, Jay D.; Gilligan, Todd; Giray, Tugrul; Nearman, Anthony; Niño, Elina L.; Rose, Robyn; Sheppard, Walter S.; vanEngelsdorp, Dennis; Ellis, James D. (2022).

"The Movement of Western Honey Bees (Apis mellifera L.) Among U.S. States and Territories: History, Benefits, Risks, and Mitigation Strategies" .

Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution .

10 .

doi : 10.3389/fevo.2022.850600.s001 .

ISSN 2296-701X .

^ a b Mortensen, Ashley N.; Schmehl, Daniel R.; Ellis, Jamie (August 2013).

"European honey bee" .

Entomology and Nematology Department, University of Florida . Retrieved 1 September 2018 .

^ a b c Charles W. Whitfield, Susanta K. Behura, Stewart H. Berlocher, Andrew G. Clark, J. Spencer Johnston, Walter S. Sheppard, Deborah R. Smith, Andrew V. Suarez, Daniel Weaver & Neil D. Tsutsui (2006).

"Thrice out of Africa: ancient and recent expansions of the honey bee, Apis mellifera " (PDF) .

Science .

314 (5799): 642– 645.

Bibcode : 2006Sci...314..642W .

doi : 10.1126/science.1132772 .

PMID 17068261 .

S2CID 15967796 . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 29, 2015.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Han, Fan; Wallberg, Andreas; Webster, Matthew T (2012).

"From where did the Western honeybee (Apis mellifera) originate?" .

Ecology and Evolution .

2 (8): 1949– 1957.

Bibcode : 2012EcoEv...2.1949H .

doi : 10.1002/ece3.312 .

PMC 3433997 .

PMID 22957195 .

^ a b "Research upsetting some notions about honey bees" .

ScienceDaily . December 29, 2006.

^ a b Winston, M.; Dropkin, J.; Taylor, O. (1981). "Demography and life history characteristics of two honey bee races (Apis mellifera)".

Oecologia .

48 (3): 407– 413.

Bibcode : 1981Oecol..48..407W .

doi : 10.1007/bf00346502 .

PMID 28309760 .

S2CID 10088325 .

^ a b Oleksa, A., Wilde, J., Tofilski, A. (2013).

"Partial reproductive isolation between European subspecies of honey bees" .

Apidologie .

44 (5): 611– 619.

doi : 10.1007/s13592-013-0212-y .

S2CID 18576927 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Caron, Dewey M. (Dewey Maurice) (2013).

Honey bee biology and beekeeping . Connor, Lawrence John. (Revised ed.). Kalamazoo, MI: Wicas Press.

ISBN 9781878075291 .

OCLC 869287399 .

^ a b Piping Queens After a Swarm on YouTube ^ a b Page, Robert E. (1980).

"The Evolution of Multiple Mating Behavior by Honey Bee Queens (Apis mellifera L.)" .

Genetics .

96 (1): 253– 273.

doi : 10.1093/genetics/96.1.263 .

PMC 1214294 .

PMID 7203010 .

^ a b " Apis mellifera " .

AnAge database . Human Ageing Genomic Resources . Retrieved June 2, 2011 .

^ Tautz, J.

Phaenomen Honigbiene Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine Springer 2003, 280 pages, pg 47 ^ Toth, A. L.; Robinson, G. E. (2009).

"Evo-Devo and the Evolution of Social Behavior: Brain Gene Expression Analyses in Social Insects" .

Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology .

74 : 419– 426.

doi : 10.1101/sqb.2009.74.026 .

PMID 19850850 .

^ Yan, Hua; Bonasio, Roberto; Simola, Daniel F.; Liebig, Jürgen; Berger, Shelley L.; Reinberg, Danny (2015).

"DNA Methylation in Social Insects: How Epigenetics Can Control Behavior and Longevity" .

Annual Review of Entomology .

60 (1): 435– 452.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-ento-010814-020803 .

PMID 25341091 .

^ Mao, Wenfu; Schuler, Mary A.; Berenbaum, May R. (2015).

"A dietary phytochemical alters caste-associated gene expression in honey bees" .

Science Advances .

1 (7): e1500795.

Bibcode : 2015SciA....1E0795M .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.1500795 .

PMC 4643792 .

PMID 26601244 .

^ Harrison, J H (1 May 1987).

"Roles of individual honeybee workers and drones in colonial thermogenesis" (PDF) .

Journal of Experimental Biology .

129 (1): 60.

Bibcode : 1987JExpB.129...53H .

doi : 10.1242/jeb.129.1.53 .

PMID 3585245 . Retrieved 17 October 2014 .

^ Wenseleers, T.; Helanterä, H.; Hart, A.; Ratnieks, F. L. W. (2004).

"Worker reproduction and policing in insect societies: an ESS analysis" .

Journal of Evolutionary Biology .

17 (5): 1035– 1047.

doi : 10.1111/j.1420-9101.2004.00751.x .

PMID 15312076 .

^ Ratnieks, F.; Visscher, P. Kirk (1989). "Worker policing in the honeybee".

Nature .

342 (6251): 796– 797.

Bibcode : 1989Natur.342..796R .

doi : 10.1038/342796a0 .

S2CID 4366903 .

^ Pirk, C.; Neumann, P.; Hepburn, R.; Moritz, R.; Tautz, J. (2003).

"Egg viability and worker policing in honey bees" .

PNAS .

101 (23): 8649– 8651.

Bibcode : 2004PNAS..101.8649P .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0402506101 .

PMC 423249 .

PMID 15169961 .

^ Oldroyd, B.; Ratnieks, Francis (2002). "Egg-marking pheromones in honey-bees Apis mellifera".

Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology .

51 (6): 590– 591.

Bibcode : 2002BEcoS..51..590O .

doi : 10.1007/s00265-002-0480-4 .

S2CID 30446742 .

^ Barron, A.; Oldroyd, B; Ratnieks, F.L.W. (2001). "Worker reproduction in honey-bees (Apis) and the anarchic syndrome: a review".

Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology .

50 (3): 199– 208.

Bibcode : 2001BEcoS..50..199B .

doi : 10.1007/s002650100362 .

S2CID 17246102 .

^ Châline, N.; Martin, S.J.; Ratnieks, F.L.W. (2004). "Worker policing persists in a hopelessly queenless honey bee colony (Apis mellifera)".

Insectes Soc .

51 (2): 1– 4.

doi : 10.1007/s00040-003-0708-y .

S2CID 11988371 .

^ Davies, N.R., Krebs, J.R., and West, S.A. An Introduction to Behavioral Ecology. 4th ed. West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012. Print. pp. 387–388 ^ Bernd Heinrich (1996).

"How the honey bee regulates its body temperature" .

Bee World .

77 (3): 130– 137.

doi : 10.1080/0005772X.1996.11099304 . Archived from the original on 2011-07-23 . Retrieved 2011-06-02 .

^ Bernd Heinrich (1979). "Keeping a cool head: honeybee thermoregulation".

Science .

205 (4412): 1269– 1271.

Bibcode : 1979Sci...205.1269H .

doi : 10.1126/science.205.4412.1269 .

PMID 17750151 .

S2CID 40283909 .

^ Papachristoforou, Alexandros; Rortais, Agnès; Zafeiridou, Georgia; Theophilidis, George; Garnery, Lionel; Thrasyvoulou, Andreas; Arnold, Gérard (2007). "Smothered to death: Hornets asphyxiated by honeybees".

Current Biology .

17 (18): R795 – R796 .

Bibcode : 2007CBio...17.R795P .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2007.07.033 .

PMID 17878045 .

^ a b Margotta, J. W.; Roberts, S. P.; Elekonich, M. M. (2018). "Effects of flight activity and age on oxidative damage in the honey bee, Apis mellifera".

The Journal of Experimental Biology .

221 (Pt 14).

doi : 10.1242/jeb.183228 .

PMID 29724776 .

^ John L. Capinera (11 August 2008).

Encyclopedia of Entomology . Springer Science & Business Media. pp. 1534–.

ISBN 978-1-4020-6242-1 .

^ Beekman, Madeleine; et al. (2008). "Dance Precision of Apis florea—Clues to the Evolution of the Honeybee Dance Language?".

Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology .

62 (8): 1259– 1265.

Bibcode : 2008BEcoS..62.1259B .

doi : 10.1007/s00265-008-0554-z .

S2CID 7402446 .

^ Biewer, Matthias; Schlesinger, Francisca; Hasselmann, Martin (10 April 2015).

"The evolutionary dynamics of major regulators for sexual development among Hymenoptera species" .

Frontiers in Genetics .

6 : 124.

doi : 10.3389/fgene.2015.00124 .

PMC 4392698 .

PMID 25914717 .

^ Free, John B., Pheromones of social bees . Ithaca, N.Y.: Comstock, 1987.

^ Blum, M.S. 1992. Honey bee pheromones in The Hive and the Honey Bee, revised edition (Dadant and Sons: Hamilton, Illinois), pages 385–389.

^ Torto, Baldwyn; Boucias, Drion G.; Arbogast, Richard T.; Tumlinson, James H.; Teal, Peter E. A. (2007-05-15).

"Multitrophic interaction facilitates parasite–host relationship between an invasive beetle and the honey bee" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

104 (20): 8374– 8378.

Bibcode : 2007PNAS..104.8374T .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0702813104 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 1895957 .

PMID 17483478 .

^ a b c Choi, Sang Hyun; Rao, Vikyath D.; Gernat, Tim; Hamilton, Adam R.; Robinson, Gene E.; Goldenfeld, Nigel (2020-11-30).

"Individual variations lead to universal and cross-species patterns of social behavior" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

117 (50).

National Academy of Sciences : 31754– 31759.

Bibcode : 2020PNAS..11731754C .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2002013117 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 7749354 .

PMID 33257554 .

^ Weber, Ella (Spring 2012).

"Apis mellifera: The Domestication and Spread of European Honey Bees for Agriculture in North America" (PDF) .

University of Michigan Undergraduate Research Journal (9): 21.

^ Mallory, J. P.; Adams, Douglas Q. (1997).

Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture . Taylor & Francis. p. 58.

ISBN 9781884964985 .

^ "Egyptian honeybee – Ark of taste" .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Weber, Ella (2012).

" Apis mellifera The Domestication and Spread of European Honey Bees for Agriculture in North America" (PDF) .

University of Michigan Undergraduate Research Journal (9) . Retrieved 21 March 2017 .

^ Crane, Eva (1984).

"Chapter 65 – Honeybees" (PDF) . In Mason, Ian L. (ed.).

Evolution of domesticated animals . Longman. pp.

403– 415.

^ Guillim, John (1603).

A Display of Heraldry .

^ Aizen, Marcelo A.; Harder, Lawrence D. (2009).

"The Global Stock of Domesticated Honey Bees Is Growing Slower Than Agricultural Demand for Pollination" .

Current Biology .

19 (11): 915– 918.

Bibcode : 2009CBio...19..915A .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2009.03.071 .

PMID 19427214 .

S2CID 12353259 .

^ Potts, Simon G.; et al. (2010).

"Global pollinator declines: Trends, impacts and drivers" .

Trends in Ecology & Evolution .

25 (6): 345– 353.

Bibcode : 2010TEcoE..25..345P .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.693.292 .

doi : 10.1016/j.tree.2010.01.007 .

PMID 20188434 .

^ Winfree, Rachael; et al. (2007).

"Native bees provide insurance against ongoing honey bee loss" .

Ecology Letters .

10 (11): 1105– 1113.

Bibcode : 2007EcolL..10.1105W .

doi : 10.1111/j.1461-0248.2007.01110.x .

PMID 17877737 .

^ Dennis, Brian; Kemp, William (1 October 2015).

"Allee effects and colony collapse disorder in honey bees" . United States Department of Agriculture . Retrieved 22 March 2017 .

^ Oxley, P.R.; Oldroyd, B. P. (2010).

The genetic architecture of bee breeding . Advances in Insect Physiology. Vol. 39. pp.

83– 118.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-381387-9.00003-8 .

ISBN 9780123813879 .

^ Oldroyd, Benjamin P. (2012).

"Domestication of honey bees was associated with expansion of genetic diversity" .

Molecular Ecology .

21 (18): 4409– 4411.

Bibcode : 2012MolEc..21.4409O .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2012.05641.x .

PMID 22967058 .

S2CID 38988310 .

^ Bailey, Leslie; Ball, B. V. (2013).

Honey Bee Pathology . Elsevier. pp.

7– 8.

ISBN 978-1-4832-8809-3 .

^ De la Rua, Pilar; et al. (2013).

"Conserving genetic diversity in the honeybee: Comments on Harpur et al. (2012)" .

Molecular Ecology .

22 (12): 3208– 3210.

Bibcode : 2013MolEc..22.3208D .

doi : 10.1111/mec.12333 .

PMID 24433572 .

S2CID 23971180 .

^ "History of Beekeeping in the United States | Beesource Beekeeping" . 24 February 2016 . Retrieved 2019-05-01 .

^ "Economic Value of Commercial Beekeeping" (PDF) .

Pesticide Action Network North America . p. 1 . Retrieved 9 May 2019 .

^ "Pollinators and agriculture: Agricultural productivity and pollinator protection" (PDF) .

European Crop Protection . p. 1 . Retrieved 1 September 2018 .

^ S. K. Javorekac; K. E. Mackenziec; S. P. Vander Kloetbc (2002).

"Comparative pollination effectiveness among bees (Hymenoptera: Apoidea) on lowbush blueberry (Ericaceae: Vaccinium angustifolium )" .

Annals of the Entomological Society of America .

95 (3): 345– 351.

doi : 10.1603/0013-8746(2002)095[0345:CPEABH]2.0.CO;2 .

S2CID 86364277 .

^ Lawrence D. Harder, Neal M. Williams, Crispin Y. Jordan & William A. Nelson (2001). "The effects of floral design and display on pollinator economics and pollen dispersal". In Lars Chittka; James D. Thomson (eds.).

Cognitive Ecology of Pollination: Animal Behaviour and Floral Evolution .

Cambridge University Press . pp.

297 –317.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511542268.016 .

ISBN 978-0-511-54226-8 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Lars Chittka, James D. Thomson & Nickolas M. Waser (1999).

"Flower constancy, insect psychology, and plant evolution" (PDF) .

Naturwissenschaften .

86 (8): 361– 377.

Bibcode : 1999NW.....86..361C .

doi : 10.1007/s001140050636 .

S2CID 27377784 .

^ Roger Morse ; Nicholas Calderone (2000).

"The Value of Honey Bees As Pollinators of U.S. Crops in 2000" (PDF) .

Cornell University . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-07-22 . Retrieved 2016-02-08 .

^ Crane E (1990). "Honey from honeybees and other insects".

Ethology Ecology & Evolution .

3 (sup1): 100– 105.

doi : 10.1080/03949370.1991.10721919 .

^ Miorin, P.L.; Levy Junior, N.C.; Custodio, A.R.; Bretz, W.A.; Marcucci, M.C. (November 2003).

"Antibacterial activity of honey and propolis from Apis mellifera and Tetragonisca angustula against Staphylococcus aureus" .

Journal of Applied Microbiology .

95 (5): 913– 920.

doi : 10.1046/j.1365-2672.2003.02050.x .

PMID 14633019 .

^ Berenbaum, May R.; Calla, Bernarda (2021).

"Honey as a Functional Food for Apis mellifera" .

Annual Review of Entomology .

66 (1): 185– 208.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-ento-040320-074933 .

PMID 32806934 .

^ Sanford, M.T.; Dietz, A. (1976).

"The fine structure of the wax gland of the honey bee (Apis mellifera L.)" (PDF) .

Apidologie .

7 (3): 197– 207.

doi : 10.1051/apido:19760301 .

^ Gillott, Cedric (1995).

Entomology . Springer. p. 79.

^ Simone-Finstrom, Michael; Spivak, Marla (May–June 2010).

"Propolis and bee health: The natural history and significance of resin use by honey bees" .

Apidologie .

41 (3): 295– 311.

doi : 10.1051/apido/2010016 .

hdl : 11299/182451 .

^ "Propolis:MedlinePlus Supplements" . U.S. National Library of Medicine. January 19, 2012.

^ Gambichler T; Boms S; Freitag M (April 2004).

"Contact dermatitis and other skin conditions in instrumental musicians" .

BMC Dermatol .

4 : 3.

doi : 10.1186/1471-5945-4-3 .

PMC 416484 .

PMID 15090069 .

^ Jung-Hoffmann, L (1966). "Die Determination von Königin und Arbeiterin der Honigbiene".

Z Bienenforsch .

8 : 296– 322.

^ "Scientific Opinion" .

EFSA Journal .

9 (4): 2083. 2011.

doi : 10.2903/j.efsa.2011.2083 .

^ "Federal Government Seizes Dozens of Misbranded Drug Products: FDA warned company about making medical claims for bee-derived products" .

Food and Drug Administration . Apr 5, 2010. Archived from the original on April 7, 2010.

^ Leung, R; Ho, A; Chan, J; Choy, D; Lai, CK (March 1997). "Royal jelly consumption and hypersensitivity in the community".

Clin. Exp. Allergy .

27 (3): 333– 6.

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2222.1997.tb00712.x .

PMID 9088660 .

S2CID 19626487 .

^ a b Honey Bee Genome Sequencing Consortium (2006).

"Insights into social insects from the genome of the honeybee Apis mellifera " .

Nature .

443 (7114): 931– 949.

Bibcode : 2006Natur.443..931T .

doi : 10.1038/nature05260 .

PMC 2048586 .

PMID 17073008 .

^ Ying Wang, Mireia Jorda, Peter L. Jones, Ryszard Maleszka, Xu Ling, Hugh M. Robertson, Craig A. Mizzen, Miguel A. Peinado & Gene E. Robinson (2006). "Functional CpG methylation system in a social insect".

Science .

314 (5799): 645– 647.

Bibcode : 2006Sci...314..645W .

doi : 10.1126/science.1135213 .

PMID 17068262 .

S2CID 31709665 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Li-Byarlay, Hongmei; Li, Yang; Stroud, Hume; Feng, Suhua; Newman, Thomas C; Kaneda, Megan; Hou, Kirk K; Worley, Kim C; Elsik, Christine G; Wickline, Samuel A; Jacobsen, Steven E; Ma, Jian; Robinson, Gene E (2013).

"RNA interference knockdown of DNA methyl-transferase 3 affects gene alternative splicing in the honey bee" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

110 (31): 12750– 12755.

Bibcode : 2013PNAS..11012750L .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1310735110 .

PMC 3732956 .

PMID 23852726 .

^ Wallberg, Andreas; Bunikis, Ignas; Pettersson, Olga Vinnere; Mosbech, Mai-Britt; Childers, Anna K.; Evans, Jay D.; Mikheyev, Alexander S.; Robertson, Hugh M.; Robinson, Gene E.; Webster, Matthew T. (2019-04-08).

"A hybrid de novo genome assembly of the honeybee, Apis mellifera, with chromosome-length scaffolds" .

BMC Genomics .

20 (1): 275.

doi : 10.1186/s12864-019-5642-0 .

ISSN 1471-2164 .

PMC 6454739 .

PMID 30961563 .

^ a b Wilfert, L.; Gadau, J.; Schmid-Hempel, P. (April 2007).

"Variation in genomic recombination rates among animal taxa and the case of social insects" .

Heredity .

98 (4): 189– 197.

Bibcode : 2007Hered..98..189W .

doi : 10.1038/sj.hdy.6800950 .

ISSN 1365-2540 .

PMID 17389895 .

^ Petersen, Jessica D.; Reiners, Stephen; Nault, Brian A.; Ollerton, Jeff (24 July 2013).

"Pollination Services Provided by Bees in Pumpkin Fields Supplemented with Either Apis mellifera or Bombus impatiens or Not Supplemented" .

PLoS ONE .

8 (7): e69819.

Bibcode : 2013PLoSO...869819P .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0069819 .

PMC 3722171 .

PMID 23894544 .

^ Stefan Lovgren (February 23, 2007).

"Mystery bee disappearances sweeping U.S." National Geographic News . Archived from the original on February 26, 2007 . Retrieved March 10, 2007 .

^ https://www.fondazioneslowfood.com/en/ark-of-taste-slow-food/egyptian-honeybee/ Egyptian honeybee Ark of taste ^ Andonov, S. (2014).

"Swarming, defensive and hygienic behaviour in honey bee colonies of different genetic origin in a pan-European experiment" .

Journal of Apicultural Research .

53 (2): 248– 260.

Bibcode : 2014JApiR..53..248U .

doi : 10.3896/IBRA.1.53.2.06 .

S2CID 56261380 . Retrieved 10 October 2019 .

^ Blacquière, T.; Smagghe, G.; van Gestel, C.A.; Mommaerts, V. (May 2012).

"Neonicotinoids in bees: a review on concentrations, side-effects and risk assessment" .

Ecotoxicology .

21 (4): 973– 92.

Bibcode : 2012Ecotx..21..973B .

doi : 10.1007/s10646-012-0863-x .

PMC 3338325 .

PMID 22350105 .

^ a b Friedli, Andrea; Williams, Geoffrey R.; Bruckner, Selina; Neumann, Peter; Straub, Lars (March 2020).

"The weakest link: Haploid honey bees are more susceptible to neonicotinoid insecticides" .

Chemosphere .

242 : 125145.

Bibcode : 2020Chmsp.24225145F .

doi : 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.125145 .

PMID 31678852 .

^ Charles Robertson (September 1887).

"Insect Relations of Certain Asclepiads. I." Botanical Gazette .

12 (9). University of Chicago Press: 207– 216.

JSTOR 2993383 . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

^ Irving, Fiona (9 August 2025).

"Tiny transmitters on Asian hornets a 'game-changer' " .

BBC News . Retrieved 9 August 2025 .

^ Campbell, Dana (11 November 2014).

" Vespa mandarinia " .

Encyclopedia of Life . Archived from the original on 7 October 2013 . Retrieved 16 September 2014 .

^ G.R. Else (1997).

" Philanthus triangulum (Fabricius,1775)" . The Bees Wasps & Ants Recording Society . Retrieved 21 May 2017 .

^ Miner, Angela (2014). Martina, Leila Siciliano (ed.).

" Anax junius " .

Animal Diversity Web . Retrieved 28 July 2023 .

^ Williams, D.; Feltmate, B. (1992).

Aquatic insects . CAB International. pp. 48, 121, 218.

ISBN 0-85198-782-6 .

^ "Goldenrod Spider ( Misumena vatia )" .

Royal Alberta Museum . August 31, 2004. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011 . Retrieved June 2, 2011 .

^ "The Bird that Loves the Bees" . Smithsonian National Zoo. Jul 15, 1998.

^ Desbiez, Arnaud L.; Oliveira, Bruna; Labão Catapani, Mariana (2020-12-22).

"Bee careful! Conflict between beekeepers and giant armadillos (Priodontes maximus) and potential ways to coexist" (PDF) .

Edentata: The Newsletter of the IUCN/SSC Anteater, Sloth and Armadillo Specialist Group (21): 1– 12.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.CH.2020.Edentata-20-1.2.en .

S2CID 231958749 .

^ Rubinoff, Daniel (16 January 2018).

"Bees Gone Wild" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 14 August 2019 .

^ Charles, Dan (27 January 2018).

"Honeybees Help Farmers, But They Don't Help The Environment" .

National Public Radio . Retrieved 8 August 2025 .

^ "Bees and Honey" .

www.monticello.org .

^ Hudewenz, Anika; Klein, Alexandra-Maria (2013-12-01). "Competition between honey bees and wild bees and the role of nesting resources in a nature reserve".

Journal of Insect Conservation .

17 (6): 1275– 1283.

Bibcode : 2013JICon..17.1275H .

doi : 10.1007/s10841-013-9609-1 .

ISSN 1366-638X .

S2CID 16268870 .

^ Johnson, Brian R.; Nieh, James C. (2010-11-01).

"Modeling the Adaptive Role of Negative Signaling in Honey Bee Intraspecific Competition" .

Journal of Insect Behavior .

23 (6): 459– 471.

Bibcode : 2010JIBeh..23..459J .

doi : 10.1007/s10905-010-9229-5 .

ISSN 0892-7553 .

PMC 2955239 .

PMID 21037953 .

^ Thompson, Helen; Hunt, Lynn (June 1999). "Extrapolating from Honeybees to Bumblebees in Pesticide Risk Assessment".

Ecotoxicology .

8 (3): 147– 166.

Bibcode : 1999Ecotx...8..147T .

doi : 10.1023/A:1026444029579 .

S2CID 83289225 .

^ Mallinger, Gaines-Day & Gratton 2017 , pp. 1–2.

^ Mallinger, Gaines-Day & Gratton 2017 , pp. 26–27.

^ a b c Mallinger, Gaines-Day & Gratton 2017 , pp. 25.

^ "Terrestrial Invertebrates" .

USDA National Invasive Species Information Center . Retrieved 29 December 2023 .

^ C. L. Gross & D. Mackay (1998). "Honeybees reduce fitness in the pioneer shrub Melastoma affine (Melastomataceae)".

Biological Conservation .

86 (2): 169– 178.

Bibcode : 1998BCons..86..169G .

doi : 10.1016/S0006-3207(98)00010-X .

^ Winston, Mark L. The biology of the honey bee. Harvard University Press, 1991.

^ Smith, Deborah R.; Villafuerte, Lynn; Otisc, Gard; Palmer, Michael R. (2000).

"Biogeography of Apis cerana F. and A. nigrocincta Smith: insights from mtDNA studies" .

Apidologie .

31 (2): 265– 279.

doi : 10.1051/apido:2000121 .

Bibliography [ edit ] A. I. Root's The ABC and XYZ of Beekeeping Lindauer, Martin. "Communication among social bees". Harvard University Press 1971.

Molecular confirmation of a fourth lineage in honeybees from the Near East Archived 2006-03-08 at the Wayback Machine Apidologie 31 (2000) 167–180, accessed Oct 2005 Schneider, S. S., P. K. Visscher, Camazine, S. "Vibration Signal Behavior of Waggle-dancers in Swarms of the Honey Bee, Apis mellifera (Hymenoptera: Apidae).

Ethology . 1998.

Biesmeijer, Jacobus. "The Occurrence and Context of the Shaking Signal in Honey Bees ( Apis mellifera ) Exploiting Natural Food Sources".

Ethology . 2003.

Myerscough, Mary R (2003).

"Dancing for a decision: a matrix model for nest-site choice by honeybees" .

Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B .

270 (1515): 577– 582.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2002.2293 .

PMC 1691286 .

PMID 12769456 .

Collet, T.; Ferreira, K.M.; Arias, M.C.; Soares, A.E.E.; Del Lama, M.A. (2006).

"Genetic structure of Africanized honeybee populations ( Apis mellifera L.) from Brazil and Uruguay viewed through mitochondrial DNA COI–COII patterns" .

Heredity .

97 (5): 329– 335.

Bibcode : 2006Hered..97..329C .

doi : 10.1038/sj.hdy.6800875 .

PMID 16955114 .

Mallinger, Rachel E.; Gaines-Day, Hannah R.; Gratton, Claudio (December 2017).

"Do managed bees have negative effects on wild bees?: A systematic review of the literature" .

PLOS One .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0189268 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Apis mellifera .

Wikispecies has information related to Apis mellifera .

FAO: Beekeeping explained FAO: Honeybee anatomy IFAS: Apis mellifera Sound recordings of Apis mellifera at BioAcoustica View the apiMel2 genome assembly in the UCSC Genome Browser v t e Honey bee types and characteristics Bee castes Queen bee Worker bee Laying worker bee Drone bee Life cycle Bee colony Honey bee life cycle Brood Bee learning and communication Swarming Subspecies, Breeds and Phenotypes Africanized bee Buckfast bee Cape honey bee Carniolan honey bee European dark bee Italian bee Maltese honey bee Russian honey bee Western honey bee Apis laboriosa Apis mellifera adansonii Apis mellifera artemisia Apis mellifera litorea Apis mellifera pomonella Apis mellifera meda Apis mellifera monticola Apis mellifera remipes Apis mellifera scutellata Apis mellifera siciliana Apis mellifera simensis Apis mellifera sinisxinyuan Apis mellifera sossimai Apis mellifera syriaca Apis mellifera taurica Apis mellifera unicolor Honey bee race Cultivation Beekeeping Apiology Beeswax Honey Alcoholic drinks Honey extraction Honeycomb Propolis Royal jelly Equipment Apiary Beehive ( BS National Beehive , Flow Hive , Horizontal top-bar hive , Langstroth hive - Nuc , Stewarton hive ) Hive frame Honey super Wax foundation Hive tool Queen clip Bee smoker Honey extractor Queen excluder Jenter kit Parasites and diseases Varroa destructor Varroa sensitive hygiene Small hive beetle Waxworm American foulbrood Deformed wing virus Colony collapse disorder Lists Topics in beekeeping Diseases of the honey bee Beekeeping by countries Antigua and Barbuda Australia Hungary India Ireland Nepal New Zealand Ukraine United Kingdom United States Museums and insectariums Malacca Bee Gallery Bee Museum of Rhodes Honey Museum Honeybee Discovery Center v t e Human interactions with insects Aspects of insects in culture In the arts Insects in art Beetlewing Musca depicta Arthropods in film Insects in literature Insects in music List of insect-inspired songs Insects on stamps In fishing Fishing bait Fly fishing Artificial fly Fly tying In medicine Apitherapy Apitoxin Melittin Spanish fly Cantharidin In mythology Bees in mythology Cicadas in mythology Scarab (artifact) Other aspects Biomimicry Cockroach racing Cockroaches in popular culture Cricket fighting Entomological warfare Entomophagy Insect farming Flea circus Insects in ethics Insects in Japan Insects in religion Jingzhe Economic entomology Beneficial insect Biological pest control Beekeeping Bee pollen List of crop plants pollinated by bees Beeswax Honey Propolis Royal jelly Carmine/Cochineal Polish Chitin Kermes Sericulture Silk Shellac Model organism Drosophila melanogaster Harmful insects Insect bites and stings Insect sting allergy Bed bug Woodworm Home-stored product entomology Clothes moth Pioneers Jan Swammerdam Alfred Russel Wallace Jean-Henri Fabre Hans Zinsser ( Rats, Lice and History ) Lafcadio Hearn ( Insect Literature ) Concerns Bees and toxic chemicals Colony collapse disorder Decline in insect populations Habitat destruction List of endangered insects Pesticide Insecticide Neonicotinoid Pesticide toxicity to bees Categories, templates Insects and humans Insecticides Pesticides Insects portal Taxon identifiers Apis mellifera Wikidata : Q30034 Wikispecies : Apis mellifera AFD : Apis_(Apis)_mellifera ARKive : apis-mellifera BioLib: 70379 BOLD : 21767 BugGuide : 3080 CoL : FN46 EoL : 1045608 EPPO : APISME EUNIS : 254009 Fauna Europaea : 231852 Fauna Europaea (new) : a8737456-b34b-4009-bc9f-5fdc5988b4ab GBIF : 1341976 iNaturalist : 47219 IRMNG : 11307057 ITIS : 154396 NatureServe : 2.110276 NBN : NHMSYS0000875423 NCBI : 7460 NZOR: 0ad225a4-927d-4819-9c60-e492ae83eeed Observation.org : 1753 OBIS : 1490237 Open Tree of Life : 461645 Paleobiology Database : 283625 TSA : 2017 ZooBank : 9082C709-6347-4768-A0DC-27DC44400CB2 Authority control databases National Czech Republic Spain Chile Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐hzrfj
Cached time: 20250817162836
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.177 seconds
Real time usage: 2.493 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 36933/1000000
Revision size: 100132/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 499879/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 134467/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 28/100
Expensive parser function count: 51/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 438843/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.419/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12494476/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 26/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2170.369      1 -total
 38.22%  829.593      1 Template:Reflist
 25.05%  543.675      1 Template:Speciesbox
 24.58%  533.407      1 Template:Taxobox/core
 21.49%  466.350     63 Template:Cite_journal
  9.74%  211.307     76 Template:Period_start
  9.35%  202.977      1 Template:Taxonbar
  7.46%  161.832      2 Template:Phanerozoic_220px
  6.75%  146.519      1 Template:Geological_range
  6.72%  145.954     22 Template:Fossil_range/bar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18214141:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817162836 and revision id 1306414595. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Western_honey_bee&oldid=1306414595 " Categories : IUCN Red List data deficient species Western honey bee Apis (genus) Beekeeping Hymenoptera of Asia Hymenoptera of Africa Hymenoptera of Europe Insects of the Middle East Insects of North Africa Insects described in 1758 Animal taxa named by Carl Linnaeus Symbols of Georgia (U.S. state) Symbols of South Dakota Symbols of Utah Symbols of Vermont Symbols of Wisconsin Symbols of West Virginia Culture of Vermont Hymenoptera of New Zealand Symbols of Kentucky Symbols of Mississippi Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Cite IUCN maint Cite IUCN without doi Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles needing additional references from December 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles needing additional references from March 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata Taxonbars with 25–29 taxon IDs Articles containing video clips Taxobox binomials not recognized by IUCN This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 16:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Western honey bee 83 languages Add topic

