Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Views 3 Groups 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Patriot movement 10 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Português Română Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Three Percenters patrol Emancipation Park in Charlottesville, Virginia during the 2017 Unite the Right rally .

American right-wing political movement In the United States, the patriot movement is a term which is used to describe a conglomeration of non-unified right wing populist and nationalist political movements , most notably right-wing armed militias , sovereign citizens , and tax protesters .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Ideologies held by patriot movement groups often focus on anti-government conspiracy theories, with the SPLC describing a common belief that "despise the federal government and/or question its legitimacy." [ 3 ] The movement first emerged in 1994 in response to what members saw as "violent government repression" of dissenting groups, along with increased gun control and the Clinton administration .

[ 4 ] Several groups within the patriot movement have committed or endorsed violence, with U.S. law enforcement agencies labeling some groups "dangerous, delusional and sometimes violent." [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The ADL and The American Scientific Affiliation has noted that groups often have connections to white supremacy , however, their connections to it have shrunk over time due to their recent inclusion of non-white members.

[ 8 ] [ 1 ] Major events in America which alarm or inspire the patriot movement include the 1992 Ruby Ridge siege , the 1993 Waco siege and the 1995 Oklahoma City Bombing .

[ 9 ] The Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) found that the economic decline and nomination of Barack Obama in 2008 caused the movement to "come roaring back", after declining from 800 groups in 1996 to less than 150 groups in 2000.

[ 4 ] [ 10 ] History [ edit ] Historians of the patriot movement identify its origins in the 1980s American farm crisis .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] As various policies combined to drive farmers deeply into debt, groups on the margins of American politics engaged rural communities with a range of conspiracy theory literature that drew on existing traditions of antisemitism , nativism and paleoconservatism .

[ 14 ] The Posse Comitatus , the Liberty Lobby and Lyndon LaRouche were prominent in these campaigns [ 13 ] [ 15 ] which informed and shaped the ideology of the movement that emerged.

[ 11 ] In the early 1990s, the patriot movement saw a surge of growth spurred by the confrontations at Ruby Ridge and Waco.

[ 5 ] The 1995 Oklahoma City bombing was carried out by two patriot movement members, Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols .

[ 10 ] [ 16 ] During the 1990s the movement organized using "gun shows and the Internet".

[ 17 ] The movement was highly active in the mid-1990s and at a peak in 1996, contained around 800 separate groups.

[ 10 ] It saw decline in the late 1990s.

[ 9 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] In 2009, the SPLC expressed concern about a resurgent patriot movement, [ 20 ] [ 21 ] and the Department of Homeland Security issued a report warning of heightened "Rightwing Extremism".

[ 22 ] The SPLC attributed this growth to "an angry backlash against non-white immigration and ... the economic meltdown and the Presidency of Barack Obama ." [ 23 ] It reported the growth of patriot groups with an increase from 149 in 2008, to 824 in 2010, to 1,274 in 2011 [ 24 ] and 1,360 in 2012.

[ 25 ] According to the SPLC, the "explosive growth seems to have been driven by the election of our first black president and the approaching loss of a white majority in the U.S. that he represents. Another driver is the crash of the economy, which coincided neatly with the rise to national power of President Obama." [ 25 ] The SPLC found that while "there are many people" in the patriot movement "that aren't engaged in illegal activity," the "normalizing of conspiracy theories"—such as the belief that the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is building concentration camps ; rumors of covert plans by Mexico to reconquer the American Southwest ; and the anxiety Sharia law might become part of the U.S. court system—has played into the growth of the groups.

[ 24 ] An extremist member of the patriot movement carried out the 2009 anti-abortion murder of George Tiller , [ 26 ] [ 27 ] and some extremists within the movement also have expressed support for Joseph Stack's 2010 plane crash into an Internal Revenue Service office.

[ 28 ] The movement was connected to and received a boost in profile from the 2014 Bundy standoff and 2016 occupation of the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge . Two members of the movement, Jerad Miller and Amanda Miller , killed two police officers and a civilian during a violent shooting rampage in Las Vegas after leaving the Bundy standoff; they pinned a note to one of their victims saying "This is the beginning of the revolution." [ 7 ] Views [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Various patriot movement aligned groups have frequently been described as racist , xenophobic , extremist , antisemitic , anti-Islam , anti-immigrant , and violent by groups such as the SPLC, [ 29 ] [ 30 ] ADL, [ 31 ] and the FBI .

[ 32 ] Descriptions of the patriot movement include: A diverse movement which has as its common thread its growing dissatisfaction with and alienation from government, the willingness to use military force in defense of its rights, and, in some groups, a conspiratorial eschatology ; [ 8 ] A brand of politics historically associated with paleoconservatives , paleolibertarians , militiagroups , [ 33 ] anti-immigration advocates, and those who argue for the abolition of the Federal Reserve ; [ 34 ] A movement outspoken regarding the U.S. Constitution, particularly the Second and Fourteenth Amendments ; [ 35 ] as a result, some members refuse to pay their income taxes , [ 35 ] and some groups operate their own common-law legal system.

[ 17 ] Additionally, the patriot movement has been associated with the following views: Support of the paramilitary militia movement, such as the Michigan Militia [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 10 ] [ 17 ] Eschatology ; religious views which are focused on finding "signs of the end of times " [ 5 ] Suspicion regarding surveillance [ 35 ] Elements of the patriot movement have expressed support for various conspiracy theories : QAnon conspiracy theories [ 36 ] 9/11 conspiracy theories [ 37 ] Federal government involvement in the Oklahoma City bombing [ 38 ] [ 39 ] (Convicted bomber Timothy McVeigh was "heavily involved in the patriot movement" and the bombing was modeled after one of the missions in William Pierce 's white supremacist novel The Turner Diaries , "one of McVeigh's favorite books".

[ 8 ] ) Federal government involvement in the John F. Kennedy assassination [ 38 ] A New World Order , [ 5 ] [ 35 ] possibly in the form of a United Nations takeover.

[ 38 ] In addition to the militia movement, which is said to have come out of the patriot movement, the patriot movement is often associated with the sovereign citizen movement , whose adherents believe that most US laws are illegitimate and do not apply to them.

[ 8 ] [ 24 ] Groups [ edit ] Groups identifying with the movement include: Idaho Light Foot Militia Militia of Montana [ 8 ] Michigan Militia [ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Christian Patriot movement Constitutional militia movement Radical right Tea Party movement References [ edit ] ^ a b " "Patriot" Movement" .

Anti-Defamation League . Retrieved October 11, 2020 .

^ Parish, Jane; Parker, Martin (December 3, 2001).

The Age of Anxiety: Conspiracy Theory and the Human Sciences . Wiley.

ISBN 9780631231684 – via Google Books.

^ a b "Key Events and Crimes of the Patriot Movement" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . April 16, 2015 . Retrieved October 11, 2020 .

^ a b Potok, Mark (March 1, 2012).

"The 'Patriot' Movement Explodes" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved October 11, 2020 .

^ a b c d e f Right-wing Counterculture Uses Waco as Rallying Cry | Herald-Journal April 24, 1995 ^ a b Winerip, Michael (June 23, 1996).

"Ohio Case Typifies the Tensions Between Militia Groups and Law" .

The New York Times .

^ a b Sullivan, Kevin.

"Primed to Fight The Government" .

Washington Post .

^ a b c d e AMERICAN MILITIAS: Rebellion, Racism & Religion by Richard Abanes, review by Dennis L. Feucht in American Scientific Affiliation .

^ a b Report: 'Explosive' Growth Of 'Patriot Movement' And Militias Continues by Mark Memmott npr.org March 13, 2012 ^ a b c d Janofsky, Michael (April 11, 1996).

"Closer Watch of Paramilitary Groups Is Urged" .

The New York Times .

^ a b Gallaher, Carolyn (2003).

On the Fault Line: Race, Class, and the American Patriot Movement .

^ Wright, Stuart T. (2007).

Patriots, politics, and the Oklahoma City bombing . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-87264-5 .

^ a b Levitas, Daniel (2004).

The Terrorist Next Door .

^ Matthew Lyons; Chip Berlet (2000).

Right-wing populism in America: too close for comfort . New York: Guilford Press.

ISBN 1-57230-562-2 .

^ "Shedding Light on Liberty Lobby" .

News & Record (Greensboro) . June 3, 1995 . Retrieved October 10, 2020 .

^ Michel, Lou. "American Terrorist", 2001.

^ a b c "Online NewsHour:Militia Movement - April 3, 1997" .

PBS . Archived from the original on March 26, 2013 . Retrieved September 7, 2017 .

^ "Militias 'in retreat' " .

BBC News . May 11, 2001.

^ "Patriots No More" .

CBS News . April 19, 2001.

Archived from the original on November 3, 2012 . Retrieved February 28, 2010 .

^ Militia movement on the rise - 22 August 2009 - MiamiHerald.com ^ Bright, Arthur (August 14, 2009).

"Report: militia activity on the rise in US" .

Christian Science Monitor .

^ Carty, Daniel (April 16, 2009).

"Homeland Security Chief Defends Report On Right Wing Extremists" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on March 10, 2010 . Retrieved March 17, 2010 .

^ Gaynor, Tim (March 4, 2010).

"U.S. right-wing groups, militias surge: study" .

Reuters .

^ a b c Right-wing 'patriot' groups girding for actual class warfare, report says By Patrik Jonsson | csmonitor.com | 8 March 2012 ^ a b Potok, Mark (November 2, 2013).

"Hatewatch Exclusive: Alleged LAX Shooter Referenced 'Patriot' Conspiracy Theories" . Southern Poverty Law Center.

^ Berlet, Chip (June 3, 2009).

"Anti-Abortion Violence and the Right-Wing Patriot Movement" .

Huffington Post .

^ Saulny, Susan; Davey, Monica (June 2, 2009).

"Seeking Clues on Suspect in Shooting of Doctor" .

The New York Times .

^ "Extremists in 'Patriot' Movement Calling Joe Stack a Hero" .

ABC News . September 7, 2010.

^ "Key Events and Crimes of the Patriot Movement" .

SPLCenter.org . April 15, 2015 . Retrieved February 23, 2017 .

^ "THE 'PATRIOT' MOVEMENT TIMELINE" .

SPLCenter.org . Retrieved February 23, 2017 .

^ "The Oath Keepers: Anti-Government Extremists Recruiting Military and Police" .

ADL.org . September 16, 2015 . Retrieved February 23, 2017 .

^ "Terrorism in the United States 1996" .

FBi.gov . Retrieved February 23, 2017 .

^ Duignan, Brian; John Philip Jenkins.

Militia movement .

Britannica .

^ Tea Party Lights Fuse for Rebellion on Right By DAVID BARSTOW| nyt.com February 15, 2010 ^ a b c d Patriot Movement is Alive and Well in the US Los Angeles Daily News December 26, 1994 |Wilmington NC, Star-News Google News Archive Search ^ "QAnon, false flags and baby-eating liberals: How Arizona Patriots build community around conspiracy theories" .

www.azcentral.com .

The Arizona Republic . October 9, 2020 . Retrieved October 10, 2020 .

^ Zaitchik, Alexander (2010).

" 'Patriot' Paranoia: A Look at the Top Ten Conspiracy Theories" .

Intelligence Report . Fall 2010 (139). Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved May 27, 2014 .

^ a b c Janofsky, Michael (May 31, 1995).

"Demons and Conspiracies Haunt a 'Patriot' World" .

The New York Times .

^ " 'Patriot' spokesmen call McVeigh a pawn at most" .

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette – via Google News Archive.

Further reading [ edit ] Mason, Lorna L. (July 31, 2008).

The New World Order: The American Patriot Movement, Globalization and Resistance . Archived from the original on May 28, 2014 . Retrieved May 27, 2014 .

Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Sociological Association Annual Meeting, Sheraton Boston and the Boston Marriott Copley Place, Boston, Massachusetts.

External links [ edit ] Active groups listed by Southern Poverty Law Center Patriot Movement page on the Southern Poverty Law Center website.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Patriot_movement&oldid=1306217283 " Categories : Patriot movement 1994 establishments in the United States Libertarianism in the United States Sovereign citizen movement Paleolibertarianism Paleoconservatism Right-wing militia organizations in the United States Right-wing populism in the United States Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from October 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2017 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 15:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Patriot movement 10 languages Add topic

