Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Arrernte sweet foods and drinks 2 Other sweet foods and drinks 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Australian Aboriginal sweets Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sweets eaten by indigenous Australians Red lerps ( Austrochardia acaciae ) on a mulga tree , Central Australia Australian Aboriginal bush tucker traditions feature various sweet foods. The four main types of sweet foods gathered (apart from ripe fruit ) are: [ 1 ] Honey from ants and wild bees ("sugarbag") Leaf scale ( lerps , from honeydew ) Tree sap Flower nectar In some parts of Australia, these customs are still used today, particularly in Central Australia .

Arrernte sweet foods and drinks [ edit ] The Arrernte of Central Australia divide their food up into a number of groups , in a way typical to many Aboriginal cultures. The Arrernte word for sweet foods is Ngkwarle (pronunciation: /ᵑɡʷaɭə/ ), meaning "honey-like foods".

Some Aboriginal people who still have their language often refer to alcohol by this sweet food group term.

Arrernte Name English name Details Ngkwarle athenge arlperle Ironwood ( Acacia estrophiolata ) tree gum Ironwood gum is broken off tree branches. It can be red or clear. It runs down the tree to the ground in long beads. It is snapped off and mixed in some water and left to set. It is then scooped up with a little stick and eaten.

Ngkwarle alkerampwe Mulga ( Acacia aneura ) tree gum Gum can be found sitting in small blobs in a row on branches. Some bits are clear and some red. They are snapped off with a wooden skewer. Once quite a few are collected, they are given to the children as a treat.

Ngkwarle arlperrampwe Whitewood ( Atalaya hemiglauca ) tree gum Arlperrampwe is found on the trunk and branches of the whitewood in big globs. Some of it runs down the tree as its hanging there. It is collected and made into a lump and kneaded until soft, and is then eaten.

Ngkwarle atnyerampwe Supplejack ( Ventilago viminalis ) tree gum Gum is scraped off after it comes through the bark. It is twisted onto a stick. It is chewy like chewing gum . Only small amounts can be eaten without water or it induces headache.

Ngkwarle akikarre Witchetty bush ( Acacia kempeana ) gum When the flowers start to fall from the Witchetty bush, the gum comes through the bark and forms lumps, usually on the trunk. Some is red and some is clear. It is kneaded into a lump, sprinkling a bit of water on it. It can be placed on a little stick to make a lollipop .

Ngkwarle aperarnte River red gum ( Eucalyptus camaldulensis ) honeydew Aperarnte is the sweet sap that drips down or is extracted from the bark of the river red gum. It is retrieved from the bark or from the ground after it has dripped down.

Ngkwarle aperaltye River red gum ( Eucalyptus camaldulensis , Psylla eucalypti ) leaf scale Small, waxy white flakes of aperaltye are found on the leaves of the river red gum. Branches can be shaken so that it falls onto a sheet or bowl below, then swept up and packed into a ball for eating.

Ngkwarle alhelpe-arenye Mallee ( Eucalyptus ) leaf scale Scale is scraped off to be eaten.

Ngkwarle yerrampe Honeyant ( Melophorus camponotus ) The honeyant is found in the ground in mulga country. Its nest is slightly different from other ants' nests. The holes on the surface are smaller. Women dig down from the openings, following the shaft, scooping out the dirt. Honeyants are harvested from the side in the main part of the nest. They are dragged out with a little stick. They are not swallowed, but placed on the tongue and the abdomen is bitten and honey sucked from it.

Ngkwarle arwengalkere ; Ngkwarle urltampe Native bee honey, sugarbag Sugarbag is found in tree hollows. A small 'nose' is found made of wax, protruding from the tree. This is chopped into to split it open. The head part is retrieved first, where the larvae are, then the honey. Honey is gathered in a coolamon or billycan to be eaten later.

Ngkwarle untyeyampe Corkwood ( Hakea suberea ) flower nectar When the yellow flowers hang down, corkwood flower nectar is ready to harvest. The nectar is shaken onto a hand and then the dark bits that fall there are licked off. Sometimes it can be placed in water and drunk. It can be used for this purpose when a person is sick. Everyone likes to collect this food.

Ngkwarle ntewale Bloodwood ( Eucalyptus opaca ) flower nectar Ntewale is the flower of the bloodwood tree. It has a pale nectar. Native bees make honey from these flowers. The flower is broken off and sucked, or nectar shaken onto the hand and the hand licked. When the flowers die off, the bush coconuts come.

Other sweet foods and drinks [ edit ] The practices of the Arrernte were widely practised by many other groups across Australia, however customs varied depending on where people lived. Other notable sweet foods include: Banksia : People placed the flower spike in a paperbark -lined hole filled with water to make a sweet drink.

Grevillea : Nectar shaken and eaten, or mixed with water to make a sweet drink.

Xanthorrhoea : Sweet drink from nectar by soaking in water.

See also [ edit ] Bush tucker Australian cuisine Food portal References [ edit ] ^ Turner, Margaret-Mary, Arrernte Foods: Foods from Central Australia , IAD Press, Alice Springs, 1994, ISBN 0-949659-76-2 , pp1-10.

v t e Desserts List of desserts Types Cake Candies Cookies Custards Doughnuts Fruit preserves Frozen desserts brands Ice cream flavors brands Gelatin Pastry Pies, tarts and flans Puddings By region Australian Aboriginal American Argentine Bahraini Bangladeshi Brazilian British Chinese Czech French German Georgian Greek Indian Indonesian Italian Israeli Japanese Jamaican Korean Pakistani Portuguese Filipino Mexican Moroccan Norwegian Polish Russian Slovenian Spanish Sri Lankan Swedish Taiwanese Thai Turkish Venezuelan Vietnamese See also Dessert sauces Category Cookbook v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights v t e Australian cuisine History Bushfood industry The English and Australian Cookery Book Dishes Anzac biscuit Avocado toast Battered sausage Caramel tart Caramel shortbread Chocolate crackles Cheese slaw Chiko Roll Devon (sausage) Smiley fritz Democracy sausage Frog cake Frozie cup Friand Halal snack pack Jelly slice Kitchener bun Lamb's fry Lamington Lemon chicken Lemon delicious pudding Meat pie Neenish tart Pavlova Pie floater Rissole Rocky road Saveloy Sticky toffee pudding Vanilla slice White Christmas Zucchini slice Breads Boston bun Bush bread Cheese and bacon roll Cheese on toast Cheesymite scroll Cruffin Crumpet Conti roll Damper English muffin Fairy bread Finger bun Hamdog Hot cross bun Prawn roll Puftaloon Savoury toast Scone Steak and oyster pie Steak sandwich Beverages Alcohol Beer Blow my skull Blue Heaven (flavour) Death Flip Flat white Japanese slipper Lemon, lime and bitters Long black Milo Tea Two Dogs Whisky Wine Ingredients Bush tucker Australian Aboriginal sweets Indigenous Australian food groups Citrus australasica Eucalyptus honey Flake (fish) Kangaroo meat List of Australian herbs and spices Mānuka honey Seafood Smallgoods Vegemite Wattleseed Witchetty grub Culture Australian pub Coffee culture Goon of Fortune Milk bar Pie shop Sausage sizzle Six o'clock swill Shrimp on the barbie Sly-grog shop The Great Aussie Pie Competition Regional and ethnic cuisines Australian Chinese cuisine Cuisine of Brisbane Christmas Island cuisine Cocos (Keeling) Islands cuisine Miscellaneous Bedourie oven Billycan List of Australian and New Zealand dishes List of breweries in Australia List of pizzerias in Australia List of pubs in Australia List of restaurant chains in Australia Related Agriculture in Australia Wheatbelt Alcoholism in rural Australia Bush medicine Gardening in Australia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Australian_Aboriginal_sweets&oldid=1295303428 " Categories : Bushfood Australian Aboriginal bushcraft Insects as food Bush medicine Australian cuisine-related lists Dessert-related lists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Use Australian English from June 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Pages with plain IPA This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 23:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Australian Aboriginal sweets Add languages Add topic

