Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Liberal viewpoint Toggle Liberal viewpoint subsection 1.1 Institutions of economic freedom 1.1.1 Private property rights 1.1.2 Freedom of contract 1.2 Economic and political freedom 1.3 Indices of economic freedom 1.3.1 Criticism 2 Socialist viewpoints 3 Choice sets and economic freedom Toggle Choice sets and economic freedom subsection 3.1 Positive and negative freedom 4 Freedom from want 5 Freedom of association and unions 6 Socioeconomic impact of economic freedom 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Economic freedom 34 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Italiano ქართული Lombard മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Freedom to make economic decisions Not to be confused with Financial freedom .

Part of a series on Neoliberalism Ideas Austerity Balanced budget Denationalization Deregulation Economic integration Economic interdependence Economic liberalization Foreign direct investment Free markets Free trade ( area ) Globalization Intellectual property Laffer curve Marketization Market economy Mundell–Fleming model Privatization Public–private partnership Shock therapy Single market Structural Adjustment Programme Supranationalism Tax cuts Economics Monetarism Neoclassical Supply-side Trickle-down Movements Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Fujimorism Thatcherism Reaganomics Rogernomics Third Way Governance Association of Southeast Asian Nations Bank for International Settlements European Central Bank European Union Federal Reserve Greater Arab Free Trade Area International Monetary Fund MERCOSUR North American Free Trade Agreement Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership World Bank World Trade Organization Organizations World Economic Forum Third Way People Clinton Fujimori Douglas Greenspan Lippmann Nakasone Pinochet Reagan Rougier Thatcher Related topics Anti-capitalism Anti-globalization Alter-globalization Authoritarian capitalism Blatcherism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of intellectual property Market fundamentalism Capitalism portal Economics portal Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Economic freedom , or economic liberty , is the agency of people to make economic decisions. This is a term used in economic and policy debates as well as in the philosophy of economics .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] One approach to economic freedom comes from the liberal tradition emphasizing free markets , free trade , and private property . Another approach to economic freedom extends the welfare economics study of individual choice, with greater economic freedom coming from a larger set of possible choices.

[ 3 ] Other conceptions of economic freedom include freedom from want [ 1 ] [ 4 ] and the freedom to engage in collective bargaining .

[ 5 ] The liberal free-market viewpoint defines economic liberty as the freedom to produce, trade and consume any goods and services acquired without the use of force, fraud, theft or government regulation. This is embodied in the rule of law, property rights and freedom of contract, and characterized by external and internal openness of the markets, the protection of property rights and freedom of economic initiative.

[ 3 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] There are several indices of economic freedom that attempt to measure free market economic freedom. Based on these rankings, correlative studies have found higher economic growth to be correlated with higher scores on the country rankings.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Critics of this approach, such as Fredrik Carlsson and Susanna Lundström, have argued that the economic freedom indices conflate unrelated policies and policy outcomes, for example counting lower corruption as an indicator of economic freedom, to conceal negative correlations between economic growth and free-market policies.

[ 10 ] Liberal viewpoint [ edit ] Institutions of economic freedom [ edit ] Private property rights [ edit ] Main article: Right to property Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e In the 1960s, Alan Greenspan argued that economic freedom requires the gold standard for protection of savings from confiscation through inflation.

[ 11 ] According to the liberal free-market view, a secure system of private property rights is a necessary part of economic freedom. Such systems include two main rights, namely the right to control and benefit from property and the right to transfer property by voluntary means. David A. Harper argues that a system of private property is required for entrepreneurship , because "entrepreneurs would not be able to formulate or carry out their plans unless they were reasonably sure that the people with whom they trade have exclusive control over the relevant resources." [ 12 ] Bernard H. Siegan holds that a secure system of property rights also reduces uncertainty and encourages investments, creating favorable conditions for an economy to be successful.

[ 13 ] According to Hernando de Soto , much of the poverty in Third World countries is caused by a lack of Western systems of laws and well-defined and universally recognized property rights. De Soto argues that because of legal barriers and because it is often unclear who owns what property, poor people in those countries cannot utilize their assets to produce more wealth.

[ 14 ] David L. Weimer, surveying a series of empirical studies about economic growth, reports that "a number of economic historians have noted the importance of credible property rights, especially in terms of freedom from arbitrary seizures of property by governments, for understanding relative rates of growth in different time periods and regions," and concludes that countries with strong property rights systems have economic growth rates almost twice as high as those of countries with weak property rights systems.

[ 15 ] At the same time, he notes that the risk of unexpected seizure, and not state ownership in and of itself, is responsible for this outcome, saying: "the degree of state ownership of property does not have a statistically significant effect on growth rates after controlling for the risk of seizure." [ 16 ] Freedom of contract [ edit ] Freedom of contract is the right to choose one's contracting parties and to trade with them on any terms and conditions one sees fit. Contracts permit individuals to create their own enforceable legal rules, adapted to their unique situations.

[ 17 ] Disputes arising from contracts are typically resolved by the judiciary branch of government, but not all contracts need to be enforced by the state. For example, in the United States there is a large number of third-party arbitration tribunals which resolve disputes under private commercial law.

[ 18 ] Negatively understood, freedom of contract is freedom from government interference and from imposed value judgments of fairness. The notion of "freedom of contract" was given one of its most famous legal expressions in 1875 by Sir George Jessel MR : [ 19 ] [I]f there is one thing more than another public policy requires it is that men of full age and competent understanding shall have the utmost liberty of contracting, and that their contracts when entered into freely and voluntarily shall be held sacred and shall be enforced by courts of justice. Therefore, you have this paramount public policy to consider – that you are not lightly to interfere with this freedom of contract.

In the United States, courts have at times stated that the U.S. Constitution protects the freedom of contract. For example, in the case of Lochner v. New York the U.S. Supreme Court struck down legal restrictions on the working hours of bakers because under the facts of the case the court found the hours "not dangerous in any degree to morals or in any real and substantial degree to the health of the employees." [ 20 ] Instead, the court stated that "other motives" underlay the law, by which it seemed to mean protectionism against small bakeries and their non-unionized employees.

[ 21 ] Critics of the classical view of freedom of contract argue that this freedom is illusory when the bargaining power of the parties is highly unequal, most notably in the case of contracts between employers and workers. The argument is that workers as a group may benefit from legal protections that prevent individuals agreeing to contracts that require long working hours. In its West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish decision in 1937, the Supreme Court retrenched on some of its previous caselaw protecting the freedom of contract.

Since then, the U.S. Supreme Court has been extremely hesitant to protect economic freedom under the due process clauses of the U.S. Constitution, as it did in Lochner .

[ 22 ] It has, however, sometimes protected economic freedom in other ways, including through the dormant Commerce Clause doctrine and the First Amendment through protection of commercial speech. And lower courts, including state courts, have protected economic freedom at times through due process clauses and similar constitutional provisions. For example, in 2023 the Georgia Supreme Court found that a law requiring lactation consultants to have a state-mandated license violated the state constitution.

[ 23 ] Economic and political freedom [ edit ] Some free market advocates argue that political and civil liberties have simultaneously expanded with market-based economies, and present empirical evidence to support the claim that economic and political freedoms are linked.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] In Capitalism and Freedom (1962), Friedman further developed Friedrich Hayek's argument that economic freedom, while itself an extremely important component of total freedom, is also a necessary condition for political freedom. He commented that centralized control of economic activities was always accompanied with political repression. In his view, voluntary character of all transactions in a free market economy and wide diversity that it permits are fundamental threats to repressive political leaders and greatly diminish power to coerce. Through elimination of centralized control of economic activities, economic power is separated from political power, and the one can serve as counterbalance to the other. Friedman feels that competitive capitalism is especially important to minority groups, since impersonal market forces protect people from discrimination in their economic activities for reasons unrelated to their productivity.

[ 26 ] Austrian School economist Ludwig von Mises argued that economic and political freedom were mutually dependent: "The idea that political freedom can be preserved in the absence of economic freedom, and vice versa, is an illusion. Political freedom is the corollary of economic freedom. It is no accident that the age of capitalism became also the age of government by the people." [ 27 ] In The Road to Serfdom , Hayek argued that "Economic control is not merely control of a sector of human life which can be separated from the rest; it is the control of the means for all our ends." [ 28 ] Hayek criticized socialist policies as the slippery slope that can lead to totalitarianism.

[ 29 ] Gordon Tullock has argued that "the Hayek-Friedman argument" predicted totalitarian governments in much of Western Europe in the late 20th century – which did not occur. He uses the example of Sweden, in which the government at that time controlled 63 percent of GNP , as an example to support his argument that the basic problem with The Road to Serfdom is "that it offered predictions which turned out to be false. The steady advance of government in places such as Sweden has not led to any loss of non-economic freedoms." While criticizing Hayek, Tullock still praises the classical liberal notion of economic freedom, saying, "Arguments for political freedom are strong, as are the arguments for economic freedom. We needn't make one set of arguments depend on the other." [ 30 ] Indices of economic freedom [ edit ] Main article: Indices of economic freedom The annual surveys Economic Freedom of the World (EFW) and Index of Economic Freedom (IEF) are two indices which attempt to measure the degree of economic freedom in the world's nations. The EFW index, originally developed by Gwartney, Lawson and Block at the Fraser Institute [ 31 ] was likely the most used in empirical studies as of 2000.

[ 32 ] The Economic Freedom of the World score for the entire world has grown considerably in recent decades. The average score has increased from 5.17 in 1985 to 6.4 in 2005. Of the nations in 1985, 95 nations increased their score, seven saw a decline, and six were unchanged.

[ 33 ] Using the 2008 Index of Economic Freedom methodology world economic freedom has increased 2.6 points since 1995.

[ 34 ] Members of the World Bank Group also use Index of Economic Freedom as the indicator of investment climate, because it covers more aspects relevant to the private sector in wide number of countries.

[ 35 ] Criticism [ edit ] The nature of economic freedom is often in dispute.

Robert Lawson , the co-author of EFW , even acknowledges the potential shortcomings of freedom indices: "The purpose of the EFW index is to measure, no doubt imprecisely, the degree of economic freedom that exists." [ 36 ] He likens the recent attempts of economists to measure economic freedom to the initial attempts of economists to measure GDP: "They [macroeconomists] were
scientists who sat down to design, as best they could with the tools at hand, a measure of the current economic activity of the nation. Economic activity exists and their job was to measure it.  Likewise economic freedom exists. It is a thing. We can define and measure it." Thus, it follows that some economists , socialists and anarchists contend that the existing indicators of economic freedom are too narrowly defined and should take into account a broader conception of economic freedoms.

Critics of the indices (e.g.

Thom Hartmann ) also oppose the inclusion of business-related measures like corporate charters and intellectual property protection.

[ 37 ] John Miller in Dollars & Sense has stated that the indices are "a poor barometer of either freedom more broadly construed or of prosperity." He argues that the high correlation between living standards and economic freedom as measured by IEF is the result of choices made in the construction of the index that guarantee this result. For example, the treatment of a large informal sector (common in poor countries) as an indicator of restrictive government policy, and the use of the change in the ratio of government spending to national income, rather than the level of this ratio. Hartmann argues that these choices cause the social democratic European countries to rank higher than countries where the government share of the economy is small but growing.

[ 38 ] Economists Dani Rodrik and Jeffrey Sachs have separately noted that there appears to be little correlation between measured economic freedom and economic growth when the least free countries are disregarded, as indicated by the strong growth of the Chinese economy in recent years.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Morris Altman found that there is a relatively large correlation between economic freedom and both per capita income and per capita growth. He argues that this is especially true when it comes to sub-indices relating to property rights and sound money, while he calls into question the importance of sub-indices relating to labor regulation and government size once certain threshold values are passed.

[ 41 ] John Miller further observes that Hong Kong and Singapore , both only "partially free" according to Freedom House , are leading countries on both economic freedom indices and casts doubt on the claim that measured economic freedom is associated with political freedom.

[ 38 ] However, according to the Freedom House, "there is a high and statistically significant correlation between the level of political freedom as measured by Freedom House and economic freedom as measured by the Wall Street Journal/Heritage Foundation survey." [ 42 ] Socialist viewpoints [ edit ] The socialist view of economic freedom conceives of freedom as a concrete situation as opposed to an abstract or moral concept. This view of freedom is closely related to the socialist view of human creativity and the importance ascribed to creative freedom. Socialists view creativity as an essential aspect of human nature, thus defining freedom as a situation or state of being where individuals are able to express their creativity unhindered by constraints of both material scarcity and coercive social institutions.

[ 43 ] Marxists stress the importance of freeing the individual from what they view as coercive, exploitative and alienating social relationships of production they are compelled to partake in, as well as the importance of economic development as providing the material basis for the existence of a state of society where there are enough resources to allow for each individual to pursue his or her genuine creative interests.

[ 44 ] Choice sets and economic freedom [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2010 ) Amartya Sen and other economists consider economic freedom to be measured in terms of the set of economic choices available to individuals. Economic freedom is greater when individuals have more economic choices available – when, in some technical sense, the choice set of individuals expands.

Positive and negative freedom [ edit ] The differences between alternative views of economic freedom have been expressed in terms of Isaiah Berlin 's distinction between positive freedom and negative freedom . Classical liberals favour a focus on negative freedom as did Berlin himself. By contrast Amartya Sen argues for an understanding of freedom in terms of capabilities to pursue a range of goals.

[ 45 ] One measure which attempts to assess freedom in the positive sense is Goodin, Rice, Parpo, and Eriksson's measure of discretionary time, which is an estimate of how much time people have at their disposal during which they are free to choose the activities in which they participate, after taking into account the time they need to spend acquiring the necessities of life.

[ 46 ] In his book, Capitalism and Freedom , [ 47 ] Milton Friedman explains the preservation of freedom is the reason for limited and decentralized governments. It creates positive freedom within the society allowing for freedom of choice for an individual in a free society.

Freedom from want [ edit ] Franklin D. Roosevelt included freedom from want in his Four Freedoms speech. Roosevelt stated that freedom from want "translated into world terms, means economic understandings which will secure to every nation a healthy peacetime life for its inhabitants – everywhere in the world".

[ citation needed ] In terms of US policy, Roosevelt's New Deal included economic freedoms such as freedom of trade union organisation, as well as a wide range of policies of government intervention and redistributive taxation aimed at promoting freedom from want.

[ citation needed ] Internationally, Roosevelt favored the policies associated with the Bretton Woods Agreement which fixed exchange rates and established international economic institutions such as the World Bank and International Monetary Fund .

[ citation needed ] Herbert Hoover saw economic freedom as a fifth freedom, which secures survival of Roosevelt's Four freedoms. He described economic freedom as freedom "for men to choose their own calling, to accumulate property in protection of their children and old age, [and] freedom of enterprise that does not injure others." [ 48 ] Freedom of association and unions [ edit ] The Philadelphia Declaration (enshrined in the constitution of the International Labour Organization [ 49 ] ) states that "all human beings, irrespective of race, creed or sex, have the right to pursue both their material well-being and their spiritual development in conditions of freedom and dignity, of economic security and equal opportunity." The ILO further states that "The right of workers and employers to form and join organizations of their own choosing is an integral part of a free and open society." [ 50 ] Socioeconomic impact of economic freedom [ edit ] One of the ways to measure economic competitiveness is by comparing an extent of economic freedom that countries have, which as surveys show can also largely explain differences in economic well-being across the world.  Generally, countries with higher economic freedom have higher gross domestic product per capita and its growth rates, as well as better health care, education quality, environment protection, income equality, and happiness results. These trends of increasing prosperity are confirmed even when we compare these indicators within territories of countries. Nevertheless, despite these benefits societies have to be aware that with increasing economic freedom they will have to face going through a phase of increasing inequality , which basically is a result of decreased redistribution, as well as other negative effects from economic liberalization , i.e., running of local enterprises out of business, takeover of competitive firms, enforcing of interests of foreign companies, dependence on foreign capital, deteriorating work rights, harmful manufacturing for the environment, introducing of commercial practices that are not favorable for consumers, as well as endangerment for survival of national cultures. However, these negative effects from economic freedom tend to be felt in a shorter term, and if countries use the opportunities of economic freedom in our increasingly globalized economy in a right way, as research shows their socioeconomic conditions will be significantly better than in a case of less economic freedom.

[ 51 ] See also [ edit ] Capitalism portal Economics portal Liberalism portal Libertarianism portal Politics portal Anglo-Saxon economy Capitalism and Freedom Economic liberalism Economic liberalization Economic Freedom of the World Economic, social and cultural rights Free association Free to Choose Four Freedoms (European Union) Index of Economic Freedom Indices of economic freedom List of indices of freedom Laissez-faire List of countries by economic freedom Universal basic income References [ edit ] ^ a b Bronfenbrenner, Martin (1955). "Two Concepts of Economic Freedom".

Ethics .

65 (3): 157– 170.

doi : 10.1086/290998 .

JSTOR 2378928 .

S2CID 144625406 .

^ Sen, Amartya . "Rationality and Freedom".

Harvard University Press : 9.

^ a b "Economic Freedom and its Measurement".

The Encyclopedia of Public Choice . Vol. 2.

Springer . 2004. pp.

161 –171.

ISBN 978-0792386070 .

^ "Franklin Roosevelt's Annual Address to Congress – The 'Four Freedoms' " . January 6, 1941. Archived from the original on May 29, 2008 . Retrieved November 10, 2008 .

^ Jacoby, Daniel (1998).

Laboring for Freedom: A New Look at the History of Labor in America (eBook) . Armonk, New York: ME Sharpe . pp.

8–9, 148, 166–167 .

ISBN 978-0585190303 .

^ Bhalla, Surjit S. (1997). "Freedom and economic growth: a virtuous cycle?".

Democracy's Victory and Crisis . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press . p. 205.

ISBN 0521575834 .

^ Harper, David A. (1999).

Foundations of Entrepreneurship and Economic Development . London, England: Routledge . pp. 57, 64.

ISBN 0415153425 .

^ Lawson, Robert; Murphy, Ryan; Powell, Benjamin (2020). "Determinants of Economic Freedom: A Survey".

Contemporary Economic Policy .

38 (4). Wiley: 622– 642.

doi : 10.1111/coep.12471 .

S2CID 216347809 .

^ Ayal, Eliezer B.; Karras, Georgios (Spring 1998). "Components of economic freedom and growth: an empirical study".

Journal of Developing Areas .

32 (3). Macomb, Illinois: Western Illinois University : 327– 338.

^ Carlsson, Fredrik; Lundström, Susanna.

"Economic Freedom and Growth: Decomposing the Effects" (PDF) .

Public Choice .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-08-11 . Retrieved 2016-05-26 .

^ Wiggin, Addision; Bonner, William (2004).

Financial Reckoning Day: Surviving the Soft Depression of the 21st Century . Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley and Sons . p. 137.

ISBN 0471481300 .

^ David A. Harper.

Foundations of Entrepreneurship and Economic Development . (1999). Routledge.

ISBN 0415153425 pp. 73–74 ^ Bernard H. Siegan.

Property and Freedom: The Constitution, the Courts, and Land-Use Regulation . Transaction Publishers. (1997).

ISBN 1560009748 pp. 9, 230 ^ Hernando De Soto.

The Mystery of Capital . Basic Books. (2003).

ISBN 0465016154 pp. 210–311 ^ David L. Weimer.

The political economy of property rights . Published in The Political Economy of Property Rights . Cambridge University Press. (1997).

ISBN 052158101X pp. 8–9 ^ David L. Weimer.

The political economy of property rights . Published in The Political Economy of Property Rights . Cambridge University Press. (1997).

ISBN 052158101X p. 8 ^ John V. Orth.

Contract and the Common Law . Published in The State and Freedom of Contract . (1998). Stanford University Press ISBN 0804733708 p. 64 ^ David A. Harper.

Foundations of Entrepreneurship and Economic Development . (1999). Routledge.

ISBN 0415153425 pp. 82–88 ^ Hans van Ooseterhout, Jack J. Vromen, Pursey Heugensp.

Social Institutions of Capitalism: Evolution and Design of Social Contracts . (2003). Edward Elgar Publishing.

ISBN 1843764954 p. 44 ^ Lochner v New York .

^ Bernstein, David E.

Rehabilitating Lochner: Defending Individual Rights against Progressive Reform . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

^ "The Supreme Court . Capitalism and Conflict . Landmark Cases . Lochner v. New York (1905)" .

PBS . Archived from the original on 2017-10-14 . Retrieved 2017-08-26 .

^ "Raffensperger v. Jackson, et al" .

Justia Law . Retrieved 2025-03-25 .

^ Freedom in the World.

(1999). Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 0765806754 p. 12 ^ Lewis F. Abbott.

British Democracy: Its Restoration & Extension , ISR/Google Books, 2006, 2010.  Chapter Five: "The Legal Protection Of Democracy & Freedom: The Case For A New Written Constitution & Bill Of Rights".

[1] ISBN 090632131X ^ Milton Friedman.

Capitalism and freedom . (2002). The University of Chicago.

ISBN 0226264211 pp. 8–21 ^ Ludwig Von Mises .

Planning for Freedom . Libertarian Press. 1962. p. 38 ^ Friedrich Hayek , The Road to Serfdom , University of Chicago Press; 50th Anniversary edition (1944), ISBN 0226320618 p. 95 ^ Hayek, Friedrich (2007).

The Road to Serfdom: Text and Documents . University of Chicago Press. pp.

53–57 .

ISBN 978-0226320557 .

^ Tullock, Gordon (1988). Walker, Michael A. (ed.).

Freedom, Democracy and Economic Welfare . Vancouver, B.C., Canada: The Fraser Institute. pp.

60– 64. Archived from the original on 2009-07-14 . Retrieved 2008-12-13 .

^ Gwartney, L., R. Lawson, and W. Block (1996).

Economic Freedom of the World , 1975–1995. Vancouver: Fraser Institute.

^ Heckelman, Jac C.; Stroup, Michael D. (2000). "Which Economic Freedoms Contribute to Growth?".

Kyklos .

53 (4): 527– 544.

doi : 10.1111/1467-6435.00132 .

^ "Economic Freedom of the World: 2005 Annual Report" .

freetheworld.com . Archived from the original on 14 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ "Economic Freedom Holding Steady" .

reuters.com . Archived from the original on 7 December 2008 . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ Improving Investment Climates Archived 2008-12-07 at the Wayback Machine , World Bank Publications, 2006.

ISBN 0821362828 pp. 221–224 ^ Lawson, Robert A. 2006. "'On Testing the Connection between
Economic Freedom and Growth." Econ Journal Watch 3(3): 398–406.

[2] Archived 2016-04-22 at the Wayback Machine ^ http://www.thomhartmann.com/index.php Archived 2008-12-05 at the Wayback Machine option=com_content&task=view&id=183 ^ a b "Free, Free at Last | Dollars & Sense" .

www.dollarsandsense.org . March 2005.

Archived from the original on 2023-10-23 . Retrieved 2024-02-06 .

^ Jeffrey Sachs, The End of Poverty; How We Can Make It Happen In Our Lifetime (Penguin Books, 2005), pp. 320–321.

^ "Dani Rodrik's weblog: Is there a growth payoff to economic freedom?" .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-07 . Retrieved 2008-11-23 .

^ Morris Altman, "How Much Economic Freedom is Necessary for Economic Growth? Theory and Evidence," Economics Bulletin , Vol. 15 (2008), no. 2, pp. 1–20.

^ Adrian Karatnycky.

Freedom in the World: The Annual Survey of Political Rights and Civil Liberties . Transaction Publishers. 2001.

ISBN 978-0765801012 . p. 11 ^ Bhargava.

Political Theory: An Introduction . Pearson Education India, 2008. p. 249.

ISBN 978-8131795613 ^ Barbara Goodwin.

Using Political Ideas . West Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2007. p. 107.

ISBN 978-0471101154 ^ Sen, Amartya K.

(1993). "Markets and Freedoms: Achievements and Limitations of the Market Mechanism in Promoting Individual Freedoms".

Oxford Economic Papers .

45 (4): 519– 541.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.oep.a042106 .

^ Goodin, Robert E.; Rice, James Mahmud; Parpo, Antti; Eriksson, Lina (2008).

Discretionary Time: A New Measure of Freedom . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

1– 54.

ISBN 978-0521709514 .

Chapter 1 and 2 discusses the context and validity of the new measure.

^ Friedman, Milton (1962).

Capitalism and Freedom . University of Chicago Press. p. 4.

^ Whisenhunt, Donald W. (2007).

President Herbert Hoover . Nova Publishers. p. 128.

ISBN 978-1600214769 .

^ "Constitution of the International Labour Organization" . Archived from the original on 2009-12-22.

^ "Freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining – Themes" . Archived from the original on 2008-12-04.

^ Rožāns, Edgars, "The Socioeconomic Impact of Economic Freedom".

Humanities and Social Sciences , pp. 105–125, 2015. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2683493 Further reading [ edit ] Berggren, Niclas (Ed.) (2024).

Handbook of Research on Economic Freedom . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.

Cebula, R., & Clark, J. (2014).

Impact of Economic Freedom, Regulatory Quality, and Taxation on the Per Capita Real Income: An Analysis for OECD Nations and Non-G8 OECD Nations , MPRA Paper 56605, University Library of Munich, Germany.

Cebula, R. (2013).

Effects of Economic Freedom, Regulatory Quality, and Taxation on Real Income , MPRA Paper 55421, University Library of Munich, Germany.

Friedrich Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty Friedrich Hayek, The Road to Serfdom Milton Friedman, Capitalism and Freedom Amartya Sen , Development as Freedom Li, Kui-Wai (2012).

Economic Freedom: Lessons of Hong Kong . Hackensack, New Jersey: World Scientific. p. 804.

doi : 10.1142/8286 .

ISBN 978-9814368858 .

S2CID 153177821 .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.

(April 22, 2024).

"Freedom for the Wolves" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved May 1, 2024 .

External links [ edit ] John Miller, " Free, Free at Last " in Dollars & Sense magazine The Protection Of Economic Rights & Freedoms v t e Capitalism Aspects and perspectives General Anarchy of production Business cycle Centralization Competition Competition law Depression definitions of capitalism Deregulation Economic bubble Economic development Economic liberalism Economic planning Entrepreneurship Ecopreneurship Externality Financial crisis Financial Revolution Globalization Global labor arbitrage History of capitalist theory Industrial Revolution Invention Market economy Market failure Merchantilism Meritocracy Multinational corporation Nationalization Oligopoly Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Privatization Profit Property rights Recession Regulation Wage labour Wealth Ideology Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Conservative Corporate Democratic Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neo Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social State State-sponsored Welfare Cultural aspects Advertising American Dream Black Friday Consumerism Decentralization Economic freedom Economic mobility Individualism Liberalism Liberty Mainstream Philanthropy Private foundation Private property Rule of law Social alienation Spontaneous order Social aspects Corporatism Economic inequality Employment Freedom of association Labour market flexibility Labour supply Productivity Prosperity Syndicate Social venture capital Unemployment Criticism Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Critique of political economy Critique of work Market fundamentalism Marxism Wage slavery Antithesis Anarchism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-syndicalism Collectivist anarchism Communalism Communism Economic democracy Eco-socialism Free-market socialism Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Libertarian socialism Market anarchism Market socialism Mutualism Post-capitalism Post-scarcity economy Sharing economy Social anarchism Socialism Syndicalism v t e Neoliberalism Ideas Austerity Balanced budget Denationalization Deregulation Economic integration Economic interdependence Economic liberalization Foreign direct investment Free markets Free trade ( area ) Globalization Intellectual property Laffer curve Marketization Mundell–Fleming model Privatization Public–private partnership Single market Supranationalism Tax cuts Economics Neoclassical Monetarism Reaganomics Rogernomics Trickle-down Supply-side Movements Fiscal conservatism Thatcherism Third Way New Democrats Governance Association of Southeast Asian Nations Bank for International Settlements European Central Bank European Union Federal Reserve Greater Arab Free Trade Area International Monetary Fund MERCOSUR North American Free Trade Agreement Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership World Bank World Economic Forum World Trade Organization Organizations Third Way People Augusto Pinochet Margaret Thatcher Ronald Reagan Alan Greenspan Bill Clinton Related topics Anti-capitalism Anti-globalization Alter-globalization Authoritarian capitalism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of intellectual property Market fundamentalism v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal v t e Liberty Concepts Artistic freedom Cognitive liberty Free will Freedom of conscience Freedom of expression Freedom of Expression (book) Algeria Canada India South Africa Freethought Moral responsibility Personification of Liberty Libertas Negative liberty Positive liberty Rights Self-ownership Topfreedom By type Academic Civil Economic Financial Intellectual Internet Morphological Political By right Abortion Assembly Association Asylum Cannabis Choice Civil and political Clothing Death Digital Education Fair trial Family Freedom from discrimination Food Gun Health Housing Internet access Information Life Morphological Movement Personality Press Privacy Property Protest Religion Repair Resist Self-defense Sexual and reproductive health Sexuality Silence Speech Thought To be forgotten Truth Water and sanitation Workers' right to access the toilet See also All men are created equal Anarchism Autonomy Beard and haircut laws by country Civil libertarianism Clothing laws by country Dancing ban Decriminalization of sex work Drug liberalization Human rights Left-libertarianism Legality of recording by civilians LGBTQ rights Libertarianism Liberty, equality, brotherhood Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness Photography and the law Photography Is Not a Crime Pornography laws by region Prostitution law Psilocybin decriminalization in the United States Right-libertarianism Self-determination Stanley v. Georgia Universal Declaration of Human Rights Authority control databases National Germany Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐rmngm
Cached time: 20250816113218
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.919 seconds
Real time usage: 1.139 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3906/1000000
Revision size: 35754/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 258376/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3213/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 211485/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.568/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8959700/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  876.385      1 -total
 33.35%  292.256      1 Template:Reflist
 17.79%  155.884      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 16.40%  143.756      6 Template:Navbox
 15.19%  133.157      5 Template:Excerpt
 13.34%  116.924      7 Template:Cite_journal
 12.70%  111.312      1 Template:Neoliberalism_sidebar
 12.02%  105.376      1 Template:Liberalism
  8.12%   71.197      1 Template:Short_description
  6.80%   59.634     11 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:345419:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816113218 and revision id 1305737221. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Economic_freedom&oldid=1305737221 " Categories : Human rights concepts Philosophy of economics Political philosophy Social philosophy Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles to be expanded from September 2010 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 20:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Economic freedom 34 languages Add topic

