Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 1.1 Philosophical universalism 1.2 Moral universalism 2 Religion Toggle Religion subsection 2.1 Baháʼí Faith 2.2 Buddhism 2.3 Christianity 2.3.1 History 2.3.2 Universalist theology 2.3.3 Questions of Biblical Translation 2.3.4 Catholicism 2.4 Hinduism 2.4.1 Hindu universalism 2.5 Islam 2.6 Judaism 2.7 Manichaeism 2.8 Sikhism 2.9 Unitarian Universalism 2.10 Zoroastrianism 2.11 Views of the Latter Day Saint Movement 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Universalism 30 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Български Català Čeština Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Magyar 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский سنڌي Suomi Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Universality (philosophy) ) Concept that some ideas have universal applicability For other uses, see Universalism (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Universalism Philosophical Moral universalism Universal value Universality Universalizability Economic and societal Cultural universal Universal basic income Universal basic services Universal design Universal health care Universal preschool Universal suffrage Christian Beliefs Apocatastasis Theosis Trinitarian universalism Universal reconciliation Churches and groups Unitarian Universalism International Council of Unitarians and Universalists Primitive Baptist Universalists Universalist Church of America Other History Unlimited atonement Other religions Baháʼí Faith Brahmoism Hinduism (Neo-Vedanta) Sufism Universalism and the Latter Day Saint movement Spiritual Mysticism Nondualism Perennialism Theosophy Category v t e Universalism is the philosophical and theological concept within Christianity that some ideas have universal application or applicability.

A belief in one fundamental truth is another important tenet in universalism. The living truth is seen as more far-reaching than the national, cultural, or religious boundaries or interpretations of that one truth. A community that calls itself universalist may emphasize the universal principles of most religions, and accept others in an inclusive manner.

In the modern context, universalism can also mean the Western pursuit of unification of all human beings across geographic and other boundaries under Western values, or the application of really universal or universalist constructs, such as human rights or international law .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Universalism has had an influence on modern-day Hinduism , in turn influencing modern Western spirituality.

[ 3 ] Christian universalism refers to the idea that every human will eventually receive salvation in a religious or spiritual sense, a concept also referred to as universal reconciliation .

[ 4 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Philosophical universalism [ edit ] In philosophy , universality is the idea that universal facts exist and can be discovered, as opposed to relativism , which asserts that all facts are relative to one's perspective.

[ 5 ] Moral universalism [ edit ] Main articles: Moral universalism and Moral particularism Moral universalism (also called moral objectivism or universal morality ) is the meta-ethical position that some system of ethics applies universally.

[ 6 ] That system is inclusive of all individuals, [ 7 ] regardless of culture , race , sex , religion , nationality , sexual orientation , or any other distinguishing feature.

[ 8 ] Moral universalism is opposed to moral nihilism and moral relativism . However, not all forms of moral universalism are absolutist , nor do they necessarily value monism . Many forms of universalism, such as utilitarianism , are non-absolutist. Other forms such as those theorized by Isaiah Berlin , may value pluralist ideals.

Religion [ edit ] Baháʼí Faith [ edit ] Symbols of many religions on a pillar of the Baháʼí House of Worship in Wilmette, Illinois Main articles: Baháʼí Faith and the unity of humanity , Baháʼí Faith and the unity of religion , and Progressive revelation (Baháʼí) In the teachings of the Baháʼí Faith , a single God has sent all the historic founders of the world religions in a process of progressive revelation . As a result, the major world religions are seen as divine in origin and are continuous in their purpose. In this view, there is unity among the founders of world religions, but each revelation brings a more advanced set of teachings in human history and none are syncretic.

[ 9 ] In addition, the Baháʼí teachings acknowledge that in every country and every people God has always revealed the divine purpose via messengers and prophets, masters and sages since time immemorial.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Within this universal view, the unity of humanity is one of the central teachings of the Baháʼí Faith.

[ 12 ] The Baháʼí teachings state that since all humans have been created in the image of God, God does not make any distinction between people with regard to race, colour or religion.

[ 13 ] : 138 Thus, because all humans have been created equal, they all require equal opportunities and treatment.

[ 12 ] Hence the Baháʼí view promotes the unity of humanity, and that people's vision should be world-embracing and that people should love the whole world rather than just their nation.

[ 13 ] : 138 The teaching, however, does not equate unity with uniformity; instead the Baháʼí writings advocate the principle of unity in diversity where the variety in the human race is valued.

[ 13 ] : 139 Operating on a worldwide basis this cooperative view of the peoples and nations of the planet culminates in a vision of the practicality of the progression in world affairs towards, and the inevitability of, world peace .

[ 14 ] Buddhism [ edit ] The term Universalism has been applied to different aspects of Buddhist thought by different modern authors.

The idea of universal salvation is key to the Mahayana school of Buddhism.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] A common feature of Mahayana Buddhism is the idea that all living beings have Buddha nature and thus all beings can aspire to become bodhisattvas , beings who are on the path to Buddhahood .

[ 16 ] This capacity is seen as something that all beings in the universe have.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] This idea has been termed "bodhisattva universalism" by the Buddhist studies scholar Jan Nattier .

[ 19 ] The idea of universal Buddha nature has been interpreted in various ways in Buddhism, from the idea that all living beings have Buddha nature and thus can become Buddhas to the idea that because all beings have Buddha nature, all beings will definitely become Buddhas.

[ 18 ] Some forms of East Asian Mahayana Buddhism even extended the Buddha nature theory to plants and insentient phenomena. Some thinkers (such as Kukai ) even promote the idea that the entire universe is the Buddha's body.

[ 18 ] [ 20 ] The Lotus Sutra , an influential Mahayana scripture, is often seen as promoting the universality of Buddhahood, the Buddha's teaching as well as the equality of all living beings.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Mahayana Buddhism also promotes a universal compassion towards all sentient beings and sees all beings as equally deserving of compassion.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] The doctrine of the One Vehicle (which states that all Buddhist paths lead to Buddhahood) is also often seen as a universalist doctrine.

[ 17 ] Adherents to Pure Land Buddhism point to Amitabha Buddha as a Universal Savior. According to the Pure Land Sutras (scriptures), before becoming a Buddha Amitabha vowed that he would save all beings and according to some Pure Land authors, all beings will be eventually saved through the work of Amida Buddha. As such, Pure Land Buddhism is often seen as an expression of a Buddhist universalism that compares to Christian universalism.

[ 16 ] This comparison has also been commented on by Christian theologians like Karl Barth .

[ 16 ] Chinese Buddhism developed a form of Buddhist universalism which saw Confucianism , Daoism and Buddhism as different aspects of a single universal truth.

[ 25 ] In Western Buddhism , the term Universalism may also refer to an nonsectarian and eclectic form of Buddhism which emphasizes ecumenism among the different Buddhism schools.

[ 26 ] American clergyman Julius A. Goldwater was one Buddhist figure who promoted a modern kind of Buddhist Universalism. For Goldwater, Buddhism transcends local contexts and culture, and his practice grew increasingly eclectic over time. Goldwater established the nonsectarian Buddhist Brotherhood of America which focused on ecumenical and nonsectarian Buddhism while also drawing on Protestant vocabulary and ideas.

[ 27 ] The desire to develop a more universalist and nonsectarian form of Buddhism was also shared by some modernist Japanese Buddhist authors, including the influential D.T. Suzuki.

[ 28 ] Christianity [ edit ] Main article: Christian universalism The fundamental idea of Christian universalism is universal reconciliation – that all humans will ultimately receive salvation and be reconciled to God. They will eventually enter God's kingdom in Heaven, through the grace and works of the Lord Jesus Christ .

[ 29 ] Christian universalists hold that an everlasting hell does not exist (though most believe there is a temporary hell of some kind), and that unending torment was not what Jesus taught. They point to historical evidence showing that many early fathers of the church were universalists [ 30 ] and attribute the origin of the idea of hell as eternal punishment to mistranslation. They also appeal to many texts of Scripture to argue that the concept of eternal hell is not biblically or historically supported either in Judaism or early Christianity.

[ 31 ] Universalists cite numerous biblical passages which reference the salvation of all beings (such as Jesus' words in John 12:31-32, and Paul's words in Romans 5:18-19).

[ 32 ] In addition, they argue that an eternal hell is both unjust and contrary to the nature and attributes of a loving God.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] The beliefs of Christian universalism are generally compatible with the essentials of Christianity, as they do not contradict any of the central affirmations summarized in the Nicene Creed .

[ 36 ] More specifically, universalists often emphasize the following teachings: God is the loving Parent of all people (see Love of God ).

Jesus Christ reveals the nature and character of God, and is the spiritual leader of humankind.

Humankind is created with an immortal soul , which death can not end—or a mortal soul that shall be resurrected and preserved by God. A soul which God will not wholly destroy.

[ 37 ] Sin has negative consequences for the sinner either in this life or the afterlife . All of God's punishments for sin are corrective and remedial. None of such punishments will last forever, or result in the permanent destruction of a soul. Some Christian universalists believe in the idea of a Purgatorial Hell, or a temporary place of purification that some must undergo before their entrance into Heaven.

[ 38 ] In 1899 the Universalist General Convention, later called the Universalist Church of America , adopted the Five Principles: the belief in God, Jesus Christ, the immortality of the human soul, the reality of sin and universal reconciliation .

[ 39 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of Christian universalism Universalist writers such as George T. Knight have claimed that Universalism was a widely held view among theologians in Early Christianity .

[ 40 ] These included such important figures such as Alexandrian scholar Origen as well as Clement of Alexandria , a Christian theologian.

[ 40 ] Origen and Clement both included the existence of a non-eternal Hell in their teachings. Hell was remedial, in that it was a place one went to purge one's sins before entering into Heaven.

[ 41 ] Between 1648-1697 English activist Gerrard Winstanley , writer Richard Coppin , and dissenter Jane Leade , each taught that God would grant all human beings salvation. The same teachings were later spread throughout 18th-century France and America by George de Benneville . People who taught this doctrine in America would later become known as the Universalist Church of America .

[ 42 ] The first Universalist Church in America was founded by John Murray (minister) .

[ 43 ] The Greek term apocatastasis came to be related by some to the beliefs of Christian universalism, but central to the doctrine was the restitution, or restoration of all sinful beings to God, and to His state of blessedness.  In early Patristics , usage of the term is distinct.

Part of a series on Origenism Origen of Alexandria Thoughts Christian pacifism Asceticism Ransom theory of atonement Free will Pre-existence Subordinationism Universalism Apocatastasis Allegorical interpretation of the Bible Logos theology Aniconism Amillennialism Biblical criticism Allegorical interpretations of Genesis Hexapla Influences and precursors Plato Philo Aristotle Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Pseudo-Barnabas Pythagoras Hermas Origenist thinkers Tyrannius Rufinus Firmilian Arius Pamphilus of Caesarea Eusebius Didymus the Blind Evagrius of Pontus Christianity portal v t e Universalist theology [ edit ] Universalist theology is grounded in history, scripture, and assumptions about the nature of God.

That All Shall Be Saved (2019) by Orthodox Christian theologian David Bentley Hart contains arguments from all three areas but with a focus on arguments from the nature of God.

Thomas Whittemore wrote the book 100 Scriptural Proofs that Jesus Christ Will Save All Mankind [ 44 ] quoting both Old and New Testament verses which support the Universalist viewpoint.

Some Bible verses he cites and are cited by other Christian universalists are: Luke 3:6: "And all people will see God's salvation." (NIV) John 17:2: "since thou hast given him power over all flesh, to give eternal life to all whom thou hast given him." (RSV) 1 Corinthians 15:22: [ 45 ] "For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive." ( ESV ) 2 Peter 3:9: "The Lord is not slow to fulfill his promise as some count slowness, but is patient toward you, not wishing that any should perish, but that all should reach repentance." (ESV) 1 Timothy 2:3–6: [ 45 ] "This is good, and pleases God our Savior, who wants all men to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth. For there is one God and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself as a ransom for ALL men—the testimony given in its proper time." (NIV) 1 John 2:2: "He is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not only for ours but also for the sins of the whole world." (NIV) 1 Timothy 4:10: [ 45 ] "For to this end we toil and strive, because we have our hope set on the living God, who is the Savior of all people, especially of those who believe." (ESV) Romans 5:18: "Then as one man's trespass led to condemnation for all men, so one man's act of righteousness leads to acquittal and life for all men." (RSV) Romans 11:32: [ 45 ] "For God has bound all men over to disobedience so that he may have mercy on them all." (NIV) Questions of Biblical Translation [ edit ] Christian universalists point towards the mistranslations of the Greek word αιών (literally "age," but often assumed to mean "eternity") and its adjectival form αἰώνιος (usually assumed to mean "eternal" or "everlasting"), as giving rise to the idea of an endless hell and the idea that some people will never be saved.

[ 31 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] For example, Revelation 14:11 says "the smoke of their torment goes up εἰς αἰῶνας αἰώνων" which most literally means "until ages of ages" but is often paraphrased in translations as "forever and ever." [ 48 ] This Greek word is the origin of the modern English word eon , which refers to a period of time or an epoch/age.

The 19th century theologian Marvin Vincent wrote about the word aion , and the supposed connotations of "eternal" or "temporal": Aion , transliterated aeon , is a period of longer or shorter duration, having a beginning and an end, and complete in itself. [...] Neither the noun nor the adjective, in themselves, carry the sense of endless or everlasting ." [ 49 ] A number of scholars have argued that, in some cases, the adjective may not indicate duration at all, but may instead have a qualitative meaning.

[ 50 ] For instance, Dr. David Bentley Hart translates Matthew 25:46 as "And these will go to the chastening of that Age, but the just to the life of that Age." [ 51 ] In this reading, Jesus is not necessarily indicating how long the life and punishment last, but instead what kind the life and punishment are—they are "of the age [to come]" rather than being earthly life or punishment.

Dr. Thomas Talbott writes: [The writers of the New Testament] therefore came to employ the term aiōnios as an eschatological term, one that functioned as a handy reference to the realities of the age to come. In that way they managed to combine the more literal sense of "that which pertains to an age" with the more religious sense of "that which manifests the presence of God in a special way." [ 52 ] Dr. Ken Vincent writes that "When it (aion) was translated into Latin Vulgate, 'aion' became 'aeternam' which means 'eternal'.

[ 31 ] Likewise, Dr. Ilaria Ramelli explains: The mistranslation and misinterpretation of αἰώνιος as "eternal" (already in Latin, where both αἰώνιος and ἀΐδιος are rendered aeternus and their fundamental semantic difference is blurred) certainly contributed a great deal to the rise of the doctrine of "eternal damnation" and of the "eternity of hell." [ 53 ] Among the English translations that do not render αἰώνιος as "eternal" or "everlasting" are Young’s Literal Translation (“age-during”), the Weymouth New Testament ("of the ages”), the Concordant Literal Version ("eonian"), Rotherham's Emphasized Bible ("age-abiding"), Hart's New Testament ("of that Age"), and more.

[ 54 ] Catholicism [ edit ] The first use of the term "Catholic Church" (literally meaning "universal church") was by the church father Saint Ignatius of Antioch in his Letter to the Smyrnaeans (circa 100 AD).

[ 55 ] The Catholic church believes that God judges everyone based only on their moral acts, [ 56 ] that no one should be subject to human misery, [ 57 ] that everyone is equal in dignity yet distinct in individuality before God, [ 58 ] that no one should be discriminated against because of their sin or concupiscence , [ 59 ] and that apart from coercion [ 60 ] God exhausts every means to save mankind from evil: original holiness being intended for everyone, [ 61 ] the irrevocable Old Testament covenants, [ 62 ] [ 63 ] each religion being a share in the truth, [ 64 ] elements of sanctification in non-Catholic Christian communities, [ 64 ] the good people of every religion and nation, [ 65 ] everyone being called to baptism and confession, [ 66 ] [ 67 ] and Purgatory, suffrages, and indulgences for the dead.

[ 68 ] [ 67 ] The church believes that everyone is predestined to Heaven, [ 69 ] that no one is predestined to Hell, [ 68 ] that everyone is redeemed by Christ's Passion, [ 70 ] that no one is excluded from the church except by sin, [ 67 ] and that everyone can either love God by loving others unto going to Heaven or reject God by sin unto going to Hell.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] The church believes that God's predestination takes everything into account, [ 70 ] and that his providence brings out of evil a greater good, [ 60 ] as evidenced, the church believes, by the Passion of Christ being all at once predestined by God, [ 70 ] foretold in Scripture, [ 70 ] necessitated by original sin , [ 73 ] authored by everyone who sins, [ 70 ] caused by Christ's executioners, [ 70 ] and freely planned and undergone by Christ.

[ 70 ] The church believes that everyone who goes to Heaven joins the church, [ 68 ] [ 74 ] and that from the beginning God intended Israel to be the beginning of the church, [ 65 ] wherein God would unite all persons to each other and to God.

[ 75 ] The church believes that Heaven and Hell are eternal.

[ 68 ] Hinduism [ edit ] Author David Frawley says that Hinduism has a "background universalism" and its teachings contain a "universal relevance." [ 76 ] Hinduism is also naturally religiously pluralistic .

[ 77 ] A well-known Rig Vedic hymn says: "Ekam Sat Vipra Bahudha Vadanti" meaning, "Truth is One, though the sages know it variously." [ 78 ] Similarly, in the Bhagavad Gītā (4:11), God, manifesting as an incarnation, states: "As people approach me, so I receive them. All paths lead to me." [ 79 ] The Hindu religion has no theological difficulties in accepting degrees of truth in other religions. Hinduism emphasizes that everyone actually worships the same God, whether one knows it or not.

[ 80 ] While Hinduism has an openness and tolerance towards other religions, it also has a wide range of diversity within it.

[ 81 ] There are considered to be six orthodox Hindu schools of philosophy/theology, [ 82 ] as well as multiple unorthodox or " heterodox " traditions called darshanas .

[ 83 ] Hindu universalism [ edit ] Main articles: Neo-Vedanta and Hindu reform movements Hindu universalism, also called Neo-Vedanta [ 84 ] and neo-Hinduism , [ 85 ] is a modern interpretation of Hinduism which developed in response to western colonialism and orientalism . It denotes the ideology that all religions are true and therefore worthy of toleration and respect.

[ 86 ] It is a modern interpretation that aims to present Hinduism as a "homogenized ideal of Hinduism" [ 87 ] with Advaita Vedanta as its central doctrine.

[ 88 ] For example, it presents that: ... an imagined "integral unity" that was probably little more than an "imagined" view of the religious life that pertained only to a cultural elite and that empirically speaking had very little reality "on the ground," as it were, throughout the centuries of cultural development in the South Asian region.

[ 89 ] Hinduism embraces universalism by conceiving the whole world as a single family that deifies the one truth, and therefore it accepts all forms of beliefs and dismisses labels of distinct religions which would imply a division of identity.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ self-published source ] This modernised re-interpretation has become a broad current in Indian culture, [ 88 ] [ 93 ] extending far beyond the Dashanami Sampradaya , the Advaita Vedanta Sampradaya founded by Adi Shankara . An early exponent of Hindu Universalism was Ram Mohan Roy , who established the Brahmo Samaj .

[ 94 ] Hindu Universalism was popularised in the 20th century in both India and the west by Vivekananda [ 95 ] [ 88 ] and Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan .

[ 88 ] Veneration for all other religions was articulated by Gandhi : After long study and experience, I have come to the conclusion that [1] all religions are true; [2] all religions have some error in them; [3] all religions are almost as dear to me as my own Hinduism, in as much as all human beings should be as dear to one as one's own close relatives. My own veneration for other faiths is the same as that for my own faith; therefore no thought of conversion is possible.

[ 96 ] Western orientalists played an important role in this popularisation, regarding Vedanta to be the "central theology of Hinduism".

[ 88 ] Oriental scholarship portrayed Hinduism as a "single world religion", [ 88 ] and denigrated the heterogeneity of Hindu beliefs and practices as 'distortions' of the basic teachings of Vedanta.

[ 97 ] Islam [ edit ] Further information: Ummah , Divisions of the world in Islam , People of the Book , Dhimmi , and Dawah This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( June 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Islam recognizes to a certain extent the validity of the Abrahamic religions , the Quran identifying Jews, Christians, and " Sabi'un " (usually taken as a reference to the Mandaeans ) as "people of the Book" ( ahl al-kitab ). Later Islamic theologians expanded this definition to include Zoroastrians , and later even Hindus, as the early Islamic empire brought many people professing these religions under its dominion, but the Qur'an explicitly identifies only Jews, Christians, and Sabians as People of the Book.

[ 98 ] [ need quotation to verify ] , [ 99 ] [ failed verification ] , [ 100 ] [ failed verification ] The relation between Islam and universalism has assumed crucial importance in the context of political Islam or Islamism , particularly in reference to Sayyid Qutb , a leading member of the Muslim Brotherhood movement, and one of the key contemporary philosophers of Islam.

[ 101 ] There are several views within Islam with respect to Universalism. According to the most inclusive teachings all peoples of the book have a chance of salvation. For example, Surah 2:62 states: Indeed, the believers, Jews, Christians, and Sabians—whoever ˹truly˺ believes in Allah and the Last Day and does good will have their reward with their Lord. And there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve.

— Surah Al-Baqara 2:62 However, the most exclusive teachings disagree. For example, Surah 9:5 states: But once the Sacred Months have passed, kill the polytheists ˹who violated their treaties˺ wherever you find them, capture them, besiege them, and lie in wait for them on every way. But if they repent, perform prayers, and pay alms-tax, then set them free. Indeed, Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

— Surah At-Tawbah 9:5 The interpretation of all of these passages are hotly contested amongst various schools of thought and branches of Islam as is the doctrine of abrogation ( naskh ) which is used to determine which verses take precedence, based on reconstructed chronology, with later verses superseding earlier ones. The ahadith also play a major role in this, and different schools of thought assign different weightings and rulings of authenticity to different hadith, with the four schools of Sunni thought accepting the Six Authentic Collections, generally along with the Muwatta Imam Malik . Depending on the level of acceptance of rejection of certain traditions, the interpretation of the Koran can be changed immensely, from the Qur'anists who reject the ahadith, to the ahl al-hadith , who hold the entirety of the traditional collections in great reverence.

Some Islamic scholars [ 102 ] [ 103 ] view the world as bipartite, consisting of the House of Islam, that is, where people live under the Sharia ; [ 103 ] and the House of War, that is, where the people do not live under Sharia, which must be proselytized [ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] using whatever resources available, including, in some traditionalist and conservative interpretations, [ 106 ] the use of violence, as holy struggle in the path of God, [ 100 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] to either convert its inhabitants to Islam, or to rule them under the Shariah (cf.

dhimmi ).

[ 108 ] Judaism [ edit ] Main article: Jewish views on religious pluralism See also: Noahidism Sefer Torah at old Glockengasse Synagogue (reconstruction), Cologne Judaism teaches that God chose the Jewish people to be in a unique covenant with God, and one of their beliefs is that Jewish people were charged by the Torah with a specific mission—to be a light unto the nations , and to exemplify the covenant with God as described in the Torah to other nations. This view does not preclude a belief that God also has a relationship with other peoples—rather, Judaism holds that God had entered into a covenant with all humanity as Noachides , and that Jews and non-Jews alike have a relationship with God, as well as being universal in the sense that it is open to all mankind.

[ 109 ] Modern Jews such as Emmanuel Levinas advocate a universalist mindset that is performed through particularist behavior.

[ 110 ] An on-line organization, the Jewish Spiritual Leaders Institute founded and led by Steven Blane , who calls himself an "American Jewish Universalist Rabbi", believes in a more inclusive version of Jewish Universalism, stating that "God equally chose all nations to be lights unto the world, and we have much to learn and share with each other. We can only accomplish Tikkun Olam by our unconditional acceptance of each other's peaceful doctrines." [ 111 ] Manichaeism [ edit ] Main article: Manichaeism Manichaeism, like Christian Gnosticism and Zurvanism , was arguably in some ways inherently universalist.

[ 112 ] [ page needed ] Yet in other respects, it was quite contrary to universalistic principles, holding instead to an eternal dualism.

[ 113 ] Sikhism [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Sikhism , all the religions of the world are compared to rivers flowing into a single ocean. Although the Sikh gurus did not agree with the practices of fasting , idolatry and pilgrimage during their times, they stressed that all religions should be tolerated. The Sikh scripture, the Guru Granth Sahib , contains the writings of not just the Sikh guru themselves, but the writings of several Hindu and Muslim saints, known as the Bhagats .

The very first word of the Sikh scripture is "Ik", followed by "Omkar". This literally means that there is only one god, and that one is wholesome, inclusive of the whole universe. It further goes on to state that all of creation, and all energy is part of this primordial being. As such, it is described in scripture over and over again, that all that occurs is part of the divine will, and as such, has to be accepted. It occurs for a reason, even if it is beyond the grasp of one person to understand.

Although Sikhism does not teach that men are created as an image of God , it states that the essence of the One is to be found throughout all of its creation.

[ 114 ] As was said by Yogi Bhajan, the man who is credited with having brought Sikhism to the West: If you can't see God in all, you can't see God at all.

— Sri Singh Sahib, Yogi Bhajan [ 115 ] The First Sikh Guru, Guru Nanak said himself: There is no Hindu, there is no Muslim".

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] By this, Guru Nanak meant that there is no real "religion" in God's eyes. Unlike many of the major world religions, Sikhism does not have missionaries , instead it believes men have the freedom to find their own path to salvation .

Unitarian Universalism [ edit ] Main article: Unitarian Universalism Sign on a UU church in Rochester, Minnesota , United States Unitarian Universalism (UU) is a theologically liberal religion characterized by a "free and responsible search for truth and meaning".

[ 118 ] Unitarian Universalists do not share a creed ; rather, they are unified by their shared search for spiritual growth and by the understanding that an individual's theology is a result of that search and not a result of obedience to an authoritarian requirement. Unitarian Universalists draw from all major world religions [ 119 ] and many different theological sources and have a wide range of beliefs and practices.

While having its origins in Christianity, UU is no longer a Christian church. As of 2006, fewer than about 20% of Unitarian Universalists identified themselves as Christian.

[ 120 ] Contemporary Unitarian Universalism espouses a pluralist approach to religious belief, whereby members may describe themselves as humanist , agnostic, deist , atheist , pagan, Christian, monotheist , pantheist , polytheist , or assume no label at all.

The Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) was formed in 1961, a consolidation of the American Unitarian Association , established in 1825, and the Universalist Church of America, [ 121 ] established in 1866. It is headquartered in Boston , and mainly serves churches in the United States. The Canadian Unitarian Council became an independent body in 2002.

[ 122 ] Zoroastrianism [ edit ] Faravahar (or Ferohar), one of the primary symbols of Zoroastrianism, believed to be the depiction of a Fravashi (guardian spirit) Main article: Zoroastrianism Some varieties of Zoroastrian (such as Zurvanism ) are universalistic in application to all races, but not necessarily universalist in the sense of universal salvation.

[ 123 ] [ failed verification ] Views of the Latter Day Saint Movement [ edit ] See also: Universalism and the Latter Day Saint movement See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Politics portal Religion portal Ananda Marga Christianity: Liberal Catholic Church Primitive Baptist Universalist Religious Society of Friends Schwarzenau Brethren Swedenborgianism ( The New Church ) Trinitarian Universalism Church Universal and Triumphant Comparative religion Ecumenism Hypothetical universalism George MacDonald Mahatma Gandhi Foundation Omnism Perennial philosophy Post-theism Religious liberalism Religious pluralism Spannian universalism Subud Universal basic income Universal basic services Universal health care Universal suffrage Universal Sufism References [ edit ] ^ Nations, United.

"Are Human Rights Universal?" .

United Nations . Retrieved 2021-04-17 .

^ Benhabib, Seyla (2007).

"Another Universalism: On the Unity and Diversity of Human Rights" .

Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association .

81 (2): 7– 32.

ISSN 0065-972X .

JSTOR 27653991 .

^ King 2002 .

^ Otis Ainsworth Skinner (1807-1861), A Series of Sermons in Defense of the Doctrine of Universal Salvation , Page 209, It is not part of mainline Christian doctrine either Catholic or Protestant. "Repentance is a means by which all men are brought into the enjoyment of religion, and we do expect any man will be saved while he continues in sin. However, Unitarian Universalism holds a universal salvation, because is, "we expect all men will repent." ^ "Relativism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 13 July 2020 .

...relativism...denies the universality of certain truth claims...

^ "Philosophical Dictionary: "universalizability" " .

www.philosophypages.com .

Archived from the original on 2007-08-20.

universalizability: The applicability of a moral rule to all similarly situated individuals.

^ Kemerling, Garth (November 12, 2011).

"A Dictionary of Philosophical Terms and Names" .

Philosophy Pages .

According to Immanuel Kant and Richard Mervyn Hare ...moral imperatives must be regarded as equally binding on everyone.

^ Gowans, Chris (Dec 9, 2008).

"Moral Relativism" . In Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2012 ed.).

Let us say that moral objectivism maintains that moral judgments are ordinarily true or false in an absolute or universal sense, that some of them are true, and that people sometimes are justified in accepting true moral judgments (and rejecting false ones) on the basis of evidence available to any reasonable and well-informed person.

^ Buck, Christopher (1999).

Paradise and Paradigm: Key Symbols in Persian Christianity and the Baháʼí Faith . Albany: State University of New York Press. p.

292 .

^ "Manifestation of God" .

Bahaipedia . Retrieved August 4, 2022 .

^ Langness, David (30 May 2015).

"How Many Prophets?" .

Bahaiteachings.org . Retrieved August 4, 2022 .

^ a b Stockman, Robert (2000).

"The Baha'i Faith" . In Beversluis, Joel (ed.).

Sourcebook of the World's Religions . New World Library. p.

7 .

ISBN 1-57731-121-3 .

^ a b c Smith, Peter (2008).

An Introduction to the Baha'i (sic) Faith .

Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-86251-6 .

^ Smith, Peter (2000).

"peace" .

A Concise Encyclopedia of the Baháʼí Faith (illustrated, reprint ed.).

Oxford : Oneworld Publications . pp.

266– 267.

ISBN 1-85168-184-1 – via Internet Archive .

^ "The main branches of Buddhism (article)" .

Khan Academy .

Archived from the original on 2021-02-22 . Retrieved 2021-08-24 .

^ a b c d Pan-chiu Lai, "Barth and Universal Salvation, A Mahayana Buddhist Perspective" in Martha L. Moore-Keish, Christian T. Collins Winn.

Karl Barth and Comparative Theology.

Fordham Univ Press, Aug 6, 2019.

^ a b Takahatake, Takamichi (2006).

Young Man Shinran: A Reappraisal of Shinran’s Life, p. 36. Wilfrid Laurier Univ. Press.

^ a b c Chen, Shuman (2014).

"Buddha-Nature of Insentient Beings" .

Encyclopedia of Psychology and Religion . pp.

208– 212.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4614-6086-2_9002 .

ISBN 978-1-4614-6085-5 .

^ C. V. Jones (2020).

The Buddhist Self: On Tathāgatagarbha and Ātman.

p. 204. University of Hawaii Press.

^ Chung, Paul S (2008).

Martin Luther and Buddhism: Aesthetics of Suffering, Second Edition , pp. 373-375. Wipf and Stock Publishers.

^ Reeves, Gene (2010).

The Stories of the Lotus Sutra.

Simon and Schuster.

^ Steven Heine (2015).

Dōgen and Sōtō Zen.

p. 65. Oxford University Press.

^ Travagnin, Stefania (2016).

Religion and Media in China: Insights and Case Studies from the Mainland, Taiwan and Hong Kong, p. 124. Taylor & Francis.

^ Kristin Beise Kiblinger (2017).

Buddhist Inclusivism: Attitudes Towards Religious Others , Routledge.

^ F Harold Smith.

The Buddhist Way of Life: Its Philosophy and History.

Routledge, 2013.

^ Emily Sigalow (2022).

American JewBu: Jews, Buddhists, and Religious Change, p. 45. Princeton University Press.

^ Emily Sigalow (2022).

American JewBu: Jews, Buddhists, and Religious Change, p. 46. Princeton University Press.

^ Duncan Ryuken Williams, Tomoe Moriya.

Issei Buddhism in the Americas, pp. 85, 123. University of Illinois Press, 2010.

^ "What Is Christian Universalism?" . Auburn.edu. Archived from the original on 2017-11-22 . Retrieved 2017-12-17 .

^ See Ramelli , The Christian Doctrine of Apokatastasis , and A Larger Hope .

^ a b c "The Salvation Conspiracy: How Hell Became Eternal | Christian Universalist Association" . 19 March 2013. Archived from the original on 20 October 2021 . Retrieved 3 May 2021 .

^ Gary Amirault.

"The Fate of the Wicked" . Tentmaker.org . Retrieved 2017-12-17 .

^ Guild, E.E.

"Arguments in Favor of Universalism" .

www.tentmaker.org .

Archived from the original on 2021-04-19 . Retrieved 2021-08-24 .

^ "Kingdom Bible Studies: J. Preston Eby, Kingdom of God; Saviour of The World" .

www.godfire.net .

Archived from the original on 2021-04-19 . Retrieved 2021-08-24 .

^ "Hell Fire and Brimstone, The Lake of Fire, Second Death" .

www.godfire.net .

Archived from the original on 2021-02-25 . Retrieved 2021-08-24 .

^ Gregory MacDonald , The Evangelical Universalist , 175-176.

^ "The Bible Hell" .

www.tentmaker.org .

Archived from the original on 2021-05-28 . Retrieved 2021-08-24 .

^ Miriam Van Scott (10 February 2015).

"Purgatorial Hell" .

The Encyclopedia of Hell: A Comprehensive Survey of the Underworld . St. Martin's Press. p. 240.

ISBN 978-1-4668-9119-7 .

^ "See section entitled "Five Principles of Faith" " . Auburn.edu. Archived from the original on 2016-08-15 . Retrieved 2011-11-09 .

^ a b Knight, George T.

(1950) [1912]. "Universalists".

The New Schaff–Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge . Vol. 12. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House . p.

96 .

OCLC 1002955 .

The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge at the Internet Archive (Vol. 12).

^ "Purgatorial Hell FAQ" . StanRock.net. 20 May 2015 . Retrieved 2016-01-19 .

^ Wyatt, Neal; Dwyer, Tierney V; Dwyer, Tierney V (2008).

"Unitarian Universalism: A Research Guide" .

Reference & User Services Quarterly .

47 (3): 210– 214.

doi : 10.5860/rusq.47n3.210 .

^ Unitarian Universalism . Zondervan Academic. 15 December 2009.

ISBN 9780310864547 .

^ "100 Scriptural Proofs That Jesus Christ Will Save All Mankind" . Tentmaker.org . Retrieved 2017-12-17 .

^ a b c d Tentmaker.

"The Fate of the Wicked" .

tentmaker.org . Tentmaker . Retrieved 29 June 2012 .

^ " "Eternal" Punishment (Matthew 25:46) Is NOT Found In The Greek New Testament" .

www.tentmaker.org .

^ "A look at the Greed word "aionion" used by universalists | carm.org" . December 15, 2008.

^ See The Greek-English Interlinear ESV New Testament , 1061; or the following online interlinear .

^ Vincent, Marvin.

"Note on Olethron Aionion (eternal destruction)" .

Word Studies in the New Testament . Archived from the original on 21 May 2018 . Retrieved 18 June 2012 .

^ See Barclay ( New Testament Words , 35); and Ramelli & Konstan ( Terms For Eternity ), who prefer "otherworldly" as the best rendering of αἰώνιος.

^ Hart , The New Testament : A Translation , 53 (see also his explanation in the postscript, 537-543).

^ Talbott , The Inescapable Love of God , 85.

^ Ramelli , A Larger Hope , 11.

^ See Beauchemin, Hope For All , 52, 160.

^ John Meyendorff, Catholicity and the Church , St Vladimirs Seminary Press, 1997, ISBN 0-88141-006-3 , p. 7 ^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - The ninth commandment" .

www.vatican.va .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church 2448" .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - Social justice" .

www.vatican.va .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - The sixth commandment" .

www.vatican.va .

^ a b "Catechism of the Catholic Church - The Creator" .

www.vatican.va .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - The Fall" .

www.vatican.va .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - Sacred Scripture" .

www.vatican.va .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - The Revelation of God" .

www.vatican.va .

^ a b "CCC - PART 1 SECTION 2 CHAPTER 3 ARTICLE 9 PARAGRAPH 3" .

www.vatican.va .

^ a b "Catechism of the Catholic Church - The Church in God's Plan" .

www.vatican.va .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - The sacrament of Baptism" .

www.vatican.va .

^ a b c "Catechism of the Catholic Church - The sacrament of penance and reconciliation" .

www.vatican.va .

^ a b c d "Catechism of the Catholic Church - I believe in life everlasting" .

www.vatican.va .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - Man" .

www.vatican.va .

^ a b c d e f g "Catechism of the Catholic Church - Jesus Died Crucified" .

www.vatican.va .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - IntraText" .

www.vatican.va .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - Sin" .

www.vatican.va .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - The Fall" .

www.vatican.va .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - The Communion of Saints" .

www.vatican.va .

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - The Church in God's Plan" .

www.vatican.va .

^ Pluralism and Universalism Within Hinduism "Hindu teachings were also denigrated accordingly and the deeper philosophies of Hinduism were often ignored, especially their universal relevance. For conversion purposes it was easier to define Hinduism in a limited way as a local phenomenon only. Yet the universality of Hindu teachings continued, though few outside of India understood this until recent years. This background universalism of Sanatana Dharma affords Hinduism a synthetic tendency, an ability to incorporate within itself a diversity of views and approaches, including at times those from groups outside of Hinduism or even opposed to Hinduism. Because of this syncretic view, sometimes Hinduism is equated with a blind universalism that accepts without discrimination anything that calls itself religious or spiritual, as if differences of spiritual teachings did not matter in any way. While this may be true of some Hindus, the Hindu tradition also contains a lively tradition of free debate on all aspects of theology, philosophy and metaphysics, showing differences as well as similarities, and not simply equating all teachings as they are. A good example of this is the debates between the dualistic and non-dualistic schools of Vedantic philosophy, but many other examples exist as well. The different sects within Hinduism have always been free to disagree, though each sect has its particular guidelines and there is an overall respect for Dharma." ^ "Hindu American Foundation "Hinduism Basics" " . Archived from the original on 2018-04-17 . Retrieved 2017-03-14 .

^ Rig Veda 1.164.46 ^ Page 194 in Eknath Easwaran (2008).

Timeless wisdom: Passages for meditation from the world's saints & sages (see article ). Tomales, CA: Nilgiri Press.

ISBN 1-58638-027-3 . Similar to Eknath Easwaran (2007).

The Bhagavad Gita , 2nd ed. Tomales, CA: Nilgiri Press, p. 117. ISBN
1586380192 (which substitutes "they" for "people"). Transliteration from Winthrop Sargeant (1984).

The Bhagavad Gita . Albany: State University of New York Press, p. 211.

ISBN 0-87395-831-4 , which translates the same passage as "They who, in whatever way, take refuge in Me, them I reward." ^ See Swami Bhaskarananda, Essentials of Hinduism (Viveka Press 2002) ISBN 1-884852-04-1 ^ "Hindu American Foundation Hinduism Basics "It is a richly diverse family of philosophies, traditions, and practices that have been followed primarily throughout Asia for thousands of years." " . Archived from the original on 2018-04-17 . Retrieved 2017-03-14 .

^ "Veden Akademie DE" .

^ Mishra, Manisha (2003).

"Some Facets of Change and Transition in Indian Philosophical Systems in the "Dabistan" " .

Proceedings of the Indian History Congress .

64 : 518– 524.

JSTOR 44145488 .

^ "Neo-Vedanta: The problem with Hindu universalism – Frank Morales" . February 15, 2012.

^ King 2002 , p. 93.

^ What Is Hinduism?: Modern Adventures Into a Profound Global Faith . Himalayan Academy Publications. 2007. p. 416.

ISBN 978-1934145005 .

^ Yelle 2012 , p. 338.

^ a b c d e f King 2002 , p. 135.

^ Larson 2012 , p. 313.

^ (Rigveda 1:164:46) "Ekam sat vipra bahudha vadanti" - Truth is one; sages call it many names ^ (Maha Upanishad: Chapter 6, Verse 72) " Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam " - The entire world is a one big family ^ Badlani, Hiro (2008).

Hinduism: Path of the Ancient Wisdom .

iUniverse . p. 303.

ISBN 978-0-595-70183-4 .

[ self-published source ] ^ Sinari 2000 .

^ Ghazi 2010 .

^ Michaelson 2009 , p. 79-81.

^ M. K. Gandhi, All Men Are Brothers: Life and Thoughts of Mahatma Gandhi as told in his own words , Paris, UNESCO 1958, p 60.

^ King 1999 , p. 135.

^ Crone, Patricia (2005).

God's Rule: Government and Islam: Six Centuries of Medieval Islamic Political Thought . Columbia University Press. p. 472.

ISBN 978-0-231-13291-6 .

^ Lapidus, Ira M. (2014).

Ira M. Lapidus . Cambridge University Press. p. 1000.

ISBN 9780521514309 .

^ a b Karsh, Efraim (2007).

Islamic Imperialism: A History (PDF) . Yale University Press. p. 304.

ISBN 9780300122633 . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2015.

^ Mura, Andrea (2014).

"The Inclusive Dynamics of Islamic Universalism: From the Vantage Point of Sayyid Qutb's Critical Philosophy" .

Comparative Philosophy .

5 (1): 29– 54.

doi : 10.31979/2151-6014(2014).050106 .

ISSN 2151-6014 .

^ Ibn Kathir, Ismail (1301-1373) (2000). Sheikh Safiur-Rahman Al-Mubarakpuri (ed.).

Tafsir al-Qur'an al-Aziz (Tafsir Ibn Kathir) (in English and Arabic) (English Abridged ed.). Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Maktaba Darussalam. p. 6608.

ISBN 978-1-59144-020-8 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Khalil, Ahmed (2002-05-27).

"Dar Al-Islam And Dar Al-Harb: Its Definition and Significance" . IslamWay (English) . Retrieved 2015-05-12 .

^ Ye'or, Bat (1985).

The Dhimmi: Jews and Christians Under Islam . Farleign Dickinson University Press. p. 444.

ISBN 978-0838632628 .

^ Ye'or, Bat (1996).

The Decline of Eastern Christianity Under Islam: From Jihad to Dhimmitude: 7th–20th Centuries . Farleigh Dickinson University Press. p. 522.

ISBN 978-0-8386-3688-6 .

^ a b Ibn Kathir's Tafsir al-Qur'an al-Aziz ^ Sayyid Qutb Milestones ^ Durie, Mark (2010).

The Third Choice: Islam, Dhimmitude and Freedom . Deror Books. p. 288.

ISBN 978-0-9807223-1-4 .

^ Polish, David (1985). "Covenant-Jewish Universalism and Particularism".

Judaism .

34 (3): 284.

^ Magid, Shaul.

"Social Justice and the Future of ...." Tablet Magazine .  13 June 2018.  5 February 2019.

^ Staff.

"Jewish Universalism" .

Jewish Spiritual Leaders Institute . Google Inc . Retrieved 29 June 2012 .

^ Manfred Hutter (January 1993). "Manichaeism in the Early Sasanian Empire".

Numen .

40 (1). BRILL: 2– 15.

doi : 10.1163/156852793X00022 .

JSTOR 3270395 .

^ White , Restoration , 107: "...unless, with the Manichees, we make two eternal principles, one of good, the other of evil, which is all one as to make two Gods." ^ "Sikh Philosophy" , International Bibliography of Sikh Studies , Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp.

163– 181, 2005, doi : 10.1007/1-4020-3044-4_5 , ISBN 1-4020-3043-6 , retrieved 2022-05-01 ^ "About the Siri Singh Sahib – Sikh Dharma International" .

www.sikhdharma.org . Retrieved 2017-11-02 .

^ "Sikhism Religion of the Sikh People" .

www.sikhs.org . Retrieved 2016-11-19 .

^ Munde, Amarpreet Singh.

"Guru Nanak (for Children) - No Hindu, and no Muslim" .

www.gurmat.info . Retrieved 2016-11-19 .

^ (The 4th principle of Unitarian Universalism) UUA.org Seven principles ^ "Major Religions Ranked by Size" . Adherents.com. Archived from the original on August 16, 2000 . Retrieved April 19, 2013 .

^ Ford, James Ishmael (2006).

Zen Master Who?

.

Wisdom Publications . p.

187 .

ISBN 0-86171-509-8 .

^ Harvard Divinity School: Timeline of Significant Events in the Merger of the Unitarian and Universalist Churches During the 1900s ^ CUC-UUA Tradition. Canadian Unitarian Council Growing Vital Religious Communities In Canada Archived 2011-07-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ Jonathan Porter Berkey The formation of Islam: religion and society in the Near East 2003 p28 "This is not to say that there was no universalist dimension to Zoroastrian religious life; but what universalism there was derived directly, and to a greater degree than in the case of Rome and Christianity, from the explicit connection between religion and the state." Sources [ edit ] Mura, Andrea (2014).

"The Inclusive Dynamics of Islamic Universalism: From the Vantage Point of Sayyid Qutb's Critical Philosophy" .

Comparative Philosophy .

5 (1): 29– 54.

doi : 10.31979/2151-6014(2014).050106 .

ISSN 2151-6014 .

Casara, E. (1984).

Universalism in America .

Ghazi, Abidullah Al-Ansari (2010).

Raja Rammohun Roy: Encounter with Islam and Christianity and the Articulation of Hindu Self-Consciousness . Xlibris Corporation.

[ self-published source ] King, Richard (1999).

Orientalism and Religion: Post-Colonial Theory, India and "The Mystic East" . Routledge.

King, Richard (2002).

Orientalism and Religion: Post-Colonial Theory, India and 'The Mystic East' . Routledge.

Larson, Gerald James (2012).

"The Issue of Not Being Different Enough: Some Reflections on Rajiv Malhotra's Being Different " (PDF) .

International Journal of Hindu Studies .

16 (3) (published December 2012): 311– 322.

doi : 10.1007/s11407-012-9129-8 .

S2CID 144728948 .

Michaelson, Jay (2009).

Everything Is God: The Radical Path of Nondual Judaism . Shambhala.

Sinari, Ramakant (2000). "Advaita and Contemporary Indian Philosophy". In Chattopadhyana (ed.).

History of Science, Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization . Volume II, Part 2: Advaita Vedanta. Delhi: Centre for Studies in Civilizations.

Woo, B. Hoon (2014).

"Karl Barth's Doctrine of the Atonement and Universalism" .

Korea Reformed Journal .

32 : 243– 291.

Yelle, Robert A. (2012). "Comparative Religion as Cultural Combat: Occidentalism and Relativism in Rajiv Malhotra's Being Different ".

International Journal of Hindu Studies .

16 (3) (published December 2012): 335– 348.

doi : 10.1007/s11407-012-9133-z .

S2CID 144950049 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ankerl, Guy (2000).

Global communication without universal civilization . Vol. 1: Coexisting contemporary civilizations: Arabo-Muslim, Bharati, Chinese, and Western. Geneva, Switzerland: INU Press.

ISBN 9782881550041 .

Palmquist, Stephen (2000), "Chapter eight: Christianity as the Universal religion", in Palmquist, Stephen (ed.), Kant's critical religion , Aldershot, Hants, England Burlington, Vermont: Ashgate, ISBN 9780754613336 .

Online.

Scott, Joan W.

(2005), "French Universalism in the nineties", in Friedman, Marilyn (ed.), Women and citizenship , Studies in Feminist Philosophy, Oxford New York: Oxford University Press, pp.

35– 51, ISBN 9780195175356 .

External links [ edit ] Catholic Encyclopedia article on Universalists as a Protestant denomination Catholic Encyclopedia article on Apocatastasis/apokatastatis TentMaker website – Many free books and articles on Universalism v t e Universalism In philosophy Concepts and theories Moral universalism Universal value Universality (philosophy) Universalizability In religion Baháʼí Faith Beliefs Baháʼí Faith and the unity of humanity Baháʼí Faith and the unity of religion Christianity Beliefs Apocatastasis Trinitarian universalism Unitarian Universalism Universal reconciliation Unlimited atonement Groups International Council of Unitarians and Universalists Primitive Baptist Universalist Unitarian Universalist Christian Fellowship Universalist Church of America Hinduism Groups Neo-Vedanta New Thought Groups Church of Divine Science Religious Science Unity Church In spirituality Concepts and theories Nondualism Perennial philosophy Theosophy Other Society, health and economics Cultural universal Housing First Universal basic income Universal basic services Universal design Universal health care Universal suffrage v t e Unitarian , Universalist , and Unitarian Universalist topics Organizations Present ICUU Members: Australia and New Zealand ANZUUA Canada CUC COA CUSJ CUUWA OWL SeedChange YRUU Denmark UK Europe EUU Germany DUR Netherlands VGNPB Romania UCT United Kingdom GAUFCC UCA UCM UESN United States UUA GA Districts BP CLF CUUPS MLTS SHB SKSM UUBF UUCF UUPA UUSC Reorganizing groups: Spain: SUUE Associates: Norway: NUC In contact: Iceland: within the Church of Iceland Independent organizations United States UCC USA Worldwide BUM TU Past Canada and United States AUA ( LRY YPRU ) UCA ( CTS LRY TSSLU YPCU ) UCMI / UCEC United Kingdom BFUA Youth ministry Present Canada and United States COA OWL YRUU Past Canada and United States AYS LRY YPCU YPRU Education Present Canada and United States COA MLTS OWL SKSM Past Canada and United States AYS CTS TSSLU Doctrine and ritual Unitarianism Biblical unitarianism Universalism Christian universalism Unitarian Universalism Free Christians Liberal religion Religious humanism List of Unitarian, Universalist, and Unitarian Universalist hymnals Flaming chalice Flower Communion Water Communion See also List of Christian universalists List of Unitarians, Universalists, and Unitarian Universalists List of Unitarian, Universalist, and Unitarian Universalist churches List of Unitarian martyrs History of Unitarianism Unitarian Universalism and LGBTQ people v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Religious pluralism Category:Religious pluralism Topics Belief system Comparative religion Comparative theology Dogmatism History of religious pluralism Inclusivism Indifferentism Interfaith dialogue Interfaith marriage Mirari vos Moral relativism vs Traditionalist School Confessionalism (politics) Multifaith space Multiple religious belonging Perennialism Cambridge Platonists Philosophy of religion Religious pluralism Religious syncretism Separation of church and state Spiritual but not religious Syncretism Toleration Universalism Persons Eknath Easwaran Jacques Dupuis (Jesuit) John Hick Hajj Muhammad Legenhausen John Courtney Murray Swami Vivekananda Emanuel Swedenborg Paul F. Knitter Religions Buddhism and Christianity Buddhism and Hinduism Three teachings Religion portal Philosophy portal Universalism at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐w4h7b
Cached time: 20250817222847
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.396 seconds
Real time usage: 1.656 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10664/1000000
Revision size: 65342/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 540743/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15689/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 34/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 440640/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.794/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11182287/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1283.934      1 -total
 37.12%  476.574      1 Template:Reflist
 20.24%  259.843     51 Template:Cite_web
  8.83%  113.374      3 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.56%  109.902     23 Template:Cite_book
  7.66%   98.287      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.60%   84.769      1 Template:Universalism
  6.11%   78.441      1 Template:Short_description
  5.46%   70.123      8 Template:Fix
  5.07%   65.089     14 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:31902:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222847 and revision id 1304655591. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Universalism&oldid=1304655591#Philosophy " Categories : Universalism Christian theological movements Religious philosophical concepts Philosophical theories Religious pluralism Religious terminology Hidden categories: Articles with Internet Archive links All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from December 2017 CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from December 2017 Articles that may contain original research from June 2018 All articles that may contain original research Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2015 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from November 2015 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2015 Articles needing additional references from February 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from February 2012 All articles to be expanded Articles with multiple maintenance issues CS1: long volume value Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 10:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Universalism 30 languages Add topic

