Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 About 2 Varsity 3 Town vs. Gown 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Cambridge University Amateur Boxing Club Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Boxing club in Cambridge, England About [ edit ] Logo of the Cambridge University Amateur Boxing Club Cambridge University Amateur Boxing Club ( CUABC ) is the boxing club of the University of Cambridge , England . Established in 1896, it is one of the toughest and most prestigious sports teams in Cambridge. Each season, around 250 men and women compete for one of the coveted 12 places on the Varsity Team. The annual Varsity Match against Oxford is the longest-running inter-club amateur boxing fixture in the world.

[ 1 ] The foundations of the modern rules of boxing were created at the University of Cambridge, and it is one of the original nine Full Blue Sports at Cambridge.

[ 2 ] The club was founded after the King's College Boxing Club amalgamated with Fordham's School of Arms to form the Cambridge University Boxing & Fencing Club (CUB&FC).

[ 3 ] Cambridge University Amateur Boxing Club (CUABC) is based at the University Sports Centre in West Cambridge, equipped with a modern boxing gym with bags, a ring and a large floor area.  The Blues Squad train six days a week, with the opportunity to compete in BUCS, Town vs. Gown and the annual Varsity match against Oxford .

[ 4 ] Varsity [ edit ] The club has competed against Oxford University Amateur Boxing Club in the Varsity Match each year since 1897 to win the Truelove Bowl. Typically, the match location switches between Oxford and Cambridge, though recently Cambridge have hosted matches in London. Boxers who compete in the Varsity Match are traditionally awarded a Full Blue by the Cambridge University Men's Blues Committee if they win individually or the team wins. Other boxers, such as those having been selected for a second Varsity Match, can be awarded a Blue at the discretion of the committee.

In the 2005 Varsity Match, Kaleen Love of Oxford defeated Catherine Tubb of Cambridge in the first women's varsity boxing bout. Catherine Tubb had previously beaten Kaleen at the BUSA championships held in December 2004. Both were awarded Extraordinary Full Blues for their athletic accomplishments.

[ 5 ] In recent years, two more Extraordinary Full Blues have been awarded to Sarah Burden and Heley Matthews. Chris Webb remains the only boxer in history to have represented Cambridge in the Varsity match 4 times, and won all 4 bouts.

[ 6 ] In both the 2005 and 2009 Varsity Matches, CUABC beat OUABC by the maximum 9-0 margin. Cambridge University Amateur Boxing Club (CUABC) remains the only side to have achieved this feat since the number of bouts was increased to 9 in the 1950s.

On 1 March 2015 CUABC broke OUABC's five year winning streak in the Varsity Match, winning 6-3.

Oxford University Amateur Boxing Club (OUABC) has withdrawn its women’s team from the 2020 Cambridge Oxford Varsity boxing bout over concerns around suitably matching experience levels between fighters and the potential impact of this on the safety of athletes.

[ 7 ] Cambridge have won 56 matches of the 114 Varsity boxing matches; Oxford 54.

[ 8 ] Town vs. Gown [ edit ] The Town vs. Gown is an annual boxing show that has been running for thirty years in Cambridge. It is one of the fiercest sporting spectacles and Cambridge University Amateur Boxing Club (CUABC) are usually matched against boxers from in and around Cambridge.

It is considered to be a good opportunity for the University boxers to rough themselves up ahead of their Varsity Match preparations later on in Lent term, by offering a great opportunity to many novice boxers to experience their first bout in front of a fantastic crowd and familiar setting, all in preparation for the upcoming Varsity clashes.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Oxford–Cambridge rivalry Varsity match References [ edit ] ^ McGennity, Lucy (11 July 2016).

"Amateur Boxing Club" .

www.sport.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 23 November 2024 .

^ "Full Blues for the CUABC team" .

www.homerton.cam.ac.uk . 28 April 2023 . Retrieved 23 November 2024 .

^ "Cambridge University Amateur Boxing Club" .

www.cuabc.org.uk . Archived from the original on 5 January 2008.

^ "Boxing | Christs College Cambridge" .

www.christs.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 23 November 2024 .

^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 4 June 2011 . Retrieved 24 February 2010 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Perry, Chris (9 March 2012).

"Cambridge go down fighting" .

VARSITY .

^ "OUABC Pull Out of Women's Varsity Contest" .

Varsity Online . Retrieved 23 November 2024 .

^ "Boxing Blues retain Varsity crown with tight victory" .

Varsity Online . Retrieved 23 November 2024 .

^ "Preview: Town vs. Gown back with a bang" .

Varsity Online . Retrieved 23 November 2024 .

External links [ edit ] v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cambridge_University_Amateur_Boxing_Club&oldid=1300895792 " Categories : Boxing clubs in the United Kingdom Sport at the University of Cambridge Boxing in England 1896 establishments in England Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 00:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cambridge University Amateur Boxing Club Add languages Add topic

