Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 First instances of archaeology 1.2 Antiquarians 1.3 First excavations 1.4 Development of archaeological method 2 Purpose Toggle Purpose subsection 2.1 Theory 3 Methods Toggle Methods subsection 3.1 Remote sensing 3.2 Field survey 3.3 Excavation 3.4 Analysis 4 Subfields Toggle Subfields subsection 4.1 Historical archaeology 4.2 Ethnoarchaeology 4.3 Experimental archaeology 4.4 Archaeometry 4.5 Digital archaeology 4.6 Cultural resources management 5 Protection 6 Popular views of archaeology 7 Current issues and controversy Toggle Current issues and controversy subsection 7.1 Public archaeology 7.2 Pseudoarchaeology 7.3 Looting 7.4 Descendant peoples 7.4.1 Repatriation 7.5 African diaspora archaeology 7.6 Climate change and archaeology 7.6.1 AI in archaeology 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Archaeology 166 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ अंगिका العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu अवधी Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ Kalaallisut ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kiswahili Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى ဘာသာမန် Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Олык марий Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Rumantsch Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла संस्कृतम् Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikinews Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of human activity based on materials left behind For other uses, see Archaeology (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Archaeology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Excavations at Atapuerca , an archaeological site in Spain Archaeology or archeology [ a ] is the study of human activity through the recovery and analysis of material culture . The archaeological record consists of artifacts , architecture , biofacts or ecofacts, sites , and cultural landscapes . Archaeology can be considered both a social science and a branch of the humanities .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] It is usually considered an independent academic discipline , but may also be classified as part of anthropology (in North America – the four-field approach ), history or geography .

[ 4 ] The discipline involves surveying , excavation , and eventually analysis of data collected, to learn more about the past. In broad scope, archaeology relies on cross-disciplinary research.

Archaeologists study human prehistory and history , from the development of the first stone tools at Lomekwi in East Africa 3.3 million years ago up until recent decades.

[ 5 ] Archaeology is distinct from palaeontology , which is the study of fossil remains. Archaeology is particularly important for learning about prehistoric societies, for which, by definition, there are no written records. Prehistory includes over 99% of the human past, from the Paleolithic until the advent of literacy in societies around the world.

[ 1 ] Archaeology has various goals, which range from understanding culture history to reconstructing past lifeways to documenting and explaining changes in human societies through time.

[ 6 ] Derived from Greek, the term archaeology means "the study of ancient history".

[ 7 ] Archaeology developed out of antiquarianism in Europe during the 19th century, and has since become a discipline practiced around the world. Archaeology has been used by nation-states to create particular visions of the past.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Since its early development, various specific sub-disciplines of archaeology have developed, including maritime archaeology , feminist archaeology , and archaeoastronomy , and numerous different scientific techniques have been developed to aid archaeological investigation. Nonetheless, today, archaeologists face many problems, such as dealing with pseudoarchaeology , the looting of artifacts, [ 10 ] [ 11 ] a lack of public interest, and opposition to the excavation of human remains.

History [ edit ] Main article: History of archaeology First instances of archaeology [ edit ] Excavations of Nabonidus ( c.

550 BC ) Nabonidus cylinder from Sippar Extract describing the excavation Cuneiform account of the excavation of a foundation deposit belonging to Naram-Sin of Akkad (ruled c.

2200 BC ), by king Nabonidus (ruled c.

550 BC ).

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] In Ancient Mesopotamia , a foundation deposit of the Akkadian Empire ruler Naram-Sin (ruled c.

2200 BC ) was discovered and analysed by king Nabonidus , c.

550 BC , who is thus known as the first archaeologist.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Not only did he lead the first excavations which were to find the foundation deposits of the temples of Šamaš the sun god, the warrior goddess Anunitu (both located in Sippar ), and the sanctuary that Naram-Sin built to the moon god, located in Harran , but he also had them restored to their former glory.

[ 12 ] He was also the first to date an archaeological artifact in his attempt to date Naram-Sin's temple during his search for it.

[ 15 ] Even though his estimate was inaccurate by about 1,500 years, it was still a very good one considering the lack of accurate dating technology at the time.

[ 12 ] [ 15 ] [ 13 ] Antiquarians [ edit ] Main article: Antiquarian Further information: History of Chinese archaeology Archaeologists excavating in Rome , Italy Cyriacus of Ancona (fresco by Benozzo Gozzoli ) The science of archaeology (from Greek ἀρχαιολογία archaiologia , from ἀρχαῖος arkhaios 'ancient' and -λογία , -logia 'study') [ 16 ] grew out of the older multi-disciplinary study known as antiquarianism . Antiquarians studied history with particular attention to ancient artifacts and manuscripts, as well as historical sites. Antiquarianism focused on the empirical evidence that existed for the understanding of the past, encapsulated in the motto of the 18th century antiquary, Richard Colt Hoare : "We speak from facts, not theory". Tentative steps towards the systematization of archaeology as a science took place during the Enlightenment period in Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries.

[ 17 ] In Imperial China during the Song dynasty (960–1279), figures such as Ouyang Xiu [ 18 ] and Zhao Mingcheng established the tradition of Chinese epigraphy by investigating, preserving, and analyzing ancient Chinese bronze inscriptions from the Shang and Zhou periods.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] (p74) [ 21 ] (p95) In his book published in 1088, Shen Kuo criticized contemporary Chinese scholars for attributing ancient bronze vessels as creations of famous sages rather than artisan commoners, and for attempting to revive them for ritual use without discerning their original functionality and purpose of manufacture.

[ 22 ] Such antiquarian pursuits waned after the Song period, were revived in the 17th century during the Qing dynasty , but were always considered a branch of Chinese historiography rather than a separate discipline of archaeology.

[ 20 ] (pp74–76) [ 21 ] (p97) In Renaissance Europe , philosophical interest in the remains of Greco - Roman civilization and the rediscovery of classical culture began in the late Middle Ages , with humanism .

Cyriacus of Ancona was a restlessly itinerant Italian humanist and antiquarian who came from a prominent family of merchants in Ancona , a maritime republic on the Adriatic . He was called by his contemporaries pater antiquitatis ('father of antiquity') and today "father of classical archaeology": "Cyriac of Ancona was the most enterprising and prolific recorder of Greek and Roman antiquities, particularly inscriptions, in the fifteenth century, and the general accuracy of his records entitles him to be called the founding father of modern classical archeology." [ 23 ] He travelled throughout Greece and all around the Eastern Mediterranean, to record his findings on ancient buildings, statues and inscriptions, including archaeological remains still unknown to his time: the Parthenon , Delphi , the Egyptian pyramids , the hieroglyphics .

[ 24 ] He noted down his archaeological discoveries in his diary, Commentaria (in six volumes).

Flavio Biondo , an Italian Renaissance humanist historian, created a systematic guide to the ruins and topography of ancient Rome in the early 15th century, for which he has been called an early founder of archaeology.

[ 25 ] Antiquarians of the 16th century, including John Leland and William Camden , conducted surveys of the English countryside, drawing, describing and interpreting the monuments that they encountered.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] The Oxford English Dictionary first cites "archaeologist" from 1824; this soon took over as the usual term for one major branch of antiquarian activity. "Archaeology", from 1607 onward, initially meant what we would call "ancient history" generally, with the narrower modern sense first seen in 1837. However, it was Jacob Spon who, in 1685, offered one of the earliest definitions of "archaeologia" to describe the study of antiquities in which he was engaged, in the preface of a collection of transcriptions of Roman inscriptions which he had gleaned over the years of his travels, entitled Miscellanea eruditae antiquitatis.

Twelfth-century Indian scholar Kalhana 's writings involved recording of local traditions, examining manuscripts, inscriptions, coins and architectures, which is described as one of the earliest traces of archaeology. One of his notable work is called Rajatarangini which was completed c.

1150 and is described as one of the first history books of India.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] First excavations [ edit ] An early photograph of Stonehenge taken July 1877 Johann Joachim Winckelmann (Raphael Mengs after 1755) One of the first sites to undergo archaeological excavation was Stonehenge and other megalithic monuments in England.

John Aubrey (1626–1697) was a pioneer archaeologist who recorded numerous megalithic and other field monuments in southern England. He was also ahead of his time in the analysis of his findings. He attempted to chart the chronological stylistic evolution of handwriting, medieval architecture, costume, and shield-shapes.

[ 31 ] Excavations were also carried out by the Spanish military engineer Roque Joaquín de Alcubierre in the ancient towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum , both of which had been covered by ash during the Eruption of Mount Vesuvius in AD 79 . These excavations began in 1748 in Pompeii, while in Herculaneum they began in 1738. The discovery of entire towns, complete with utensils and even human shapes, as well the unearthing of frescos , had a big impact throughout Europe.

However, prior to the development of modern techniques, excavations tended to be haphazard; the importance of concepts such as stratification and context were overlooked.

[ 32 ] In the mid-18th century, the German Johann Joachim Winckelmann lived in Rome and devoted himself to the study of Roman antiquities, gradually acquiring an unrivalled knowledge of ancient art.

[ 33 ] Then, he visited the archaeological excavations being conducted at Pompeii and Herculaneum .

[ 34 ] He was one of the founders of scientific archaeology and first applied the categories of style on a large, systematic basis to the history of art [ 35 ] He was one of the first to separate Greek art into periods and time classifications.

[ 36 ] Winckelmann has been called both "The prophet and founding hero of modern archaeology " [ 37 ] and the father of the discipline of art history .

[ 38 ] Development of archaeological method [ edit ] Artifacts discovered at the 1808 Bush Barrow excavation by Sir Richard Colt Hoare and William Cunnington .

The father of archaeological excavation was William Cunnington (1754–1810). He undertook excavations in Wiltshire from around 1798, [ 39 ] funded by Sir Richard Colt Hoare. Cunnington made meticulous recordings of Neolithic and Bronze Age barrows , and the terms he used to categorize and describe them are still used by archaeologists today.

[ 40 ] Future U.S. President Thomas Jefferson also did his own excavations in 1784 using the trench method, on several Native American burial mounds in Virginia . His excavations were prompted by the "Moundbuilders" question ; however, his careful methods led him to admit he saw no reason why ancestors of the Native Americans of his time could not have raised those mounds.

[ 41 ] One of the major achievements of 19th-century archaeology was the development of stratigraphy . The idea of overlapping strata tracing back to successive periods was borrowed from the new geological and palaeontological work of scholars like William Smith , James Hutton and Charles Lyell . The systematic application of stratigraphy to archaeology first took place with the excavations of prehistorical and Bronze Age sites. In the third and fourth decades of the 19th century, archaeologists like Jacques Boucher de Perthes and Christian Jürgensen Thomsen began to put the artifacts they had found in chronological order.

This photo is made of a single goat hair from a textile found on the 14th century ship in Tallinn, Estonia. Photo was done in archaeology department (University of Tartu) by microscope Olympus BX51, magnification 200x A major figure in the development of archaeology into a rigorous science was army officer and ethnologist Augustus Pitt Rivers , [ 42 ] who began excavations on his land in England in the 1880s. Highly methodical by the standards of the time, he is widely regarded as the first scientific archaeologist. He arranged his artifacts by type or " Typology (archaeology) ", and within types chronologically. This style of arrangement, designed to highlight the evolutionary trends in human artifacts, was of enormous significance for the accurate dating of the objects. His most important methodological innovation was his insistence that all artifacts, not just beautiful or unique ones, be collected and catalogued.

[ 43 ] Archaeological excavation of a Stone Age settlement at Glamilders in Långbergsöda village, Saltvik , Åland , in 1906.

William Flinders Petrie is another man who may legitimately be called the Father of Archaeology. His painstaking recording and study of artifacts, both in Egypt and later in Palestine , laid down many of the ideas behind modern archaeological recording; he remarked that "I believe the true line of research lies in the noting and comparison of the smallest details." Petrie developed the system of dating layers based on pottery and ceramic findings , which revolutionized the chronological basis of Egyptology . Petrie was the first to scientifically investigate the Great Pyramid in Egypt during the 1880s.

[ 44 ] He was also responsible for mentoring and training a whole generation of Egyptologists, including Howard Carter who went on to achieve fame with the discovery of the tomb of 14th-century BC pharaoh Tutankhamun .

Mortimer Wheeler pioneered systematic excavation in the early 20th century. Pictured, are his excavations at Maiden Castle, Dorset , in October 1937.

The first stratigraphic excavation to reach wide popularity with public was that of Hissarlik , on the site of ancient Troy , carried out by Heinrich Schliemann , Frank Calvert and Wilhelm Dörpfeld in the 1870s. These scholars individuated nine different cities that had overlapped with one another, from prehistory to the Hellenistic period .

[ 45 ] Meanwhile, the work of Sir Arthur Evans at Knossos in Crete revealed the ancient existence of an equally advanced Minoan civilization .

[ 46 ] The next major figure in the development of archaeology was Sir Mortimer Wheeler , whose highly disciplined approach to excavation and systematic coverage in the 1920s and 1930s brought the science on swiftly. Wheeler developed the grid system of excavation , [ 47 ] which was further improved by his student Kathleen Kenyon .

Archaeology became a professional activity in the first half of the 20th century, and it became possible to study archaeology as a subject in universities and even schools. By the end of the 20th century nearly all professional archaeologists, at least in developed countries, were graduates. Further adaptation and innovation in archaeology continued in this period, when maritime archaeology and urban archaeology became more prevalent and rescue archaeology was developed as a result of increasing commercial development.

[ 48 ] Purpose [ edit ] Cast of the skull of the Taung child , uncovered in South Africa . The Child was an infant of the Australopithecus africanus species, an early form of hominin The purpose of archaeology is to learn more about past societies and the development of the human race. Over 99% of the development of humanity has occurred within prehistoric cultures, who did not make use of writing , thereby no written records exist for study purposes. Without such written sources, the only way to understand prehistoric societies is through archaeology. Because archaeology is the study of past human activity, it stretches back to about 2.5 million years ago when the first stone tools are found – The Oldowan Industry . Many important developments in human history occurred during prehistory, such as the evolution of humanity during the Paleolithic period, when the hominins developed from the australopithecines in Africa and eventually into modern Homo sapiens . Archaeology also sheds light on many of humanity's technological advances, for instance the ability to use fire, the development of stone tools , the discovery of metallurgy , the beginnings of religion and the creation of agriculture . Without archaeology, little or nothing would be known about the use of material culture by humanity that pre-dates writing.

[ 49 ] However, it is not only prehistoric, pre-literate cultures that can be studied using archaeology but historic, literate cultures as well, through the sub-discipline of historical archaeology . For many literate cultures, such as Ancient Greece and Mesopotamia , their surviving records are often incomplete and biased to some extent. In many societies, literacy was restricted to the elite classes, such as the clergy , or the bureaucracy of court or temple. The literacy of aristocrats has sometimes been restricted to deeds and contracts. The interests and world-view of elites are often quite different from the lives and interests of the populace. Writings that were produced by people more representative of the general population were unlikely to find their way into libraries and be preserved there for posterity. Thus, written records tend to reflect the biases, assumptions, cultural values and possibly deceptions of a limited range of individuals, usually a small fraction of the larger population. Hence, written records cannot be trusted as a sole source. The material record may be closer to a fair representation of society, though it is subject to its own biases, such as sampling bias and differential preservation.

[ 50 ] Often, archaeology provides the only means to learn of the existence and behaviors of people of the past. Across the millennia many thousands of cultures and societies and billions of people have come and gone of which there is little or no written record or existing records are misrepresentative or incomplete. Writing as it is known today did not exist in human civilization until the 4th millennium BC, in a relatively small number of technologically advanced civilizations. In contrast, Homo sapiens has existed for at least 200,000 years, and other species of Homo for millions of years (see Human evolution ). These civilizations are, not coincidentally, the best-known; they are open to the inquiry of historians for centuries, while the study of pre-historic cultures has arisen only recently. Within a literate civilization many events and important human practices may not be officially recorded. Any knowledge of the early years of human civilization – the development of agriculture, cult practices of folk religion, the rise of the first cities – must come from archaeology.

In addition to their scientific importance, archaeological remains sometimes have political or cultural significance to descendants of the people who produced them, monetary value to collectors, or strong aesthetic appeal. Many people identify archaeology with the recovery of such aesthetic, religious, political, or economic treasures rather than with the reconstruction of past societies.

This view is often espoused in works of popular fiction, such as Raiders of the Lost Ark, The Mummy, and King Solomon's Mines. When unrealistic subjects are treated more seriously, accusations of pseudoscience are invariably levelled at their proponents (see Pseudoarchaeology ) . However, these endeavours, real and fictional, are not representative of modern archaeology.

Theory [ edit ] Main article: Archaeological theory There is no one approach to archaeological theory that has been adhered to by all archaeologists. When archaeology developed in the late 19th century, the first approach to archaeological theory to be practised was that of cultural-historical archaeology , which held the goal of explaining why cultures changed and adapted rather than just highlighting the fact that they did, therefore emphasizing historical particularism .

[ 51 ] In the early 20th century, many archaeologists who studied past societies with direct continuing links to existing ones (such as those of Native Americans , Siberians , Mesoamericans etc.) followed the direct historical approach , compared the continuity between the past and contemporary ethnic and cultural groups.

[ 51 ] In the 1960s, an archaeological movement largely led by American archaeologists like Lewis Binford and Kent Flannery arose that rebelled against the established cultural-history archaeology.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] They proposed a "New Archaeology", which would be more "scientific" and "anthropological", with hypothesis testing and the scientific method very important parts of what became known as processual archaeology .

[ 51 ] In the 1980s, a new postmodern movement arose led by the British archaeologists Michael Shanks , [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] Christopher Tilley , [ 58 ] Daniel Miller , [ 59 ] [ 60 ] and Ian Hodder , [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] which has become known as post-processual archaeology . It questioned processualism's appeals to scientific positivism and impartiality, and emphasized the importance of a more self-critical theoretical reflexivity .

[ citation needed ] However, this approach has been criticized by processualists as lacking scientific rigour, and the validity of both processualism and post-processualism is still under debate. Meanwhile, another theory, known as historical processualism , has emerged seeking to incorporate a focus on process and post-processual archaeology's emphasis of reflexivity and history.

[ 67 ] Archaeological theory now borrows from a wide range of influences, including systems theory , neo-evolutionary thought , [ 68 ] [35] phenomenology , postmodernism , agency theory , cognitive science , structural functionalism , Marxism , gender-based and feminist archaeology , queer theory , postcolonial thoughts , materiality , and posthumanism .

Methods [ edit ] Video showing the different works in an archaeological recovery and analysis An archaeological investigation usually involves several distinct phases, each of which employs its own variety of methods. Before any practical work can begin, however, a clear objective as to what the archaeologists are looking to achieve must be agreed upon. This done, a site is surveyed to find out as much as possible about it and the surrounding area. Second, an excavation may take place to uncover any archaeological features buried under the ground. And, third, the information collected during the excavation is studied and evaluated in an attempt to achieve the original research objectives of the archaeologists. It is then considered good practice for the information to be published so that it is available to other archaeologists and historians, although this is sometimes neglected.

[ 30 ] Remote sensing [ edit ] Before actually starting to dig in a location, remote sensing can be used to look where sites are located within a large area or provide more information about sites or regions. There are two types of remote sensing instruments—passive and active. Passive instruments detect natural energy that is reflected or emitted from the observed scene. Passive instruments sense only radiation emitted by the object being viewed or reflected by the object from a source other than the instrument. Active instruments emit energy and record what is reflected.

Satellite imagery is an example of passive remote sensing. Here are two active remote sensing instruments: Lidar : Lidar (light detection and ranging) uses a laser (light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation) to transmit a light pulse and a receiver with sensitive detectors to measure the backscattered or reflected light. Distance to the object is determined by recording the time between the transmitted and backscattered pulses and using the speed of light to calculate the distance travelled. Lidars can determine atmospheric profiles of aerosols, clouds, and other constituents of the atmosphere.

Laser altimeter : A laser altimeter uses a lidar (see above) to measure the height of the instrument platform above the surface. By independently knowing the height of the platform with respect to the mean Earth's surface, the topography of the underlying surface can be determined.

[ 69 ] Drones : Archaeologists around the world use drones to speed up survey work and protect sites from squatters, builders and miners. In Peru, small drones helped researchers produce three-dimensional models of Peruvian sites instead of the usual flat maps – and in days and weeks instead of months and years.

[ 70 ] Drones costing as little as £650 have proven useful. In 2013, drones have flown over at least six Peruvian archaeological sites, including the colonial Andean town Machu Llacta 4,000 metres (13,000 ft) above sea level. The drones continue to have altitude problems in the Andes, leading to plans to make a drone blimp , employing open source software.

[ 70 ] Jeffrey Quilter, an archaeologist with Harvard University said, "You can go up three metres and photograph a room, 300 metres and photograph a site, or you can go up 3,000 metres and photograph the entire valley." [ 70 ] In September 2014 drones weighing about 5 kg (11 lb) were used for 3D mapping of the above-ground ruins of the Greek city of Aphrodisias . The data are being analysed by the Austrian Archaeological Institute in Vienna.

[ 71 ] Field survey [ edit ] Main article: Archaeological survey Satellite image of Mesopotamia (with the Persian Gulf in the lower right corner) indicating the areas that have been subjected to regional surveys (in blue) over the past decades The archaeological project then continues (or alternatively, begins) with a field survey. Regional survey is the attempt to systematically locate previously unknown sites in a region. Site survey is the attempt to systematically locate features of interest, such as houses and middens , within a site. Each of these two goals may be accomplished with largely the same methods.

Survey was not widely practised in the early days of archaeology. Cultural historians and prior researchers were usually content with discovering the locations of monumental sites from the local populace, and excavating only the plainly visible features there.

Gordon Willey pioneered the technique of regional settlement pattern survey in 1949 in the Viru Valley of coastal Peru , [ 72 ] [ 73 ] and survey of all levels became prominent with the rise of processual archaeology some years later.

[ 74 ] Survey work has many benefits if performed as a preliminary exercise to, or even in place of, excavation. It requires relatively little time and expense, because it does not require processing large volumes of soil to search out artifacts. (Nevertheless, surveying a large region or site can be expensive, so archaeologists often employ sampling methods.) [ 75 ] As with other forms of non-destructive archaeology, survey avoids ethical issues (of particular concern to descendant peoples) associated with destroying a site through excavation. It is the only way to gather some forms of information, such as settlement patterns and settlement structure. Survey data are commonly assembled into maps , which may show surface features and/or artifact distribution.

Archaeologists surveying a site in the Harrat al-Sham , eastern Jordan The simplest survey technique is surface survey. It involves combing an area, usually on foot but sometimes with the use of mechanized transport, to search for features or artifacts visible on the surface. Surface survey cannot detect sites or features that are completely buried under earth, or overgrown with vegetation. Surface survey may also include mini-excavation techniques such as augers , corers, and shovel test pits. If no materials are found, the area surveyed is deemed sterile .

Inverted kite aerial photo of an excavation of a Roman building at Nesley near Tetbury in Gloucestershire.

Aerial survey is conducted using cameras attached to airplanes , balloons , UAVs , or even Kites .

[ 76 ] A bird's-eye view is useful for quick mapping of large or complex sites. Aerial photographs are used to document the status of the archaeological dig. Aerial imaging can also detect many things not visible from the surface.

Plants growing above a buried human-made structure, such as a stone wall, will develop more slowly, while those above other types of features (such as middens ) may develop more rapidly. Photographs of ripening grain , which changes colour rapidly at maturation, have revealed buried structures with great precision. Aerial photographs taken at different times of day will help show the outlines of structures by changes in shadows. Aerial survey also employs ultraviolet , infrared , ground-penetrating radar wavelengths, Lidar and thermography .

[ 77 ] Geophysical survey can be the most effective way to see beneath the ground.

Magnetometers detect minute deviations in the Earth's magnetic field caused by iron artifacts, kilns , some types of stone structures , and even ditches and middens. Devices that measure the electrical resistivity of the soil are also widely used. Archaeological features whose electrical resistivity contrasts with that of surrounding soils can be detected and mapped. Some archaeological features (such as those composed of stone or brick) have higher resistivity than typical soils, while others (such as organic deposits or unfired clay) tend to have lower resistivity.

Although some archaeologists consider the use of metal detectors to be tantamount to treasure hunting, others deem them an effective tool in archaeological surveying.

[ 78 ] Examples of formal archaeological use of metal detectors include musketball distribution analysis on English Civil War battlefields, metal distribution analysis prior to excavation of a 19th-century ship wreck, and service cable location during evaluation. Metal detectorists have also contributed to archaeology where they have made detailed records of their results and refrained from raising artifacts from their archaeological context. In the UK, metal detectorists have been solicited for involvement in the Portable Antiquities Scheme .

Regional survey in underwater archaeology uses geophysical or remote sensing devices such as marine magnetometer, side-scan sonar , or sub-bottom sonar.

[ 79 ] Excavation [ edit ] Main article: Archaeological excavation Excavations at the 3800-year-old Edgewater Park Site , Iowa Archaeological excavation that discovered prehistoric caves in Vill ( Innsbruck ), Austria An archaeologist sifting for POW remains on Wake Island .

This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Archaeology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Archaeological excavation existed even when the field was still the domain of amateurs, and it remains the source of the majority of data recovered in most field projects. It can reveal several types of information usually not accessible to survey, such as stratigraphy , three-dimensional structure, and verifiably primary context.

Modern excavation techniques require that the precise locations of objects and features, known as their provenance or provenience, be recorded. This always involves determining their horizontal locations, and sometimes vertical position as well (also see Primary Laws of Archaeology ). Likewise, their association , or relationship with nearby objects and features , needs to be recorded for later analysis. This allows the archaeologist to deduce which artifacts and features were likely used together and which may be from different phases of activity. For example, excavation of a site reveals its stratigraphy; if a site was occupied by a succession of distinct cultures, artifacts from more recent cultures will lie above those from more ancient cultures.

Excavation is the most expensive phase of archaeological research, in relative terms. Also, as a destructive process, it carries ethical concerns. As a result, very few sites are excavated in their entirety. Again the percentage of a site excavated depends greatly on the country and "method statement" issued.

Sampling is even more important in excavation than in survey. Sometimes large mechanical equipment, such as backhoes ( JCBs ), is used in excavation, especially to remove the topsoil ( overburden ), though this method is increasingly used with great caution. Following this rather dramatic step, the exposed area is usually hand-cleaned with trowels or hoes to ensure that all features are apparent.

Archaeological excavations in the Middle Paleolithic cave site of the Ghamari Cave,Zagros  2025 The next task is to form a site plan and then use it to help decide the method of excavation. Features dug into the natural subsoil are normally excavated in portions to produce a visible archaeological section for recording. A feature, for example a pit or a ditch, consists of two parts: the cut and the fill . The cut describes the edge of the feature, where the feature meets the natural soil. It is the feature's boundary. The fill is what the feature is filled with, and will often appear quite distinct from the natural soil. The cut and fill are given consecutive numbers for recording purposes. Scaled plans and sections of individual features are all drawn on site, black and white and colour photographs of them are taken, and recording sheets are filled in describing the context of each. All this information serves as a permanent record of the now-destroyed archaeology and is used in describing and interpreting the site.

Analysis [ edit ] Main article: Post-excavation analysis Five of the seven known fossil teeth of Homo luzonensis found in Callao Cave , the Philippines .

Once artifacts and structures have been excavated, or collected from surface surveys, it is necessary to properly study them. This process is known as post-excavation analysis , and is usually the most time-consuming part of an archaeological investigation. It is not uncommon for final excavation reports for major sites to take years to be published.

At a basic level of analysis, artifacts found are cleaned, catalogued and compared to published collections. This comparison process often involves classifying them typologically and identifying other sites with similar artifact assemblages. However, a much more comprehensive range of analytical techniques are available through archaeological science , meaning that artifacts can be dated and their compositions examined. Bones, plants, and pollen collected from a site can all be analysing using the methods of zooarchaeology , paleoethnobotany , palynology and stable isotopes [ 80 ] while any texts can usually be deciphered .

These techniques frequently provide information that would not otherwise be known, and therefore they contribute greatly to the understanding of a site.

Subfields [ edit ] Main article: Subfields of archaeology As with most academic disciplines, there are a very large number of archaeological sub-disciplines characterized by a specific method or type of material (e.g., lithic analysis , music , archaeobotany ), geographical or chronological focus (e.g.

Near Eastern archaeology , Islamic archaeology , Medieval archaeology ), other thematic concern (e.g. maritime archaeology, landscape archaeology , battlefield archaeology ), or a specific archaeological culture or civilization (e.g.

Egyptology , Indology , Sinology ).

[ 81 ] Historical archaeology [ edit ] Main article: Historical archaeology Historical archaeology is the study of cultures with some form of writing and deals with objects and issues from the past.

In medieval Europe , archaeologists have explored the illicit burial of unbaptized children in medieval texts and cemeteries.

[ 82 ] In downtown New York City , archaeologists have exhumed the 18th century remains of the African Burial Ground . When remnants of the WWII Siegfried Line were being destroyed, emergency archaeological digs took place whenever any part of the line was removed, to further scientific knowledge and reveal details of the line's construction.

Ethnoarchaeology [ edit ] Main article: Ethnoarchaeology Ethnoarchaeology is the ethnographic study of living people, designed to aid in our interpretation of the archaeological record.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] The approach first gained prominence during the processual movement of the 1960s, and continues to be a vibrant component of post-processual and other current archaeological approaches.

[ 68 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] Early ethnoarchaeological research focused on hunter-gatherer or foraging societies; today ethnoarchaeological research encompasses a much wider range of human behaviour.

Experimental archaeology [ edit ] Main article: Experimental archaeology Experimental archaeology represents the application of the experimental method to develop more highly controlled observations of processes that create and impact the archaeological record.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] In the context of the logical positivism of processualism with its goals of improving the scientific rigor of archaeological epistemologies , the experimental method gained importance. Experimental techniques remain a crucial component to improving the inferential frameworks for interpreting the archaeological record.

Archaeometry [ edit ] Main article: Archaeological science Archaeometry aims to systematize archaeological measurement. It emphasizes the application of analytical techniques from physics, chemistry, and engineering. It is a field of research that frequently focuses on the definition of the chemical composition of archaeological remains for source analysis.

[ 98 ] Archaeometry also investigates different spatial characteristics of features, employing methods such as space syntax techniques and geodesy as well as computer-based tools such as geographic information system technology.

[ 99 ] Rare earth elements patterns may also be used.

[ 100 ] A relatively nascent subfield is that of archaeological materials, designed to enhance understanding of prehistoric and non-industrial culture through scientific analysis of the structure and properties of materials associated with human activity.

[ 101 ] Digital archaeology [ edit ] Main article: Digital archeology See also: Computational archaeology and Virtual archaeology Digital Archeology is an interdiscplinary field that applies information technology (IT) , digital tools, and data management techniques to archaeology. It includes virtual archeology and computational archeology .

Examples of digital archaeology include the use of computer graphics to create virtual 3D models of sites, like the throne room of an Assyrian palace or ancient Rome.

[ 102 ] Photogrammetry and digital topographical models are combined with astronomical calculations to check if structures, such as pillars, align with astronomical events like the sun's position at a solstice .

[ 102 ] Agent-based modelling and simulation are used to understand past social dynamics and outcomes.

Data mining is applied to large collections of archaeological 'grey literature'.

Cultural resources management [ edit ] Main article: Cultural resource management Archaeology can be a subsidiary activity within Cultural resource management (CRM), also called Cultural heritage management (CHM) in the UK.

[ 103 ] CRM archaeologists frequently examine archaeological sites threatened by development. CRM accounts for most archaeological research done in the US and much of that in western Europe . In the US, CRM archaeology has been a growing concern since the passage of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966. Most scholars and politicians believe CRM has helped preserve much of the US' history and prehistory that would have otherwise been lost in the expansion of cities, dams, and highways. Along with other statutes, the NHPA mandates that projects on federal land, or involving federal funds or permits, consider the effects of the project on each archaeological site .

The application of CRM in the UK is not limited to government-funded projects. Since 1990, PPG 16 [ 104 ] has required planners to consider archaeology as a material consideration in determining applications for new development. As a result, archaeological organizations undertake mitigation work in advance of, or during, construction work in archaeologically sensitive areas, at the developer's expense . Some of the largest archaeological projects ever undertaken in the UK are due to major infrastructure projects like the A14 road improvement scheme, or the building of HS2 .

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] In England, ultimate responsibility of care for the historic environment rests with the Department for Culture, Media and Sport [ 107 ] in association with English Heritage .

[ 108 ] In Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland , the same responsibilities lie with Historic Scotland , [ 109 ] Cadw [ 110 ] and the Northern Ireland Environment Agency [ 111 ] respectively. In France, the Institut national du patrimoine (The National Institute of Cultural Heritage) trains curators specialized in archaeology. Their mission is to enhance the objects discovered. The curator is the link between scientific knowledge, administrative regulations, heritage objects and the public.

Among the goals of CRM are the identification, preservation, and maintenance of cultural sites on public and private lands, and the removal of culturally valuable materials from areas where they would otherwise be destroyed by human activity, such as proposed construction. This study involves an examination to determine whether significant archaeological sites are present in the area affected by the proposed construction. If these do exist, time and money must be allotted for their excavation. If initial survey and/or test excavations indicate the presence of an extraordinarily valuable site, the construction may be prohibited entirely.

Cultural resources management has been criticized. CRM is conducted by private companies that bid for projects by submitting proposals outlining the work to be done and expected budget. The agency responsible for the construction often chooses the proposal that asks for the least funding. CRM archaeologists face time pressure, often being forced to complete their work in much less time that might be allotted for a solely academic project. Compounding the time pressure is the vetting process of site reports that are required to be submitted by CRM firms to the appropriate State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO). From the SHPO's perspective there is no difference between a report submitted by a CRM firm operating under tight deadline, and a multi-year academic project.

[ citation needed ] The ratio of open academic archaeology positions to the number of archaeology MA/MSc and PhD students is high. CRM, once an intellectual backwater for individuals with "strong backs and weak minds", [ 112 ] has attracted these graduates, and CRM offices are increasingly staffed by advance degreed workers with a track record of producing scholarly articles, but who also have extensive CRM field experience.

Protection [ edit ] Karl von Habsburg , on a Blue Shield International fact-finding mission in Libya The protection of archaeological finds for the public from catastrophes, wars and armed conflicts is increasingly being implemented internationally. This happens on the one hand through international agreements and on the other hand through organizations that monitor or enforce protection.

United Nations , UNESCO and Blue Shield International deal with the protection of cultural heritage and thus also archaeological sites. This also applies to the integration of United Nations peacekeeping . Blue Shield International has undertaken various fact-finding missions in recent years to protect archaeological sites during the wars in Libya, Syria, Egypt and Lebanon. The importance of archaeological finds for identity, tourism and sustainable economic growth is repeatedly emphasized internationally.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] [ 115 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] The president of Blue Shield International, Karl von Habsburg , said during a cultural property protection mission in Lebanon in April 2019 with the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon: "Cultural assets are part of the identity of the people who live in a certain place. If you destroy their culture, you also destroy their identity. Many people are uprooted, often have no prospects anymore and subsequently flee from their homeland." [ 119 ] Popular views of archaeology [ edit ] Extensive excavations at Beit She'an , Israel Permanent exhibition in a German multi-storey car park , explaining the archaeological discoveries made during the construction of this building Early archaeology was largely an attempt to uncover spectacular artifacts and features, or to explore vast and mysterious abandoned cities and was mostly done by upper class, scholarly men. This general tendency laid the foundation for the modern popular view of archaeology and archaeologists. Many of the public view archaeology as something only available to a narrow demographic. The job of archaeologist is depicted as a "romantic adventurist occupation", [ 120 ] and as a hobby more than a job in the scientific community. Cinema audiences form a notion of "who archaeologists are, why they do what they do, and how relationships to the past are constituted", [ 120 ] and is often under the impression that all archaeology takes place in a distant and foreign land, only to collect monetarily or spiritually priceless artifacts. The modern depiction of archaeology has incorrectly formed the public's perception of what archaeology is.

Much thorough and productive research has indeed been conducted in dramatic locales such as Copán and the Valley of the Kings , but the bulk of activities and finds of modern archaeology are not so sensational. Archaeological adventure stories tend to ignore the painstaking work involved in carrying out modern surveys, excavations , and data processing. Some archaeologists refer to such off-the-mark portrayals as "pseudoarchaeology".

[ 121 ] Archaeologists are also very much reliant on public support; the question of for whom they are working is often discussed.

[ 122 ] Current issues and controversy [ edit ] Public archaeology [ edit ] Motivated by a desire to halt looting, curb pseudoarchaeology, and to help preserve archaeological sites through education and fostering public appreciation for the importance of archaeological heritage, archaeologists are mounting public-outreach campaigns.

[ 123 ] They seek to stop looting by combatting people who illegally take artifacts from protected sites, and by alerting people who live near archaeological sites of the threat of looting. Common methods of public outreach include press releases, the encouragement of school field trips to sites under excavation by professional archaeologists, and making reports and publications accessible outside of academia.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Public appreciation of the significance of archaeology and archaeological sites often leads to improved protection from encroaching development or other threats.

One audience for archaeologists' work is the public. Archaeologists increasingly realize that their work can benefit non-academic and non-archaeological audiences, and that they have a responsibility to educate and inform the public about archaeology. Local heritage awareness is aimed at increasing civic and individual pride through projects such as community excavation projects, and better public presentations of archaeological sites and knowledge.

[ citation needed ] The U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service (USFS) operates a volunteer archaeology and historic preservation program called the Passport in Time (PIT). Volunteers work with professional USFS archaeologists and historians on national forests throughout the U.S. Volunteers are involved in all aspects of professional archaeology under expert supervision.

[ 126 ] Television programs, web videos and social media can also bring an understanding of underwater archaeology to a broad audience. The Mardi Gras Shipwreck Project [ 127 ] integrated a one-hour HD documentary, [ 128 ] short videos for public viewing and video updates during the expedition as part of the educational outreach. Webcasting is also another tool for educational outreach. For one week in 2000 and 2001, live underwater video of the Queen Anne's Revenge Shipwreck Project was webcast to the Internet as a part of the QAR DiveLive [ 129 ] educational program that reached thousands of children around the world.

Southerly, C.; Gillman-Bryan, J. (19 February 2009).

Diving on the Queen Anne's Revenge . The American Academy of Underwater Sciences. Archived from the original on 19 February 2009.

Created and co-produced by Nautilus Productions and Marine Grafics, this project enabled students to talk to scientists and learn about methods and technologies used by the underwater archaeology team.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] In the UK, popular archaeology programs such as Time Team and Meet the Ancestors have resulted in a huge upsurge in public interest.

[ citation needed ] Where possible, archaeologists now make more provisions for public involvement and outreach in larger projects than they once did, [ 132 ] and many local archaeological organizations operate within the Community archaeology framework [ 133 ] to expand public involvement in smaller-scale, more local projects. Archaeological excavation, however, is best undertaken by well-trained staff that can work quickly and accurately. Often this requires observing the necessary health and safety and indemnity insurance issues involved in working on a modern building site with tight deadlines. Certain charities and local government bodies sometimes offer places on research projects either as part of academic work or as a defined community project.

[ citation needed ] There is also a flourishing industry selling places on commercial training excavations and archaeological holiday tours.

[ citation needed ] Archaeologists prize local knowledge and often liaise with local historical and archaeological societies, which is one reason why Community archaeology projects are starting to become more common. Often archaeologists are assisted by the public in the locating of archaeological sites, which professional archaeologists have neither the funding, nor the time to do.

Archaeological Legacy Institute (ALI), is a registered 501[c] [3] non-profit, media and education corporation registered in Oregon in 1999. ALI founded a website, The Archaeology Channel to support the organization's mission "to nurturing and bringing attention to the human cultural heritage, by using media in the most efficient and effective ways possible." [ 134 ] There is a considerable international body of research focused on archaeology and public value and tangible benefits of archaeology include [ 135 ] helping to counteract racism, documenting accomplishments of ignored communities, providing time-depth as a response to short-termism of the modern age, and contributing to human ecology, independent evidence base, historic context development and tourism.

[ 136 ] The delivery of public benefits through archaeology can be summarised as follows: through making a contribution to a shared history, [ 137 ] artistic and cultural treasures, local values, place-making and social cohesion, educational benefits, contribution to science and innovation, health and wellbeing, and added economic value to developers.

[ 138 ] [ 132 ] Pseudoarchaeology [ edit ] Main article: Pseudoarchaeology Pseudoarchaeology is an umbrella term for all activities that falsely claim to be archaeological but in fact violate commonly accepted and scientific archaeological practices. It includes much fictional archaeological work (discussed above), as well as some actual activity. Many non-fiction authors have ignored the scientific methods of processual archaeology, or the specific critiques of it contained in post-processualism .

[ citation needed ] An example of this type is the writing of Erich von Däniken . His 1968 book, Chariots of the Gods?

, together with many subsequent lesser-known works, expounds a theory of ancient contacts between human civilization on Earth and more technologically advanced extraterrestrial civilizations. This theory, known as palaeocontact theory , or Ancient astronaut theory , is not exclusively Däniken's, nor did the idea originate with him. Works of this nature are usually marked by the renunciation of well-established theories on the basis of limited evidence, and the interpretation of evidence with a preconceived theory in mind.

[ citation needed ] Looting [ edit ] A looter's pit on the morning following its excavation, taken at Rontoy, Huaura Valley, Peru in June 2007. Several small holes left by looters' prospecting probes can be seen, as well as their footprints.

Looting of archaeological sites is an ancient problem. For instance, many of the tombs of the Egyptian pharaohs were looted during antiquity .

[ 139 ] Archaeology stimulates interest in ancient objects, and people in search of artifacts or treasure cause damage to archaeological sites. The commercial and academic demand for artifacts contributes directly to the illicit antiquities trade. Smuggling of antiquities abroad to private collectors has caused great cultural and economic damage in many countries whose governments lack the resources and or the will to deter it. Looters damage and destroy archaeological sites, denying future generations information about their ethnic and cultural heritage. Indigenous peoples especially lose access to and control over their 'cultural resources', ultimately denying them the opportunity to know their past.

[ 140 ] In 1937, W. F. Hodge the director of the Southwest Museum released a statement that the museum would no longer purchase or accept collections from looted contexts.

[ 141 ] The first conviction of the transport of artifacts illegally removed from private property under the Archaeological Resources Protection Act was in 1992 in the State of Indiana.

[ 142 ] Archaeologists trying to protect artifacts may be placed in danger by looters or locals trying to protect the artifacts from archaeologists who are viewed as looters by the locals.

[ 143 ] Some historical archaeology sites are subjected to looting by metal detector hobbyists who search for artifacts using increasingly advanced technology. Efforts are underway among all major Archaeological organizations to increase education and legitimate cooperation between amateurs and professionals in the metal detecting community.

[ 144 ] While most looting is deliberate, accidental looting can occur when amateurs, who are unaware of the importance of Archaeological rigor, collect artifacts from sites and place them into private collections.

Descendant peoples [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the United States, examples such as the case of Kennewick Man have illustrated the tensions between Native Americans and archaeologists, which can be summarized as a conflict between a need to remain respectful toward sacred burial sites and the academic benefit from studying them. For years, American archaeologists dug on Indian burial grounds and other places considered sacred, removing artifacts and human remains to storage facilities for further study. In some cases human remains were not even thoroughly studied but instead archived rather than reburied. Furthermore, Western archaeologists' views of the past often differ from those of tribal peoples. The West views time as linear; for many natives, it is cyclic. From a Western perspective, the past is long-gone; from a native perspective, disturbing the past can have dire consequences in the present.

As a consequence of this, American Indians attempted to prevent archaeological excavation of sites inhabited by their ancestors, while American archaeologists believed that the advancement of scientific knowledge was a valid reason to continue their studies. This contradictory situation was addressed by the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA, 1990), which sought to reach a compromise by limiting the right of research institutions to possess human remains. Due in part to the spirit of postprocessualism , some archaeologists have begun to actively enlist the assistance of indigenous peoples likely to be descended from those under study.

Archaeologists have also been obliged to re-examine what constitutes an archaeological site in view of what native peoples believe to constitute sacred space. To many native peoples, natural features such as lakes, mountains or even individual trees have cultural significance. Australian archaeologists especially have explored this issue and attempted to survey these sites to give them some protection from being developed. Such work requires close links and trust between archaeologists and the people they are trying to help and at the same time study.

While this cooperation presents a new set of challenges and hurdles to fieldwork, it has benefits for all parties involved. Tribal elders cooperating with archaeologists can prevent the excavation of areas of sites that they consider sacred, while the archaeologists gain the elders' aid in interpreting their finds. There have also been active efforts to recruit aboriginal peoples directly into the archaeological profession.

Repatriation [ edit ] See also: Repatriation and reburial of human remains A new trend in the heated controversy between First Nations groups and scientists is the repatriation of native artifacts to the original descendants.

[ clarification needed ] An example of this occurred on 21 June 2005, when community members and elders from a number of the 10 Algonquian nations in the Ottawa area convened on the Kitigan Zibi reservation near Maniwaki, Quebec , to inter ancestral human remains and burial goods—some dating back 6,000 years. It was not determined, however, if the remains were directly related to the Algonquin people who now inhabit the region. The remains may be of Iroquoian ancestry, since Iroquoian people inhabited the area before the Algonquin. Moreover, the oldest of these remains might have no relation at all to the Algonquin or Iroquois, and belong to an earlier culture who previously inhabited the area.

[ citation needed ] The remains and artifacts, including jewelry , tools and weapons , were originally excavated from various sites in the Ottawa Valley , including Morrison and the Allumette Islands . They had been part of the Canadian Museum of Civilization 's research collection for decades, some since the late 19th century. Elders from various Algonquin communities conferred on an appropriate reburial, eventually deciding on traditional red cedar and birch bark boxes lined with red cedar chips, muskrat and beaver pelts .

[ citation needed ] An inconspicuous rock mound marks the reburial site where close to 80 boxes of various sizes are buried. Because of this reburial, no further scientific study is possible. Although negotiations were at times tense between the Kitigan Zibi community and museum, they were able to reach agreement.

[ 145 ] African diaspora archaeology [ edit ] Main article: African diaspora archaeology African Diaspora Archaeology is an area of study within the subfield of historical archaeology that studies those that have been forcibly transported through the Atlantic Slave Trade , the Trans-Saharan Slave Trade , and the Indian Ocean Slave Trade , as well as their descendants. Although of global relevance, most research has been conducted in the Americas and Africa.

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] In the United States, Similar to the experience of Native Americans, the history of African diaspora archaeology is one of controversies over Whiteness in archaeology and anthropology, a lack of inclusion of the African descendant community, [ 148 ] and possession of human remains in the collections of universities and museums.

[ 149 ] In the 1990s, anthropologist Michael Blakey was the director of research during the New York African Burial Ground Project where he initiated a protocol for collaborating with the African descendant community. In 2011, the Society of Black Archaeologists was created in the United States .

[ 150 ] Co-founders Ayana Omilade Flewellen , archaeologist at the University of California, Riverside and Justin Dunnavant, archaeologist and assistant professor of anthropology at the University of California, Los Angeles intend to build a restorative justice-based structure in archaeology. They suggest to define descendants not only in genealogical terms, but also to welcome input of African Americans whose ancestors had a shared historical experience in enslavement.

[ 151 ] The United States Senate unanimously passed a bill [ 152 ] in December 2020 that centers African American cemeteries at risk in South Carolina. The bill is made to better protect historic African burial grounds and can lead to the creation of an African American Burial Grounds Network .

[ 153 ] Barbados , eight days after becoming a republic on November 30, 2021, announced plans for the construction of the Newton Enslaved Burial Ground Memorial as well as a museum dedicated to the history of the Atlantic slave trade .

[ 154 ] The Ghanaian-British architect David Adjaye is to lead the project that is to commemorate an estimated 570 West Africans buried in unmarked graves at the site of the former Newton sugar plantation.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] Barbados can be seen as a good example of respectful preservation of an African burial ground. Throughout the Americas however the burial grounds are in danger of being destroyed or human remains are being excavated without the descendant community being involved.

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] [ 158 ] [ 159 ] [ 160 ] In 2022, residents on Sint Eustatius , Dutch Caribbean spoke out strongly against what they found were unethical excavations of their ancestors on the Godet African Burial Ground and the Golden Rock African Burial Ground .

[ 161 ] Climate change and archaeology [ edit ] As anthropogenic climate change affects our environment, projections show that there will be changes in rainfall with increased drought and desertification, increases in intensity and frequency of rainfall, increases in temperature (winter and summer), increases in both the temperature and frequency of heatwaves, rising sea levels, and warmer seas, ocean acidification and changes in oceanic currents. These climate drivers will result in changes to flora and fauna, and changes in ground conditions (both on and below the surface) and so will also affect archaeological deposits and structures, while human responses to the climate crisis will also impact archaeological sites. The archaeologist's knowledge and skills are relevant to supporting society in adapting to a changing climate and a low carbon future.

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] Another effect of higher temperatures has been melting of glaciers and ice patches. This has led to the discovery of artifacts and bodies long buried in the ice, fostering the new field of glacial archaeology .

[ 164 ] [ 165 ] Archaeological sites can be seen as habitats that support ecosystems and fulfil biodiversity goals.

[ 166 ] AI in archaeology [ edit ] As artificial intelligence (AI) continues to influence scientific research, its application in archaeological studies has become increasingly significant. For instance, AI models have been utilized to identify archaeological remains in the Empty Quarter of the Arabian Peninsula .

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] Additionally, AI technology has facilitated the discovery of 303 new geoglyphs in Nazca.

[ 169 ] See also [ edit ] Aerial archaeology Anthropology – Scientific study of humans, human behavior, and societies Archaeoastronomy – Interdisciplinary study of astronomies in cultures Archaeobiology Archaeogenetics – Application of the techniques of molecular population genetics to the study of the human past Archaeological science – Application of scientific techniques to archaeology Archaeology and racism Archaeology of religion and ritual Archival research – Type of research using evidence from archival records Area of archaeological potential Bioarchaeology – Sub-discipline of archaeology Chronological dating – Methods for estimating a realistic date for an event or object Classical archaeology – Sub-discipline of archaeology Computational archaeology – Archaeological sub-discipline Conservation and restoration of archaeological sites – Process in archaeology Digital archaeology – Application of digital technology to archaeology Disturbance (archaeology) – Change to an archaeological site Dump digging – Excavating garbage dumps to find objects of interest Environmental archaeology – Sub-discipline of archaeology Environmental history – Specialisation of history Geophysical survey (archaeology) – Non-invasive physical sensing techniques used for archaeological imaging or mapping GIS in archaeology – Aspect of GIS usage Glossary of archaeology Harris matrix – Method of depicting site stratigraphy Human ecology – Study of the relationship between humans and their natural, social, and built environments Intellectual Property Issues in Cultural Heritage project – Cultural heritage research initiative Landscape archaeology – Sub-discipline of archaeology and archaeological theory Landscape history – Study of changes in the physical environment caused by human activities.

Magnetic survey (archaeology) – Magnetic detection of archaeological artefacts and features Maritime archaeology – Archaeological study of human interaction with the sea Nationalism and archaeology Palaeoanthropology – Study of ancient humans Remote sensing in archaeology Urban archaeology – Archaeological sub-discipline Zooarchaeology – Analysis of animal remains found in archaeological sites Lists List of archaeological excavations by date List of archaeological periods List of archaeological sites by country List of archaeologists List of archaeology awards List of paleoethnobotanists Notes [ edit ] ^ from Ancient Greek ἀρχαῖος (archaios) ' ancient ' and λογία (logia) ' study of ' .

[ 170 ] Although American English usually does not use -ae spellings , archaeology is the standard spelling across the English-speaking world, including the United States.

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] Some US government bodies and university presses use archeology in accordance with the GPO Style Manual .

[ 173 ] Another uncommon variant is archæology , using the archaic ligature æ .

[ 171 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Renfrew and Bahn (2004 [1991]:13) ^ Sinclair, A. (2016).

"The Intellectual Base of Archaeological Research 2004–2013: A visualisation and analysis of its disciplinary links, networks of authors, and conceptual language" .

Internet Archaeology (42).

doi : 10.11141/ia.42.8 .

^ Sinclair, A. (2022).

"Archaeological Research 2014 to 2021: an examination of its intellectual base, collaborative networks and conceptual language using science maps" .

Internet Archaeology (59).

doi : 10.11141/ia.59.10 .

^ Kristiansen, Kristian (2009).

"The Discipline of Archaeology" .

The Oxford Handbook of Archaeology .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-174344-3 .

^ Roche, Hélène; Kent, Dennis V.; Kirwa, Christopher; Lokorodi, Sammy; Wright, James D.; Mortlock, Richard A.; et al. (May 2015).

"3.3 million-year-old stone tools from Lomekwi 3, West Turkana, Kenya" .

Nature .

521 (7552): 310– 315.

Bibcode : 2015Natur.521..310H .

doi : 10.1038/nature14464 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMID 25993961 .

S2CID 1207285 .

^ "What is archaeology? – Archaeology definition" .

Live Science . 28 March 2014.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2019 . Retrieved 25 August 2017 .

^ The Oxford Encyclopedia of Mesoamerican Cultures . Oxford University Press. 2001.

ISBN 978-0-19-510815-6 .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2020 . Retrieved 22 July 2020 .

^ "Archaeology as a Central Issue in the Creation of Identity" .

Encyclopédie d'histoire numérique de l'Europe . Retrieved 22 December 2022 .

^ Bueno, Christina (2016).

The Pursuit of Ruins: Archaeology, History, and the Making of Modern Mexico . Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. pp. 25 ff.

^ Markin, Pablo (10 April 2017).

"A special issue of Open Archaeology on non-professional metal-detecting" .

Open Science (blog). de Gruyter. Archived from the original on 28 October 2019 . Retrieved 14 June 2022 .

^ Banning, Edward B. (29 May 2019).

"The archaeological impacts of metal detecting" .

Open Archaeology .

5 (1): 180– 186.

doi : 10.1515/opar-2019-0013 .

ISSN 2300-6560 .

^ a b c d Silverberg, Robert (1997).

Great Adventures in Archaeology . University of Nebraska Press. p. viii.

ISBN 978-0-8032-9247-5 . Retrieved 10 June 2020 .

^ a b c Kelly, Robert L.; Thomas, David Hurst (2013).

Archaeology: Down to Earth . Cengage. p. 2.

ISBN 978-1-133-60864-6 . Retrieved 10 June 2020 .

^ Watrall, Ethan.

"Lecture 2" (PDF) . History of Archaeology (ANP203). Anthropology.msu.edu. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 April 2014 . Retrieved 7 April 2014 .

^ a b Hirst, K. Kris.

"The History of Archaeology Part 1" . ThoughtCo.com.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2016 . Retrieved 5 April 2014 .

^ "archaeology" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

Archived from the original on 27 December 2013 . Retrieved 26 December 2013 .

^ Hirst, K. Kris (9 February 2017).

"The history of archaeology: How ancient relic hunting became science" .

about.com .

Archived from the original on 11 June 2011 . Retrieved 8 April 2018 .

^ Ebrey, Patricia Buckley (1999).

The Cambridge Illustrated History of China (paperback ed.).

Cambridge University Press . p. 148.

ISBN 0-521-66991-X .

^ Rudolph, R. C. (1963). "Preliminary notes on Sung archaeology".

The Journal of Asian Studies .

22 (2): 169– 177, esp. 171.

doi : 10.2307/2050010 .

JSTOR 2050010 .

S2CID 164153713 .

^ a b Trigger, Bruce G. (2006).

A History of Archaeological Thought (2nd ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-84076-7 .

^ a b Clunas, Craig (2004).

Superfluous Things: Material culture and social status in early modern China . Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

ISBN 0-8248-2820-8 .

^ Fraser, Julius Thomas; Haber, Francis C. (1986).

Time, Science, and Society in China and the West . Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. p. 227.

ISBN 0-87023-495-1 .

^ Edward W. Bodnar, Later travels , with Clive Foss, introduction (pp. ix-xxiii) ^ E. W. Bodnar, Cyriacus of Ancona and Athens , Bruxelles-Berchem, 1960.

^ "Flavio Biondo" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica (Online ed.). 31 May 2021.

Archived from the original on 27 October 2021 . Retrieved 27 October 2021 .

^ "John Leland" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica (Online ed.). 14 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 22 April 2016 . Retrieved 27 October 2021 .

^ "William Camden" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica (Online ed.). 28 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 27 October 2021 . Retrieved 27 October 2021 .

^ Singh, Upinder (2009).

A History of Ancient and Early Medieval India: From the Stone Age to the 12th Century . Pearson. p. 13.

ISBN 978-9332569966 .

Archived from the original on 31 July 2022 . Retrieved 11 May 2022 .

^ Ucko, P. J. (2005).

Theory in Archaeology: A World Perspective . Taylor & Francis. p. 192.

ISBN 978-1-134-84346-6 .

Archived from the original on 10 May 2022 . Retrieved 10 May 2022 .

^ a b Cunliffe, B. W.; Colin Renfrew, B. W. C.; Cunliffe, P.; Davies, W.; Renfrew, C.; Davies, P.; et al. (2002).

Archaeology: The widening debate . British Academy centenary monographs. British Academy. p. 309.

ISBN 978-0-19-726255-9 .

Archived from the original on 10 May 2022 . Retrieved 10 May 2022 .

^ Hunter, Michael (1975).

John Aubrey and the Realm of Learning . London: Duckworth. pp.

156–157, 162– 166, 181 .

ISBN 978-0-7156-0818-0 .

^ King, Dorothy (2006).

The Elgin Marbles . Hutchinson.

^ Sime, James; Mitchell, John Malcolm (1911). "Winckelmann, Johann Joachim". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 28 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 707 ^ "WINCKELMANN, Johann Joachim (1779)" 1 Archived 8 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ David Irwin, Winckelmann: Writings on Art (London: Phaidon) 1972.

^ Winckelmann, Johann Joachim (2006).

History of the art of antiquity . Potts, Alex. Los Angeles: Getty Research Institute.

ISBN 978-0-89236-668-2 .

^ Boorstin , 584 ^ Robinson, Walter (1995).

"Introduction" .

Instant Art History . Random House Publishing Group. p.

240 .

ISBN 0-449-90698-1 .

The father of official art history was a German named Johann Joachim Winckelmann (1717–68).

^ Everill, P. (2010). "The Parkers of Heytesbury: Archaeological pioneers".

Antiquaries Journal .

90 : 441– 453.

doi : 10.1017/S000358151000003X .

S2CID 162145183 .

^ Everill, P. (2009). "Invisible pioneers".

British Archaeology .

108 : 40– 43.

^ Renfrew, Colin; Bahn, Paul G. (2015).

Archaeology essentials: theories, methods, practice (3. ed.). London: Thames & Hudson. pp.

17– 18.

ISBN 978-0-500-29159-7 .

^ Bowden, Mark (1984).

General Pitt Rivers: The father of scientific archaeology .

Salisbury and South Wiltshire Museum .

ISBN 0-947535-00-4 .

^ Hicks, Dan (2013).

"Characterizing the World Archaeology Collections of the Pitt Rivers Museum" . In Hicks, Dan; Stevenson, Alice (eds.).

World Archaeology at the Pitt Rivers Museum: A characterization . Oxford: Archaeopress.

ISBN 978-1-905739-58-5 .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2018 . Retrieved 8 April 2018 .

^ "Sir William Flinders Petrie 1853–1942" . Palestine Exploration Fund. 2000.

Archived from the original on 14 May 2011 . Retrieved 19 November 2007 .

^ Harl, Kenneth W.

"Great Ancient Civilizations of Asia Minor" .

thegreatcourses.com .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2013 . Retrieved 23 November 2012 .

^ MacGillivray, Joseph Alexander (2000).

Minotaur: Sir Arthur Evans and the Archaeology of the Minoan Myth . New York, NY: Hill and Wang (Farrar, Straus and Giroux).

^ Renfrew, Colin; Bahn, Paul G. (2015).

Archaeology essentials: theories, methods, practice (3. ed.). London: Thames & Hudson. p. 24.

ISBN 978-0-500-29159-7 .

^ Renfrew and Bahn (2004 [1991]):33–35 ^ Greene, Kevin.

" Archaeology – an introduction " . Staff.ncl.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 23 January 2013 . Retrieved 12 August 2010 .

^ Schiffer, M. B. (1972). "Archaeological context and systemic context".

American Antiquity .

37 (2): 156– 165.

doi : 10.2307/278203 .

JSTOR 278203 .

S2CID 162342729 .

^ a b c Trigger (1989) ^ Binford (1962) ^ Flannery (1967) ^ Shanks and Tilley (1987) ^ Shanks and Tilley (1988) ^ Shanks (1991) ^ Shanks (1993) ^ Tilley (1993) ^ Miller and Tilley1984 ^ Miller et al. (1989) ^ Hodder (1982) ^ Hodder (1985) ^ Hodder (1987) ^ Hodder (1990) ^ Hodder (1991) ^ Hodder (1992) ^ Pauketat, Timothy R.

(2001) ^ a b Hinshaw (2000) ^ Steve, Graham (17 September 1999).

"Remote sensing" . Feature Articles.

NASA .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2018 . Retrieved 8 April 2018 .

^ a b c "Peru's archaeologists turn to drones to help protect and explore ancient ruins" . World News.

The Guardian . Reuters in Lima. 25 August 2013. Archived from the original on 25 August 2013 . Retrieved 27 August 2013 .

^ Hudson, Hal (24 September 2014).

"Air-chaeological drones search for ancient treasures" .

New Scientist . No. 2988.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2014 . Retrieved 2 October 2014 .

^ Willey (1953) ^ Willey (1968) ^ Billman and Feinman (1999) ^ Redman, C. L. (1974).

Archaeological Sampling Strategies . Binghamton: State University of New York at Binghamton .

^ "Kite aerial photography" .

Archived from the original on 25 April 2016 . Retrieved 2 December 2012 .

^ Reeves, D. M. (1936). "Aerial photography and archaeology".

American Antiquity .

2 (2): 102– 107.

doi : 10.2307/275881 .

JSTOR 275881 .

S2CID 164041261 .

^ Sánchez, Rosalía (25 February 2015).

"Para los arqueólogos es un ladrón, para los buscadores de tesoros un ídolo" .

El Mundo (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 22 December 2017 . Retrieved 19 December 2017 .

^ Hall, E. T. (1970). "Survey techniques in underwater archaeology".

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences .

269 (1193): 121– 124.

Bibcode : 1970RSPTA.269..121H .

doi : 10.1098/rsta.1970.0090 .

JSTOR 73925 .

S2CID 124297131 .

^ Adibe, Luiz Abdalla Filho; Gabriela, Bielefeld Nardoto; Leonardo, de Aro Galera; Janaina, Leite de Souza; Luiza, Santos Reis; Yeleine, Almoza Hernandez; Rebeca, Sales; Daniel, Guimarães Gerardi; Luiz, Antonio Martinelli (2019). "Is the 'canine surrogacy approach' (CSA) still valid for dogs and humans in market-oriented and subsistence-oriented communities in Brazil?".

Isotopes in Environmental and Health Studies .

55 (3): 227– 236.

Bibcode : 2019IEHS...55..227A .

doi : 10.1080/10256016.2019.1598986 .

PMID 30943760 .

S2CID 93000409 .

^ "What is archaeology?" .

www.saa.org . Society for American Archaeology.

Archived from the original on 25 August 2017 . Retrieved 25 August 2017 .

^ Crow, Madison; Zori, Colleen; Zori, Davide (17 December 2020).

"Doctrinal and physical marginality in Christian death: The burial of unbaptized infants in Medieval Italy" .

Religions .

11 (12): 678.

doi : 10.3390/rel11120678 .

^ Gould (1971a) ^ Gould (1971b) ^ Yellen (1972) ^ Yellen (1977) ^ Gould and Yellen 1987 ^ Yellen (1991) ^ Sillet et al. (2006) ^ Schott and Sillitoe (2005) ^ Ogundele (2005) ^ Kuznar (2001) ^ Ascher (1961) ^ Saraydar and Shimada (1971) ^ Saraydar and Shimada (1973) ^ Gifford-Gonzalez (1985) ^ Frison, G. C. (1989). "Experimental Use of Clovis Weaponry and Tools on African Elephants".

American Antiquity .

54 (4): 766– 84.

doi : 10.2307/280681 .

JSTOR 280681 .

S2CID 162199901 .

^ Glascock et al. 1994 ^ Hacιgüzeller, Piraye (2012). "GIS, critique, representation and beyond".

Journal of Social Archaeology .

12 (2): 245– 263.

doi : 10.1177/1469605312439139 .

S2CID 220418716 .

^ Saiano, F.; Scalenghe, R. (2009). "An anthropic soil transformation fingerprinted by REY patterns".

Journal of Archaeological Science .

36 (11): 2502– 06.

Bibcode : 2009JArSc..36.2502S .

doi : 10.1016/j.jas.2009.06.025 .

^ "MIT Archaeological Materials and CMRAE Mission Statement" . Archived from the original on 25 July 2008.

^ a b Bawaya, Michael (8 January 2010).

"Virtual archaeologists recreate parts of ancient worlds" (PDF) .

Science .

327 (5962): 140– 141.

Bibcode : 2010Sci...327..140B .

doi : 10.1126/science.327.5962.140 .

PMID 20056870 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 August 2019 . Retrieved 8 April 2018 .

^ "Department of Archaeology" .

Sogaer.ex.ac.uk . The University of Exeter – SoGAER. 28 October 2008.

Archived from the original on 21 June 2008 . Retrieved 5 May 2009 .

^ "Planning Policy Guidance 16: Archaeology and planning" . Planning, building and the environment – Communities and Local Government. Archived from the original on 12 February 2008 . Retrieved 25 July 2009 .

^ West, E; Christie, C; Moretti, D; Scholma-Mason, O; Smith, A (2024).

"A Route Well Travelled. The archaeology of the A14 Huntingdon to Cambridge Road Improvement Scheme" .

Internet Archaeology (67).

doi : 10.11141/ia.67.22 .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2025 . Retrieved 6 March 2025 .

^ Smith, A; West, E; Sherlock, S; Gdaniec, K; Bowsher, D (2024).

"Great Excavations: Methodological considerations arising after a major archaeological infrastructure project for the A14 Cambridge to Huntingdon Road Improvement Scheme" .

Internet Archaeology (67).

doi : 10.11141/ia.67.21 .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2025 . Retrieved 6 March 2025 .

^ "Historic environment" . Department for Culture Media and Sport. Culture.gov.uk. 28 April 2009.

Archived from the original on 21 May 2009 . Retrieved 5 May 2009 .

^ "English Heritage – Stonehenge & the History of England: English Heritage" . English Heritage.

Archived from the original on 30 April 2009 . Retrieved 5 May 2009 .

^ "Historic Scotland" (main page). Historic Scotland.

Archived from the original on 26 April 2009 . Retrieved 5 May 2009 .

^ "Cadw" . Cadw.wales.gov.uk.

Archived from the original on 29 April 2009 . Retrieved 5 May 2009 .

^ "Built Environment" . ehsni.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 25 December 2007 . Retrieved 5 May 2009 .

^ Flannery (1982) ^ UNESCO convenes Libyan and international experts meeting for the safeguard of Libya's cultural heritage. UNESCO World Heritage Center – News, 21. Oktober 2011.

^ Roger O'Keefe, Camille Péron, Tofig Musayev, Gianluca Ferrari "Protection of Cultural Property. Military Manual." UNESCO, 2016, S. 73ff.

^ Eric Gibson: The Destruction of Cultural Heritage Should be a War Crime.

In: The Wall Street Journal, 2 March 2015.

^ Eden Stiffman "Cultural Preservation in Disasters, War Zones. Presents Big Challenges" in The Chronicle Of Philanthropy, 11 May 2015.

^ "UNESCO Director-General calls for stronger cooperation for heritage protection at the Blue Shield International General Assembly.", UNESCO – 13 September 2017.

^ Friedrich Schipper: "Bildersturm: Die globalen Normen zum Schutz von Kulturgut greifen nicht" (German – The global norms for the protection of cultural property do not apply), In: Der Standard, 6 March 2015.

^ "Action plan to preserve heritage sites during conflict" .

UNIFIL . 12 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 26 July 2020 . Retrieved 7 May 2020 .

^ a b McGeough, Kevin (2006). "Heroes, mummies, and treasure: Near Eastern archaeology in the movies".

Near Eastern Archaeology .

69 ( 3– 4): 174– 185.

doi : 10.1086/NEA25067670 .

S2CID 166381712 .

^ "Romancing the Past-Archaeology" (Press release).

Denison University . Archived from the original on 31 May 2010 . Retrieved 11 January 2011 .

^ Denning, K. (28 January 2004). " 'The Storm of Progress' and Archaeology for an Online Public".

Internet Archaeology .

15 (15).

doi : 10.11141/ia.15.1 .

^ "Public Education/Outreach" .

Anthropological Studies Center (ASC) . Sonoma.edu. 17 April 2018.

Archived from the original on 18 October 2022 . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

^ Marwick, Ben; Pham, Thanh Son; Ko, May Su (15 December 2020).

"Over-research and ethics dumping in international archaeology" .

SPAFA Journal .

4 .

doi : 10.26721/spafajournal.v4i0.625 .

^ Marwick, Ben (29 October 2020).

"Open Access to Publications to Expand Participation in Archaeology" .

Norwegian Archaeological Review .

53 (2): 163– 169.

doi : 10.1080/00293652.2020.1837233 .

S2CID 228961066 .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2021 . Retrieved 16 March 2021 .

^ "Volunteers restore antique Miller Cabin" .

Rapid City Journal . Rapid City, SD. 14 November 2008.

Archived from the original on 12 April 2011 . Retrieved 12 August 2010 .

^ "Mardi Gras Shipwreck" .

uwf.edu . Archived from the original on 16 May 2015.

^ Mystery Mardi Gras Shipwreck (video documentary). Nautilus Productions.

Archived from the original on 13 June 2015 . Retrieved 8 March 2016 .

^ "Live from Morehead City, it's Queen Anne's Revenge" . State Publications.

Archived from the original on 15 January 2020 . Retrieved 8 March 2016 .

^ "Apple, QuickTime help with underwater diving trip" .

Macworld . October 2001.

Archived from the original on 3 April 2015 . Retrieved 8 March 2016 .

^ "Blackbeard's glowing shipwreck" .

P3 Update . Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 8 March 2016 .

^ a b Single, Adam; Davies, Louise (2021).

"Prehistory, Playhouses and the Public: London's Planning Archaeology" .

Internet Archaeology (57).

doi : 10.11141/ia.57.10 .

^ Wilkins, Brendon (2021).

"Social Impact Archaeology: Pontefract Castle and the Gatehouse Project" .

Internet Archaeology (57).

doi : 10.11141/ia.57.18 .

^ "Our organization" .

archaeologychannel.org . Archaeological Legacy Institute (ALI).

Archived from the original on 21 March 2018 . Retrieved 20 March 2018 .

^ Sloane, Barney (2021).

"Making the Case for the Public Benefits of Development-led Archaeology" .

Internet Archaeology (57).

doi : 10.11141/ia.57.17 .

^ Minnis, P. E.; Kelly, D. S.; Sebastian, L.; Ingram, S. E.; Spielmann, K. A. (2006). "Answering the skeptic's question".

The Society for American Archaeology Archaeological Record .

6 (5).

^ Dediala, Ričardas (2021).

"Archaeology and the History of the Lithuanian Resistance in the 19th and 20th Centuries: in search of the public benefit" .

Internet Archaeology (57).

doi : 10.11141/ia.57.11 .

^ Aitchison, Kenneth (2021).

"No More Polluter Pays Principle: opportunities and challenges of public benefit provision in UK development-led archaeology" .

Internet Archaeology (57).

doi : 10.11141/ia.57.8 .

^ Ramses II: Magnificence on the Nile (TV documentary). Time Life Lost Civilizations. 1993.

^ Sheets, P. D. (1973). "The Pillage of Prehistory".

American Antiquity .

38 (3): 317– 20.

doi : 10.2307/279718 .

JSTOR 279718 .

S2CID 163319469 .

^ Hodge (1937) ^ Munson, C. A.; Jones, M. M.; Fry, R. E. (1995). "The GE Mound: An ARPA Case Study".

American Antiquity .

60 (1): 131– 59.

doi : 10.2307/282080 .

JSTOR 282080 .

S2CID 163470391 .

^ Strauss, Mark (20 August 2015).

"Archaeologist's execution highlights risks to history's guardians" .

National Geographic News . Archived from the original on 22 August 2015 . Retrieved 21 August 2015 .

^ "Open minds, clearer signals – metal detectorist and archaeologist cooperation takes another step" .

sha.org (blog). The Society for Historical Archaeology. 10 April 2013.

Archived from the original on 22 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 September 2019 .

^ Wallace, Katie.

"Bones of contention" .

Canadian Geographic Online .

Archived from the original on 18 February 2006 . Retrieved 4 October 2005 .

^ Singleton, Theresa (2010). "African Diaspora in Archaeology". In Olaniyan, Tejumola; Sweet, James (eds.).

The African Diaspora and The Disciplines . Bloomington: Indiana University Press. pp.

119– 134.

ISBN 978-0-253-35464-8 .

^ Fennell, Christopher (2020). "African Diaspora Archaeology".

Encyclopedia of Global Archaeology (2nd ed.). Springer Cham. pp.

58– 59.

ISBN 978-3-030-30018-0 .

^ Archaeology under the Blinding Light of Race. Michael L. Blakey in Current Anthropology 2020 61:S22, S183-S197 ^ Wade, Lizzie (8 July 2021).

"A racist scientist built a collection of human skulls. Should we still study them?" .

Science . AAAS.

Archived from the original on 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ "About" .

Society of Black Archaeologists .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ Lepore, Jill (24 September 2021).

"When Black history is unearthed, who gets to speak for the dead?" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 31 July 2022 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ "All Info – H.R.1179 – 116th Congress (2019–2020): African-American Burial Grounds Network Act" .

Congress.gov . 22 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ McGreevy, Nora (29 December 2020).

"New Legislation Seeks to Protect the U.S.' Historic Black Cemeteries" .

Smithsonian Magazine .

Archived from the original on 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ a b Gershon, Livia (8 December 2021).

"After Breaking Ties with Britain, Barbados Announces Heritage District Tracing Slavery's Toll" .

Smithsonian Magazine .

Archived from the original on 8 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ Architects' Journal (6 December 2021).

"Adjaye Associates' proposed Newton Enslaved Burial Ground Memorial, Barbados" .

YouTube .

Archived from the original on 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ "Flatbush African Burial Ground Coalition" . flatbushafricanburialground.org.

Archived from the original on 14 November 2021 . Retrieved 13 January 2022 .

^ Gaffney, Austyn (19 August 2020).

"The fight to save America's historic Black cemeteries" .

National Geographic Society . Archived from the original on 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ marjolijn kok, 2022.

A Future That Does Not Forget: Collaborative Archaeology in the Colonial Context of Sint Eustatius (Dutch Caribbean).

Archived 22 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine Rotterdam, Bureau Archeologie en Toekomst, BAT-report 1 ^ "Olympics media village built on 'sacred' mass grave of African slaves" .

The Guardian . 21 July 2016.

Archived from the original on 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ "The Mass Grave in the Garden" . 25 July 2017.

Archived from the original on 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ "Criticism remains despite suspension of excavations" . 19 July 2021.

Archived from the original on 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ Fluck, H.; Guest, K. (2022).

"Climate Change and Archaeology. An Introduction" .

Internet Archaeology (60).

doi : 10.11141/ia.60.1 .

^ Woodside, R.; Huggett-Jones, S. (2022).

"Heritage Responds – Taking Positive Actions on Climate Change" .

Internet Archaeology (60).

doi : 10.11141/ia.60.10 .

^ " 'Dark' archaeologists scour melting ice for ancient artifacts" . October 2023.

^ Curry, Andrew (2014). "Racing the thaw".

Science .

346 (6206): 157– 159.

doi : 10.1126/science.346.6206.157 .

PMID 25301599 .

^ Kadakas, U. (2022).

"Archaeological Heritage as a Sustainer of Biodiversity" .

Internet Archaeology (60).

doi : 10.11141/ia.60.9 .

^ Cairns, Rebecca (25 September 2024).

"Artificial intelligence is detecting new archaeological sites in the desert" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2024 . Retrieved 25 September 2024 .

^ Laurel, Capitol Technology University 11301 Springfield Road; Md 20708 888.522.7486.

"AI in Archeology: How New Technology is Revolutionizing Historical Studies" .

Capitol Technology University . Retrieved 25 September 2024 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Sakai, Masato; Sakurai, Akihisa; Lu, Siyuan; Olano, Jorge; Albrecht, Conrad M.; Hamann, Hendrik F.; Freitag, Marcus (2024).

"AI-accelerated Nazca survey nearly doubles the number of known figurative geoglyphs and sheds light on their purpose" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

121 (40): e2407652121.

Bibcode : 2024PNAS..12107652S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2407652121 .

PMC 11459208 .

PMID 39312651 .

^ "archaeology" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ a b Hirst, K. Kris (24 March 2018).

"Archeology: Why Is There an Alternative Way to Spell Archaeology?" .

ThoughtCo .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2021 . Retrieved 18 February 2021 .

^ "Archaeology vs. archeology" .

Grammarist . Correct spelling. 9 February 2012.

Archived from the original on 15 January 2021 . Retrieved 18 February 2021 .

^ Little, Barbara J. (2006).

"Why are there two different spellings: archaeology and archeology?" . Society for American Archaeology. Archived from the original on 5 December 2009.

Bibliography [ edit ] Aldenderfer, M. S.; Maschner, H. D. G., eds. (1996).

Anthropology, Space, and Geographic Information Systems . New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Ascher, R. (1961). "Analogy in archaeological interpretation".

Southwestern Journal of Anthropology .

17 (4). University of New Mexico: 317– 25.

doi : 10.1086/soutjanth.17.4.3628943 .

JSTOR 3628943 .

S2CID 153939299 .

Ascher, R. (1961).

"Experimental Archeology" .

American Anthropologist .

63 (4): 793– 816.

doi : 10.1525/aa.1961.63.4.02a00070 .

Billman, B. R.; Feinman, G. (1999).

Settlement Pattern Studies in the Americas — Fifty Years Since Virú . Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.

Binford, L. (1962). "Archaeology as Anthropology".

American Antiquity .

28 (4). Society for American Archaeology: 217– 25.

doi : 10.2307/278380 .

JSTOR 278380 .

S2CID 162242910 .

Denning, K. (2004). "The Storm of Progress' and Archaeology for an Online Public".

Internet Archaeology .

15 .

Ebrey, Patricia Buckley (1999).

The Cambridge Illustrated History of China . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-43519-2 .

Fash, William (2001).

"Archaeology" . In David L. Carrasco (ed.).

The Oxford Encyclopedia of Mesoamerican Cultures . Vol. 1. New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

25– 35.

ISBN 978-0-19-510815-6 .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2023 . Retrieved 22 July 2020 .

Flannery, K. V. (1967). "Culture History v. Culture Process: A Debate in American archaeology".

Scientific American .

217 (2): 119– 22.

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0867-119 .

Flannery, K. V. (1982). "The Golden Marshalltown: A Parable for the Archaeology of the 1980s".

American Anthropologist .

84 (2): 265– 278.

doi : 10.1525/aa.1982.84.2.02a00010 .

Fraser, Julius Thomas; Francis C. Haber (1986).

Time, Science, and Society in China and the West . Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.

Glascock, M. D.; Neff, H.; Stryker, K. S. & Johnson, T. N. (1994). "Sourcing archaeological obsidian by an abbreviated NAA procedure".

Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry .

180 (1): 29– 35.

Bibcode : 1994JRNC..180...29G .

doi : 10.1007/BF02039899 .

S2CID 97455573 .

Gifford-Gonzalez, D. P.; Damrosch, D. B.; Damrosch, D. R.; Pryor, J. & Thunen, R. L. (1985). "The Third Dimension in Site Structure: An Experiment in Trampling and Vertical Dispersal".

American Antiquity .

50 (4): 803– 818.

doi : 10.2307/280169 .

JSTOR 280169 .

S2CID 163218164 .

Gladfelter, B. G. (1977). "Geoarchaeology: The Geomorphologist and Archaeology".

American Antiquity .

42 (4). Society for American Archaeology: 519– 538.

doi : 10.2307/278926 .

JSTOR 278926 .

S2CID 163453920 .

Gould, R. (1971a). "The Archaeologist as Ethnographer: A Case from the Western Desert of Australia".

World Archaeology .

3 (2): 143– 177.

doi : 10.1080/00438243.1969.9979499 .

Gould, R.; Koster, D. A. & Sontz, A. H. L. (1971b). "The Lithic Assemblage of the Western Desert Aborigines of Australia".

American Antiquity .

36 (2): 149– 169.

doi : 10.2307/278668 .

JSTOR 278668 .

S2CID 163617121 .

Gould, R.; Yellen, J. (1987). "Man the hunted: Determinants of household spacing in desert and tropical foraging societies".

Journal of Anthropological Archaeology .

6 (1): 77.

doi : 10.1016/0278-4165(87)90017-1 .

Haviland, William A.; Prins, Harald E. L.; McBride, Bunny; Walrath, Dana (2010).

Cultural Anthropology: The human challenge (13th ed.). Cengage.

ISBN 978-0-495-81082-7 .

Hinshaw, J. (2000).

Ethnobotanical and Archaeobotanical Relationships: A Yuman case study . Salinas: Coyote Press. pp.

3– 7, 38– 45.

Hodder, I. (1982).

Symbols in Action . Cambridge University Press.

Hodder, I. (1985). "Post-processual archaeology". In Schiffer, M. B. (ed.).

Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory . New York: Academic Press.

Hodder, I., ed. (1987).

The Archaeology of Contextual Meaning . New York: Cambridge University Press.

Hodder, I. (1990). "Style as historical quality". In Hastorf, M. (ed.).

The Uses of Style in Archaeology . Cambridge University Press.

Hodder, I. (1991). "Interpretive Archaeology and Its Role".

American Antiquity .

56 (1). Society for American Archaeology: 7– 18.

doi : 10.2307/280968 .

JSTOR 280968 .

S2CID 163936790 .

Hodder, I. (1992).

Theory and Practice in Archaeology . London, UK: Routledge.

Kuznar, L., ed. (2001).

Ethnoarchaeology of Andean South America . Ann Arbor, MI: International Monographs in Prehistory.

Miller, D.; Tilley, C. (1984). "Ideology, power, and prehistory: An introduction". In Miller, D.; Tilley, C. (eds.).

Ideology, Power, and Prehistory . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-25526-4 .

OCLC 241599209 .

Miller, D.; Rowlands, M.; Tilley, C., eds. (1989).

Dominion and Resistance . New York, NY: Routledge.

Ogundele, S. O. (2005). "Ethnoarchaeology of domestic space and spatial behaviour among the Tiv and Ungwai of central Nigeria".

African Archaeological Review .

22 (1): 25– 54.

doi : 10.1007/s10437-005-3158-2 .

S2CID 145452535 .

Pauketat, T. R.

(2001). "Practice and History in Archaeology: An Emerging Paradigm".

Anthropological Theory .

1 (1): 73– 98.

doi : 10.1177/14634990122228638 (inactive 11 July 2025).

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) Renfrew, C.; Bahn, P. G. (1991).

Archaeology: Theories, Methods, and Practice . London: Thames and Hudson Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-500-27867-3 .

Saraydar, S. C.; Shimada, I. (1971). "A Quantitative Comparison of Efficiency Between A Stone Axe and A Steel Axe".

American Antiquity .

36 (2): 216– 217.

doi : 10.2307/278680 .

JSTOR 278680 .

S2CID 163927190 .

Saraydar, S. C.; Shimada, I. (1973). "Experimental archaeology: A new outlook".

American Antiquity .

38 (3): 344– 350.

doi : 10.2307/279722 .

JSTOR 279722 .

S2CID 163223665 .

Sellet, F.; Greaves, R. & Yu, P.-L. (2006).

Archaeology and Ethnoarchaeology of Mobility . Gainesville: University Press of Florida.

Shanks, M.; Tilley, C. (1987).

Reconstructing Archaeology . New York: Cambridge university Press.

Shanks, M.; Tilley, C. (1988).

Social Theory and Archaeology . Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.

ISBN 978-0-7456-0184-7 .

Shanks, M. (1991). "Some recent approaches to style and social reconstruction in classical archaeology".

Archaeological Review from Cambridge .

10 : 164– 174.

Shanks, M. (1993). "Style and the design of a perfume jar from an Archaic Greek city state".

Journal of European Archaeology .

1 (1): 77– 106.

doi : 10.1179/096576693800731190 .

Shott, M. J.; Sillitoe, P. (2005). "Use life and curation in New Guinea experimental used flakes".

Journal of Archaeological Science .

32 (5): 653– 663.

Bibcode : 2005JArSc..32..653S .

doi : 10.1016/j.jas.2004.11.012 .

Tassie, G. J.; Owens, L. S. (2010).

Standards of Archaeological Excavations: A Fieldguide to the Methology, Recording Techniques and Conventions . London: GHP.

ISBN 978-1-906137-17-5 .

Taylor, W. W. (1948).

A Study of Archaeology . Menasha: American Anthropological Association.

ISBN 978-0-906367-12-4 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Tilley, Christopher, ed. (1993).

Interpretive Archaeology . Oxford: Berg.

ISBN 978-0-85496-842-8 .

Trigger, B. G. (1989).

A History of Archaeological Thought . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Watters, M. R. (1992).

Principles of Geoarchaeology: A North American Perspective . Tucson: The University of Arizona Press.

Watters, M. R. (2000). "Alluvial stratigraphy and geoarchaeology in the American Southwest".

Geoarchaeology .

15 (6): 537– 557.

Bibcode : 2000Gearc..15..537W .

doi : 10.1002/1520-6548(200008)15:6<537::AID-GEA5>3.0.CO;2-E .

Willey, G. R. (1953).

Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the Virú Valley, Perú . Washington, D.C.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Willey, G. (1968).

Settlement Archaeology . Palo Alto, CA: National Press.

Wylie, A. (1985). "The reaction against analogy". In Schiffer, Michael B. (ed.).

Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory . Orlando, FL: Academic Press. pp.

63– 111.

Yellen, J.; Harpending, H. (1972). "Hunter-Gatherer Populations and Archaeological Inference".

World Archaeology .

4 (2): 244– 253.

doi : 10.1080/00438243.1972.9979535 .

PMID 16468220 .

Yellen, J. (1977).

Archaeological Approaches to the Present . New York: Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-12-770350-3 .

Further reading [ edit ] Main articles: Bibliography of anthropology and Table of years in archaeology Hodder, Ian; Shanks, Michael; Alexandri, Alexandar; Buchili, Victor; Carman, John; Last, Jonathan; Lucas, Gavin (2008).

Interpreting Archaeology: Finding Meaning in the Past . London: Routledge.

Archived from the original on 16 August 2021 . Retrieved 18 June 2019 .

Olsen, Bjørnar; Shanks, Michael; Webmoor, Timothy; Witmore, Christopher (2012).

Archaeology: The Discipline of Things . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-95400-7 .

Archived from the original on 17 August 2021 . Retrieved 18 June 2019 .

Rathje, William; Shanks, Michael; Witmore, Christoper (2013).

Archaeology in the Making . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-63480-9 .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2021 . Retrieved 18 June 2019 .

Shanks, Michael (1992).

Experiencing the Past: On the Character of Archaeology . London and New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-203-97363-1 .

Archived from the original on 17 August 2021 . Retrieved 18 June 2019 .

Archaeology (magazine) Lewis Binford – New Perspectives in Archaeology (1968) ISBN 0-202-33022-2 Glyn Daniel – A Short History of Archaeology (1991) Kevin Greene – Introduction to Archaeology (1983) Thomas Hester, Harry Shafer, and Kenneth L. Feder – Field Methods in Archaeology 7th edition (1997) Ian Hodder & Scott Hutson – "Reading the Past" 3rd. edition (2003) Hutchings Rich, La Salle Marina (2014). "Teaching Anti-Colonial Archaeology".

Archaeologies .

10 (1): 27– 69.

doi : 10.1007/s11759-014-9250-y .

S2CID 154800430 .

International Journal of South American Archaeology – IJSA (magazine) Internet Archaeology , e-journal C. U. Larsen – Sites and Monuments (1992) Adrian Praetzellis – Death by Theory , AltaMira Press (2000).

ISBN 978-0-7425-0359-5 Colin Renfrew & Paul Bahn – Archaeology: theories, methods and practice , 2nd edition (1996) Smekalova, T. N.; Voss O.; & Smekalov S. L. (2008). " Magnetic Surveying in Archaeology . More than 10 years of using the Overhauser GSM-19 gradiometer". Wormianum.

David Hurst Thomas – Archaeology , 3rd. ed. (1998) Robert J. Sharer & Wendy Ashmore – Archaeology: Discovering our Past 2nd edition (1993) Bruce Trigger – "A History of Archaeological Thought" 2nd. edition (2007) Alison Wylie – Thinking From Things: Essays in the Philosophy of Archaeology , University of California Press , Berkeley CA, 2002 External links [ edit ] Library resources about Archaeology Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Works related to Archaeology at Wikisource Wikimedia Commons has media related to Archaeology .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Archaeology .

Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Archaeology Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Archaeological sites .

Fasti Online – an online database of archaeological sites The Archaeology Data Service – Open access online archive for UK and global archaeology World Archaeology News – weekly update from BBC Radio archaeologist, Win Scutt The Archaeology Channel v t e Archaeology History Archaeological sites Antiquarianism Johann Joachim Winckelmann Richard Hoare Heinrich Schliemann Arthur Evans John Lloyd Stephens William Henry Holmes Augustus Pitt Rivers Flinders Petrie Mortimer Wheeler Dorothy Garrod Max Uhle Alfred V. Kidder George Bass Method and theory Archaeological theory Philosophy of archaeology Archaeological diving Archaeological ethics Conservation and restoration of archaeological sites Survey geophysical survey electrical resistance survey Sondage Burnt layer Excavation Lithic analysis Post-excavation Sub-disciplines Chronological Prehistoric Protohistoric Biblical Classical Medieval Post-Medieval Historical Contemporary Geographic African American Asian Australian Oceanian Egyptian Mesopotamian Near Eastern Nubian Methodological Aerial Bioarchaeology Archaeogenetics Medieval Near Eastern Osteology Paleopathology Calceology Digital Archaeogaming Computational Virtual Environmental Geoarchaeology Paleoethnobotany Zooarchaeology Experimental Underwater Thematic Archaeoastronomy Archaeometry Battlefield Conflict Feminist Funerary Gender Indigenous Industrial Landscape Maritime Mortuary Music Nazi Phenomenology Pseudoarchaeology Queer Transgender Lists Sites by country Periods Archaeologists Egyptologists Assyriologists Hittitologists Journals Category History portal v t e Cultural heritage and historic preservation Topics and issues Agents of deterioration Archival processing Archaeological science Archaeology Archive Bioarchaeology Book Calendar (archives) Conservation and restoration of cultural property Conservation and restoration of immovable cultural property Conservation and restoration of movable cultural property Conservation science (cultural property) Collecting Collection (museum) Collection catalog Collections maintenance Collections management Collections management system Cultural heritage Cultural heritage management Cultural property Cultural property documentation Cultural property exhibition Cultural property imaging Cultural property storage Cultural resource management Database preservation Deaccessioning Digital library Digital photograph restoration Digital preservation Disaster preparedness (cultural property) Film preservation Finding aid Fonds Found in collection Heritage asset Heritage science Historic site Inherent vice Intangible cultural heritage Integrated pest management (cultural property) Inventory (library and archive) Inventory (museums) Media preservation Midden Mold control and prevention (library and archive) Museum Optical media preservation Preservation (library and archive) Preservation metadata Preservation survey Provenance Repatriation Ruins Sustainable preservation Treasure Web archiving Roles and expertise Archivist Art dealer Art handler Auctioneer Collection manager Conservator-restorer Conservation scientist Conservation technician Curator Exhibition designer Mount maker Objects conservator Paintings conservator Photograph conservator Preservationist Registrar (cultural property) Textile conservator Methods and techniques Aging (artwork) Anastylosis Arrested decay Cradling (paintings) Cultural property radiography Detachment of wall paintings Desmet method Display case Digital repository audit method based on risk assessment Historic paint analysis Inpainting Kintsugi Leafcasting Lining of paintings Mass deacidification Overpainting Paleo-inspiration Paper splitting Reconstruction (architecture) Rissverklebung Textile stabilization Transfer of panel paintings UVC-based preservation VisualAudio Conservation and restoration of immovable cultural property by item type Archaeological sites Cultural venues Frescos Heritage railways Historic gardens Outdoor artworks Outdoor bronze objects Outdoor murals Conservation and restoration of movable cultural property by item type Aircraft Ancient Greek pottery Bone, horn, and antler objects Books, manuscripts, documents and ephemera Ceramic objects Clocks Copper-based objects Feathers Film Flags and banners Fur objects Glass objects Herbaria Human remains Illuminated manuscripts Insect specimens Iron and steel objects Ivory objects Judaica Lacquerware Leather objects Lighthouses Metals Musical instruments Neon objects New media art Paintings Painting frames Panel paintings Papyrus Parchment Performance art Photographs Photographic plates Plastic objects Rail vehicles Road vehicles Shipwreck artifacts Silver objects South Asian household shrines Stained glass Taxidermy Textiles Tibetan thangkas Time-based media art Totem poles Vinyl discs Woodblock prints Wooden artifacts Wooden furniture Intangible cultural heritage preservation Ancient music Applied folklore Dance notation Early music Endangered language Ethnochoreology Ethnomusicology Ethnopoetics Family folklore Folklore Folk art Folk dance Folk etymology Folk instrument Folk music Folk process Folk play Foodways Folklore studies Heritage language Heritage language learning Indigenous intellectual property Indigenous culture Indigenous language Language death Language preservation Language revitalization Living history Oral history preservation Preservation of meaning Prehistoric music Tradition preservation Traditional knowledge Traditional medicine Notable projects Conservation issues of Pompeii and Herculaneum Conservation-restoration of Ecce Homo by Elías García Martínez Conservation-restoration of The Gross Clinic by Thomas Eakins Conservation-restoration of Leonardo da Vinci's The Last Supper Pompeian frescoes Conservation-restoration of the Shroud of Turin Conservation-restoration of the Sistine Chapel frescoes Conservation-restoration of the Statue of Liberty Conservation-restoration of the H.L. Hunley Conservation response to flood of Arno, Florence Modern and Contemporary Art Research Initiative Preservation Metadata: Implementation Strategies World Heritage Site v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category Portal : History Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia Greece Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8vgl8
Cached time: 20250817021118
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.483 seconds
Real time usage: 2.903 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20980/1000000
Revision size: 138823/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 509024/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14995/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 34/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 652502/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.594/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25598477/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2468.228      1 -total
 34.81%  859.305      2 Template:Reflist
 14.81%  365.488     58 Template:Cite_journal
 13.67%  337.455     56 Template:Cite_book
  9.83%  242.675     35 Template:Annotated_link
  8.70%  214.849     40 Template:Cite_web
  4.52%  111.631      6 Template:Navbox
  4.40%  108.711      3 Template:Lang
  3.70%   91.399      1 Template:Archaeology
  3.46%   85.462      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18951655:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817021118 and revision id 1306215320. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Archaeology&oldid=1306215320 " Categories : Archaeology Anthropology Fields of history Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from April 2018 Use Canadian English from December 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in Canadian English Articles needing additional references from August 2025 All articles needing additional references Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2007 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: location missing publisher Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 15:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Archaeology 166 languages Add topic

