Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Configuration Toggle Configuration subsection 2.1 The sphere 2.2 Projectors 2.3 Computer hardware 2.4 SOS data details 3 SOS User's Collaborative Network 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Science On a Sphere 5 languages Dansk Español 한국어 Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spherical projection system This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( April 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Science On a Sphere" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) SOS in the Planet Theater at the NOAA Earth System Research Laboratories in Boulder, Colorado The Canyon World in the Science On a Sphere Theater at Grand Canyon Visitor Center Science On a Sphere ( SOS ) is a spherical projection system created by the United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). It displays high-resolution video on a suspended globe with the aim of better representing global phenomena.

[ 1 ] Animated images of atmospheric storms, climate change , and ocean temperature can be displayed on the sphere to display environmental processes. SOS systems are most frequently installed in science museums , universities , zoos , and research institutions .

History [ edit ] SOS was invented by Alexander E. MacDonald, the former director of the Earth System Research Laboratories .

[ 2 ] MacDonald devised the original idea for SOS in 1995. A team of NOAA staff wrote the SOS software and developed the SOS hardware and system architecture. A patent was awarded to NOAA for Science On a Sphere in August 2005.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Configuration [ edit ] SOS uses many off-the-shelf hardware and software components.

[ 4 ] A spherical screen covered in ordinary latex paint hangs suspended in the center of the projection space. The screen is inert; it neither moves nor has any electronic parts. Surrounding the screen are four video projectors, with each projector responsible for one quadrant of screen space. One CPU is used to control the system. The SOS software runs on Linux .

[ 5 ] The sphere [ edit ] The carbon fiber sphere is 68 inches (1.7 m) in diameter and weighs under 50 pounds (23 kg).

[ 6 ] The sphere is attached to the ceiling or suspension structure with a three-point suspension system to hold the sphere in place and reduce lateral movement and blurring.

[ 7 ] Projectors [ edit ] The system requires high quality, bright, long-duty cycle projectors, rather than smaller portable and consumer models to endure the requirements of 8–10 hours per day, 7 days per week of most public displays.

[ 8 ] Computer hardware [ edit ] The newest configuration [ when?

] uses one Ubuntu Linux computer with NVIDIA Quadro graphics cards, and an iPad app to control the system.

[ 8 ] SOS data details [ edit ] An equirectangular projection of the Earth ; the standard parallel is the equator.

The majority of SOS assets are so-called "datasets". Originally conceived as a video system for showing space-based collections of Earth data, the SOS has grown in its utility. The majority of data that traditionally appears on the SOS screens concerns the Earth, either from near-real-time data acquisition systems, or from processed remote sensing platforms, but recent interest and growth in different kinds of media have started to broaden that library.

[ 9 ] There are currently over 500 datasets that can be shown on the sphere, including real-time infrared satellite images, Mars, real-time earthquakes, an ocean acidification model, and others, including a number of movies.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The data format for SOS datasets is the equirectangular projection , as shown by the map to the right.

[ 12 ] SOS User's Collaborative Network [ edit ] A collaborative network has been established by institutions with access to SOS, as well as partners who are developing educational programming and content for these systems. The SOS Users Collaborative Network is backed by the NOAA Office of Education (OEd) and the NOAA Earth System Research Laboratories (ESRL).

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Virtual globe References [ edit ] ^ "SOS: Documentation" . April 13, 2008. Archived from the original on 2008-04-13.

^ a b "SOS: What is SOS?" . September 29, 2006. Archived from the original on 2006-09-29.

^ "Science On a Sphere Geometry" (PDF) .

Sos.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2016-11-26 .

^ "Setup and Installation Details" . Retrieved August 3, 2009 .

^ "Archived copy" .

sos.noaa.gov . Archived from the original on 28 May 2010 . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Site Requirements" . September 29, 2006. Archived from the original on 2006-09-29.

^ "SOS: Pictures and Movies" . January 20, 2008. Archived from the original on 2008-01-20.

^ a b "SOS: Documentation" . September 29, 2006. Archived from the original on 2006-09-29.

^ "Dataset Catalog" . Archived from the original on 2005-09-05.

^ "NASA – 'Footprints' and Science On a Sphere" .

Nasa.gov . 2009-02-18 . Retrieved 2016-11-26 .

^ "Best Inventions of 2006" . TIME.

Archived from the original on December 11, 2006 . Retrieved 2016-11-26 .

^ "Content Creation | Science On a Sphere" .

Sos.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2016-11-26 .

^ "Science On a Sphere Users Collaborative Network" .

Oesd.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2016-11-26 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Science On a Sphere .

BWC Visual Technology A distributor and installer of Science on a Sphere Official website SOS Explorer , the desktop version of SOS for Windows and Mac computers, was released in September 2015 and is free for classroom or personal use.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Science_On_a_Sphere&oldid=1257948055 " Categories : Display technology Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research Science and technology in the United States Spheres Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with a promotional tone from April 2018 All articles with a promotional tone Articles needing additional references from November 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from July 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 17 November 2024, at 10:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Science On a Sphere 5 languages Add topic

