Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Example 2 Definitions 3 Other nomenclature uses 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Variety (botany) 49 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí भोजपुरी Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska עברית Jawa ქართული Lietuvių Magyar Malti Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Taxonomic rank below subspecies This article is about the taxonomic rank in botany. For other uses, see Plant variety .

"Var." redirects here. For other uses, see Var .

Not to be confused with the legal term "plant variety" , equivalent to the cultivar rank in taxonomy The hierarchy of biological classification 's eight major taxonomic ranks .  Intermediate minor rankings are not shown.

In botanical nomenclature , variety (abbreviated var.

; in Latin : varietas ) is a taxonomic rank below that of species and subspecies , but above that of form .

[ 1 ] As such, it gets a three-part infraspecific name . It is sometimes recommended that the subspecies rank should be used to recognize geographic distinctiveness, whereas the variety rank is appropriate if the taxon is seen throughout the geographic range of the species.

[ 2 ] Example [ edit ] The pincushion cactus, Escobaria vivipara , is a wide-ranging variable species occurring from Canada to Mexico, and found throughout New Mexico below about 2,600 metres (8,500 ft). Nine varieties have been described. Where the varieties of the pincushion cactus meet, they intergrade . The variety Escobaria vivipara var.

arizonica is from Arizona, while Escobaria vivipara var.

neo-mexicana is from New Mexico.

[ citation needed ] Definitions [ edit ] The term is defined in different ways by different authors.

[ 3 ] However, the International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants , while recognizing that the word "variety" is often used to denote " cultivar ", does not accept this usage. Variety  is defined in the code for cultivated plants as follows: "Variety (varietas) the category in the botanical nomenclatural hierarchy between species and form (forma)". The code for cultivated plants acknowledges the other usage as follows: "term used in some national and international legislation for a clearly distinguishable taxon below the rank of species; generally, in legislative texts, a term equivalent to cultivar. See also: cultivar and variety (varietas)".

[ 4 ] A variety will have an appearance distinct from other varieties, but will hybridize freely with those other varieties.

[ 5 ] Other nomenclature uses [ edit ] In plant breeding nomenclature, at least in countries that are signatory to the UPOV Convention, " variety " or "plant variety" is a legal term.

[ citation needed ] In zoological nomenclature , the only allowed rank below that of species is that of subspecies . A name that was published before 1961 as that of a variety is taken to be the name of a subspecies. A name published after 1960 as that of a variety does not formally exist. In zoology, forms and morphs are used informally if needed, but are unregulated by the ICZN .

[ citation needed ] The bacteriological nomenclature uses the term subspecies. Some names were published as "varieties" before 1992 but the terminology is now disallowed; names that were published as varieties are taken to be published as subspecies.

[ citation needed ] In viticulture nomenclature, what is referred to as " grape varieties " are in reality cultivars according to usage in the International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants or " plant varieties " in the legal sense rather than botanical  taxonomy varieties, since they are propagated by cuttings and have properties that are not stable under sexual reproduction . However, usage of the term variety is so entrenched in viticulture that a change to cultivar is unlikely.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Cultivar Hybrid (biology) Plant variety (law) Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act of 2001 (India) Race (biology) Subvariety Trinomial nomenclature Plant Landrace References [ edit ] ^ "Article 4".

International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants . 2012.

4.1. If a greater number of ranks of taxa is desired, [...a]n organism may thus be assigned to taxa of the following ranks (in descending sequence): [... genus, ... species, subspecies,] variety ( varietas ), subvariety ( subvarietas ), form ( forma ), and [*subform|subforms*{8.21.06<sub-conformable, sub-conformer>}{6.4.18<sub-conform, sub-conforms><sub-conformal, sub-conformally, sub-conformable, sub-conformably, sub-conformant, sub-conformation, sub-conforming, sub-conformed, sub-conformer>}]. ... 4.3. Further ranks may also be intercalated or added, provided that confusion or error is not thereby introduced.

^ "Varieties and forms" , HORTAX : Cultivated Plant Taxonomy Group , archived from the original on 17 August 2016 , retrieved 19 July 2016 ^ Robert T. Clausen (1941).

"On The Use Of The Terms "Subspecies" And "Variety" " .

Rhodora .

43 (509): 157– 167.

Archived from the original on 2019-05-17 . Retrieved 2018-01-13 .

^ Brickell et al 2016 .

^ Salm et al 2015 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Brickell, C.D.; Alexander, C.; Cubey, J.J.; David, J.C.; Hoffman, M.H.A.; Leslie, A.C.; Valéry Malécot; Jin, X. (2016), International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP or Cultivated Plant Code) incorporating the Rules and Recommendations for naming plants in cultivation, Ninth Edition, Adopted by the International Union of Biological Sciences International Commission for the Nomenclature of Cultivated Plants (PDF) , International Society for Horticultural Science, ISBN 978-94-6261-116-0 , archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-10-07 , retrieved 2017-01-20 Salm, Sarah; Allen, Deborah; Nester, Eugene; Anderson, Denise (2015).

Nester's Microbiology: A Human Perspective (8th ed.). McGraw-Hill Higher Education.

ISBN 9780077730932 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-23 . Retrieved 2020-09-20 .

v t e Taxonomic ranks Realm ( vir.

) Subrealm ( vir.

) Domain /Superkingdom Kingdom Subkingdom Infrakingdom/Branch Superphylum / Superdivision ( bot.

) Phylum / Division ( bot.

) Subphylum / Subdivision ( bot.

) Infraphylum Parvphylum Superclass Class Subclass Infraclass Subterclass Parvclass Division ( zoo.

) Legion Cohort Magnorder Superorder Order Suborder Infraorder Parvorder Section ( zoo.

) Superfamily Family Subfamily Infrafamily Supertribe Tribe Subtribe Infratribe Genus Subgenus Section ( bot.

) Series ( bot.

) " Species complex " Species Subspecies Variety ( bot.

) Form ( bot.

) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Variety_(botany)&oldid=1303539173 " Categories : Botanical nomenclature Plant taxonomy Hidden categories: Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 15:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Variety (botany) 49 languages Add topic

