Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Subject matter 2 Editorial process 3 Management 4 Impact 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Molecular Biology and Evolution 8 languages বাংলা Deutsch Español Français Italiano Português Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject.

It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view . Please discuss further on the talk page .

( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Academic journal Molecular Biology and Evolution Discipline Evolutionary biology Language English Edited by Claudia Russo & Brandon Gaut Publication details History 1983–present Publisher Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution Frequency Monthly Open access Yes Impact factor 11.000 (2023) Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Mol. Biol. Evol.

Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L CODEN MBEVEO ISSN 0737-4038 (print) 1537-1719 (web) LCCN 90648368 OCLC no.

439813139 Links Journal homepage Online access Molecular Biology and Evolution ( MBE ) is a monthly peer-reviewed scientific journal published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution .

[ 1 ] It publishes work in the intersection of molecular biology and evolutionary biology .

[ 2 ] The founding editors were Walter Fitch and Masatoshi Nei ; the present editors-in-chief are Brandon Gaut and Claudia Russo.

Subject matter [ edit ] Evolution is the most fundamental of biological processes. MBE publishes patterns and processes that impact the evolution of life at molecular levels, across a full breadth of taxonomy, genomic organization, and functions, forms, and phenotypes. MBE's Methods, Resource, and Protocol sections include research tools that enable discoveries, while the Reviews and Perspectives synthesize different aspects of the evolutionary thought.

Editorial process [ edit ] All MBE manuscripts are peer-reviewed. Decisions to publish are made by the Board of Editors, led by the Editors-in-Chief (EiCs) that oversee processing and set the direction of the journal. The board also includes Associate Editors (AEs) who solicit peer reviews and make an initial recommendation and the Senior Editors (SEs) who make the final recommendation that lead to the decision for each manuscript.

Management [ edit ] MBE is entirely owned by The Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution (SMBE). The SMBE Council appoints the Editor-in-Chief. The Journal is published by Oxford University Press. MBE has transitioned to full Open Access, with all papers free to access from 1 January 2021. All articles accepted for publication from 1 August 2020 have been published as Open Access.

Impact [ edit ] According to the Journal Citation Reports , the journal has a 2017 Impact Factor of 10.217, a 2018 Impact Factor of 14.797, a 2019 Impact Factor of 11.062, a 2022 Impact Factor of 10.700 and a 2023 Impact Factor of 11.00. In 2023 , MBE was ranked 8th out of the 172 journals in the Genetics & Heredity category, 16th out of 285 journals within the Biochemistry & Molecular Biology category and 4th  out of 54 in the Evolutionary Biology category.

References [ edit ] ^ Evolution, The Society for Molecular Biology &.

"Molecular Biology and Evolution" .

smbe.org . Retrieved 20 October 2017 .

^ "About | Molecular Biology and Evolution | Oxford Academic" .

academic.oup.com . Retrieved 20 October 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Molecular_Biology_and_Evolution&oldid=1235935306 " Categories : Molecular and cellular biology journals Evolutionary biology journals English-language journals Monthly journals Oxford University Press academic journals Academic journals associated with learned and professional societies Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles with possible conflicts of interest from December 2023 Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Monthly journals (infobox) Open access journals (infobox) This page was last edited on 22 July 2024, at 00:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Molecular Biology and Evolution 8 languages Add topic

