Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Personnel Toggle Personnel subsection 2.1 Prime crew 2.2 Backup crew 2.3 Support crew 2.4 Capsule communicators 2.5 Flight directors 2.6 Other key personnel 3 Preparations Toggle Preparations subsection 3.1 Insignia 3.2 Call signs 3.3 Mementos 3.4 Site selection 3.5 First-step decision 3.6 Pre-launch 4 Mission Toggle Mission subsection 4.1 Launch and flight to lunar orbit 4.2 Lunar descent 4.3 Landing 4.4 Lunar surface operations 4.5 Lunar ascent 4.6 Columbia in lunar orbit 4.7 Return 4.8 Splashdown and quarantine 5 Celebrations 6 8-Day NASA Mission timeline [9-Days] 7 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 7.1 Cultural significance 7.2 Spacecraft 7.3 Moon rocks 7.4 Experiment results 7.5 Moonwalk camera 7.6 Lunar Module Eagle memorabilia 7.7 Anniversary events 7.7.1 40th anniversary 7.7.2 50th anniversary 8 Films and documentaries 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Notes 10.2 Citations 10.3 Sources 11 External links Toggle External links subsection 11.1 Multimedia Toggle the table of contents Apollo 11 103 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ Anarâškielâ العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Seeltersk Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia First crewed Moon landing (1969) "First Moon landing" redirects here. For earlier uncrewed Moon landings, see Moon landing .

This article is about the 1969 crewed lunar mission. For other uses, see Apollo 11 (disambiguation) .

Apollo 11 Buzz Aldrin on the Moon in a photograph taken by Neil Armstrong , who can be seen in the visor reflection along with Earth, the Lunar Module Eagle , and the U.S. flag .

[ 1 ] Mission type Crewed lunar landing ( G ) Operator NASA COSPAR ID CSM: 1969-059A LM: 1969-059C SATCAT no.

CSM: 4039 [ 2 ] LM: 4041 [ 3 ] Mission duration 8 days, 3 hours, 18 minutes, 35 seconds Spacecraft properties Spacecraft Apollo CSM -107 Apollo LM -5 Manufacturer CSM: North American Rockwell [ 4 ] LM: Grumman [ 4 ] Launch mass 109,646 pounds (49,735 kg) [ 5 ] Landing mass 10,873 pounds (4,932 kg) Crew Crew size 3 Members Neil A. Armstrong Michael Collins Edwin E. Aldrin Jr.

Callsign CSM: Columbia LM: Eagle On surface: Tranquility Base Start of mission Launch date July 16, 1969, 13:32:00 ( 1969-07-16UTC13:32Z ) UTC (9:32 am EDT ) [ 6 ] Rocket Saturn V SA-506 Launch site Kennedy LC‑39A End of mission Recovered by USS Hornet Landing date July 24, 1969, 16:50:35 ( 1969-07-24UTC16:50:36Z ) UTC Landing site North Pacific Ocean 13°19′N 169°9′W ﻿ / ﻿ 13.317°N 169.150°W ﻿ / 13.317; -169.150 ﻿ ( Apollo 11 splashdown ) Orbital parameters Reference system Selenocentric Periselene altitude 100.9 kilometers (54.5 nmi) [ 7 ] Aposelene altitude 122.4 kilometers (66.1 nmi) [ 7 ] Inclination 1.25 degrees [ 7 ] Period 2 hours [ 7 ] Epoch July 19, 1969, 21:44 UTC [ 7 ] Lunar orbiter Spacecraft component Command and service module Orbital insertion July 19, 1969, 17:21:50 UTC [ 8 ] Orbital departure July 22, 1969, 04:55:42 UTC [ 9 ] Orbits 30 Lunar lander Spacecraft component Apollo Lunar Module Landing date July 20, 1969, 20:17:40 UTC [ 10 ] Return launch July 21, 1969, 17:54:00 UTC [ 11 ] Landing site Tranquility Base , Mare Tranquillitatis 0°40′27″N 23°28′23″E ﻿ / ﻿ 0.67416°N 23.47314°E ﻿ / 0.67416; 23.47314 [ 12 ] Sample mass 21.55 kilograms (47.51 lb) Surface EVAs 1 EVA duration 2 hours, 31 minutes, 40 seconds Docking with LM Docking date July 16, 1969, 16:56:03 UTC [ 8 ] Undocking date July 20, 1969, 17:44:00 UTC [ 13 ] Docking with LM ascent stage Docking date July 21, 1969, 21:35:00 UTC [ 9 ] Undocking date July 21, 1969, 23:41:31 UTC [ 9 ] Left to right: Neil Armstrong , Michael Collins , Buzz Aldrin Apollo program ← Apollo 10 Apollo 12 → Apollo 11 was a spaceflight conducted from July 16 to 24, 1969, by the United States and launched by NASA . It marked the first time that humans landed on the Moon . Commander Neil Armstrong and Lunar Module pilot Buzz Aldrin landed the Lunar Module Eagle on July 20, 1969, at 20:17 UTC , and Armstrong became the first person to step onto the Moon's surface six hours and 39 minutes later, on July 21 at 02:56:15 UTC. Aldrin joined him 19 minutes later, and they spent about two and a quarter hours together exploring the site they had named Tranquility Base upon landing. Armstrong and Aldrin collected 47.5 pounds (21.5 kg) of lunar material to bring back to Earth as pilot Michael Collins flew the Command Module Columbia in lunar orbit , and were on the Moon's surface for 21 hours, 36 minutes, before lifting off to rejoin Columbia .

Apollo 11 was launched by a Saturn V rocket from Kennedy Space Center on Merritt Island, Florida , on July 16 at 13:32 UTC. It was the fifth crewed mission of NASA's Apollo program . The Apollo spacecraft had three parts: a command module (CM) with a cabin for the three astronauts, the only part that returned to Earth; a service module (SM), which supported the command module with propulsion, electrical power, oxygen, and water; and a lunar module (LM) that had two stages—a descent stage for landing on the Moon and an ascent stage to place the astronauts back into lunar orbit.

After being sent to the Moon by the Saturn V's third stage, the astronauts separated the spacecraft from it and traveled for three days until they entered lunar orbit. Armstrong and Aldrin then moved into Eagle and landed in the Mare Tranquillitatis on July 20. The astronauts used Eagle ' s ascent stage to lift off from the lunar surface and rejoin Collins in the command module. They jettisoned Eagle before they performed the maneuvers that propelled Columbia out of the last of its 30 lunar orbits onto a trajectory back to Earth.

[ 9 ] They returned to Earth and splashed down in the Pacific Ocean on July 24 after more than eight days in space.

Armstrong's first step onto the lunar surface was broadcast on live TV to a worldwide audience. He described the event as "one small step for [a] man, one giant leap for mankind." [ a ] [ 15 ] Apollo 11 effectively proved U.S. victory in the Space Race to demonstrate spaceflight superiority, by fulfilling a national goal proposed in 1961 by President John F. Kennedy , "before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth." [ 16 ] Background In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the United States was engaged in the Cold War , a geopolitical rivalry with the Soviet Union .

[ 17 ] On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1 , the first artificial satellite . This surprise success stoked fears and imaginations around the world. It demonstrated that the Soviet Union had the capability to deliver nuclear weapons over intercontinental distances, and challenged American claims of military, economic, and technological superiority.

[ 18 ] This precipitated the Sputnik crisis , and triggered the Space Race to prove which superpower would achieve superior spaceflight capability.

[ 19 ] President Dwight D. Eisenhower responded to the Sputnik challenge by creating the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and initiating Project Mercury , [ 20 ] which aimed to launch a man into Earth orbit .

[ 21 ] But on April 12, 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person in space, and the first to orbit the Earth.

[ 22 ] Nearly a month later, on May 5, 1961, Alan Shepard became the first American in space, completing a 15-minute suborbital journey.

[ 23 ] Since the Soviet Union had higher lift capacity launch vehicles , Eisenhower's successor, John F. Kennedy chose, from among options presented by NASA, a challenge beyond the capacity of the existing generation of rocketry, so that the US and Soviet Union would be starting from a position of equality. A crewed mission to the Moon would serve this purpose.

[ 24 ] On May 25, 1961, Kennedy addressed the United States Congress on "Urgent National Needs" and declared: I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade [1960s] is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth. No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind, or more important for the long-range exploration of space; and none will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish. We propose to accelerate the development of the appropriate lunar space craft. We propose to develop alternate liquid and solid fuel boosters, much larger than any now being developed, until certain which is superior. We propose additional funds for other engine development and for unmanned explorations—explorations which are particularly important for one purpose which this nation will never overlook: the survival of the man who first makes this daring flight. But in a very real sense, it will not be one man going to the Moon—if we make this judgment affirmatively, it will be an entire nation. For all of us must work to put him there.

— Kennedy's speech to Congress [ 25 ] On September 12, 1962, Kennedy delivered another speech before a crowd of about 40,000 people in the Rice University football stadium in Houston , Texas.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] A widely quoted refrain from the middle portion of the speech reads as follows: There is no strife, no prejudice, no national conflict in outer space as yet. Its hazards are hostile to us all. Its conquest deserves the best of all mankind, and its opportunity for peaceful cooperation may never come again. But why, some say, the Moon? Why choose this as our goal? And they may well ask, why climb the highest mountain? Why, 35 years ago, fly the Atlantic ? Why does Rice play Texas ?
We choose to go to the Moon! We choose to go to the Moon ... We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard; because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills, because that challenge is one that we are willing to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone, and one we intend to win, and the others, too.

[ 28 ] President John F. Kennedy speaking at Rice University on September 12, 1962 In spite of that, the proposed program faced the opposition of many Americans and was dubbed a " moondoggle " by Norbert Wiener , a mathematician at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] The effort to land a man on the Moon already had a name: Project Apollo .

[ 31 ] When Kennedy met with Nikita Khrushchev , the Premier of the Soviet Union in June 1961, he proposed making the Moon landing a joint project, but Khrushchev did not take up the offer.

[ 32 ] Kennedy again proposed a joint expedition to the Moon in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly on September 20, 1963.

[ 33 ] The idea of a joint Moon mission was abandoned after Kennedy's death.

[ 34 ] An early and crucial decision was choosing lunar orbit rendezvous over both direct ascent and Earth orbit rendezvous . A space rendezvous is an orbital maneuver in which two spacecraft navigate through space and meet up. In July 1962 NASA head James Webb announced that lunar orbit rendezvous would be used [ 35 ] [ 36 ] and that the Apollo spacecraft would have three major parts: a command module (CM) with a cabin for the three astronauts, and the only part that returned to Earth; a service module (SM), which supported the command module with propulsion, electrical power, oxygen, and water; and a lunar module (LM) that had two stages—a descent stage for landing on the Moon, and an ascent stage to place the astronauts back into lunar orbit.

[ 37 ] This design meant the spacecraft could be launched by a single Saturn V rocket that was then under development.

[ 38 ] Technologies and techniques required for Apollo were developed by Project Gemini .

[ 39 ] The Apollo project was enabled by NASA's adoption of new advances in semiconductor device , including metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) in the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (IMP) [ 40 ] [ 41 ] and silicon integrated circuit (IC) chips in the Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC).

[ 42 ] Project Apollo was abruptly halted by the Apollo 1 fire on January 27, 1967, in which astronauts Gus Grissom , Ed White , and Roger B. Chaffee died, and the subsequent investigation.

[ 43 ] In October 1968, Apollo 7 evaluated the command module in Earth orbit, [ 44 ] and in December Apollo 8 tested it in lunar orbit.

[ 45 ] In March 1969, Apollo 9 put the lunar module through its paces in Earth orbit, [ 46 ] and in May Apollo 10 conducted a "dress rehearsal" in lunar orbit. By July 1969, all was in readiness for Apollo 11 to take the final step onto the Moon.

[ 47 ] The Soviet Union appeared  to be winning the Space Race by beating the US to firsts, but its early lead was overtaken by the US Gemini program and Soviet failure to develop the N1 launcher , which would have been comparable to the Saturn V.

[ 48 ] The Soviets tried to beat the US to return lunar material to the Earth by means of uncrewed probes . On July 13, three days before Apollo 11's launch, the Soviet Union launched Luna 15 , which reached lunar orbit before Apollo 11. During descent, a malfunction caused Luna 15 to crash in Mare Crisium about two hours before Armstrong and Aldrin took off from the Moon's surface to begin their voyage home. The Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories radio telescope in England recorded transmissions from Luna 15 during its descent, and these were released in July 2009 for the 40th anniversary of Apollo 11.

[ 49 ] Personnel Part of a series on Apollo 11 Crew Neil Armstrong · Buzz Aldrin · Michael Collins Spacecraft CM-107 Columbia · Lunar Module Eagle Landing site Tranquility Base Recovery vessels Helicopter 66 · USS Hornet Commemoration Anniversaries · 50th Anniversary commemorative coins · Eisenhower dollar · Anthony dollar Related British TV coverage · Goodwill messages · In popular culture · Lunar sample display · Missing tapes v t e Prime crew Position Astronaut Commander Neil A. Armstrong Second and last spaceflight Command Module Pilot Michael Collins Second and last spaceflight Lunar Module Pilot Edwin "Buzz" E. Aldrin Jr.

Second and last spaceflight The initial crew assignment of Commander Neil Armstrong , Command Module Pilot (CMP) Jim Lovell , and Lunar Module Pilot (LMP) Buzz Aldrin on the backup crew for Apollo 9 was officially announced on November 20, 1967.

[ 50 ] Lovell and Aldrin had previously flown together as the crew of Gemini 12 . Due to design and manufacturing delays in the LM, Apollo 8 and Apollo 9 swapped prime and backup crews, and Armstrong's crew became the backup for Apollo 8. Based on the normal crew rotation scheme, Armstrong was then expected to command Apollo 11.

[ 51 ] There would be one change.

Michael Collins , the CMP on the Apollo 8 crew, began experiencing trouble with his legs. Doctors diagnosed a bony growth between his fifth and sixth vertebrae, requiring surgery.

[ 52 ] Lovell took his place on the Apollo 8 crew, and when Collins recovered he joined Armstrong's crew as CMP. In the meantime, Fred Haise filled in as backup LMP, and Aldrin as backup CMP for Apollo 8.

[ 53 ] Apollo 11 was the second American mission where all the crew members had prior spaceflight experience, [ 54 ] the first being Apollo 10.

[ 55 ] The next was STS-26 in 1988.

[ 54 ] Deke Slayton gave Armstrong the option to replace Aldrin with Lovell, since some thought Aldrin was difficult to work with. Armstrong had no issues working with Aldrin but thought it over for a day before declining. He thought Lovell deserved to command his own mission (eventually Apollo 13 ).

[ 56 ] The Apollo 11 prime crew had none of the close cheerful camaraderie characterized by that of Apollo 12 . Instead, they forged an amiable working relationship. Armstrong in particular was notoriously aloof, but Collins, who considered himself a loner, confessed to rebuffing Aldrin's attempts to create a more personal relationship.

[ 57 ] Aldrin and Collins described the crew as "amiable strangers".

[ 58 ] Armstrong did not agree with the assessment, and said "all the crews I was on worked very well together." [ 58 ] Backup crew Position Astronaut Commander James A. Lovell Jr.

Command Module Pilot William A. Anders Lunar Module Pilot Fred W. Haise Jr.

The backup crew consisted of Lovell as Commander, William Anders as CMP, and Haise as LMP. Anders had flown with Lovell on Apollo 8.

[ 54 ] In early 1969, Anders accepted a job with the National Aeronautics and Space Council effective August 1969, and announced he would retire as an astronaut at that time.

Ken Mattingly was moved from the support crew into parallel training with Anders as backup CMP in case Apollo 11 was delayed past its intended July launch date, at which point Anders would be unavailable.

[ 59 ] By the normal crew rotation in place during Apollo, Lovell, Mattingly, and Haise were scheduled to fly on Apollo 14 , but the three of them were bumped to Apollo 13 : there was a crew issue for Apollo 13 as none of them except Edgar Mitchell flew in space again.

George Mueller rejected the crew and this was the first time an Apollo crew was rejected. To give Alan Shepard more training time, Lovell's crew were bumped to Apollo 13. Mattingly would later be replaced by Jack Swigert as CMP on Apollo 13.

[ 59 ] Support crew During Projects Mercury and Gemini, each mission had a prime and a backup crew. For Apollo, a third crew of astronauts was added, known as the support crew. The support crew maintained the flight plan, checklists and mission ground rules, and ensured the prime and backup crews were apprised of changes. They developed procedures, especially those for emergency situations, so these were ready for when the prime and backup crews came to train in the simulators, allowing them to concentrate on practicing and mastering them.

[ 60 ] For Apollo 11, the support crew consisted of Ken Mattingly, Ronald Evans and Bill Pogue .

[ 61 ] Capsule communicators CAPCOM Charles Duke (left), with backup crewmen Jim Lovell and Fred Haise listening in during Apollo 11's descent The capsule communicator (CAPCOM) was an astronaut at the Mission Control Center in Houston , Texas, who was the only person who communicated directly with the flight crew.

[ 62 ] For Apollo 11, the CAPCOMs were: Charles Duke , Ronald Evans, Bruce McCandless II , James Lovell, William Anders, Ken Mattingly, Fred Haise, Don L. Lind , Owen K. Garriott and Harrison Schmitt .

[ 61 ] Flight directors The flight directors for this mission were: [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] Apollo 11 flight directors Name Shift Team Activities Clifford E. Charlesworth 1 Green Launch and extravehicular activity (EVA) Gerald D. Griffin 1 Gold Backup for shift 1 Gene Kranz 2 White Lunar landing Glynn Lunney 3 Black Lunar ascent Milton Windler 4 Maroon Planning Other key personnel Other key personnel who played important roles in the Apollo 11 mission include the following.

[ 69 ] Other personnel Name Activities Farouk El-Baz Geologist, studied geology of the Moon , identified landing locations, trained pilots Kurt Debus Rocket scientist , supervised construction of launch pads and infrastructure Jamye Flowers Secretary for astronauts Eleanor Foraker Tailor who designed space suits Jack Garman Computer engineer and technician Millicent Goldschmidt Microbiologist who designed aseptic lunar material collection techniques and trained astronauts Eldon C. Hall Apollo Guidance Computer hardware designer Margaret Hamilton Onboard flight computer software engineer John Houbolt Route planner Gene Shoemaker Geologist who trained astronauts in field geology Bill Tindall Coordinated mission techniques Preparations Insignia Apollo 11 insignia The Apollo 11 mission emblem was designed by Collins, who wanted a symbol for "peaceful lunar landing by the United States". At Lovell's suggestion, he chose the bald eagle , the national bird of the United States, as the symbol. Tom Wilson, a simulator instructor, suggested an olive branch in its beak to represent their peaceful mission. Collins added a lunar background with the Earth in the distance. The sunlight in the image was coming from the wrong direction; the shadow should have been in the lower part of the Earth instead of the left. Aldrin, Armstrong and Collins decided the Eagle and the Moon would be in their natural colors, and decided on a blue and gold border. Armstrong was concerned that "eleven" would not be understood by non-English speakers, so they went with "Apollo 11", [ 70 ] and they decided not to put their names on the patch, so it would "be representative of everyone who had worked toward a lunar landing".

[ 71 ] An illustrator at the Manned Spacecraft Center (MSC) did the artwork, which was then sent off to NASA officials for approval.

[ 70 ] The design was rejected.

Bob Gilruth , the director of the MSC felt the talons of the eagle looked "too warlike".

[ 72 ] After some discussion, the olive branch was moved to the talons.

[ 72 ] When the Eisenhower dollar coin was released in 1971, the patch design provided the eagle for its reverse side.

[ 73 ] The design was also used for the smaller Susan B. Anthony dollar unveiled in 1979.

[ 74 ] Call signs Original cockpit of the command module (CM) with three seats, photographed from above. It is located in the National Air and Space Museum , the very high resolution image was produced in 2007 by the Smithsonian Institution .

After the crew of Apollo 10 named their spacecraft Charlie Brown and Snoopy , assistant manager for public affairs Julian Scheer wrote to George Low , the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at the MSC, to suggest the Apollo 11 crew be less flippant in naming their craft. The name Snowcone was used for the CM and Haystack was used for the LM in both internal and external communications during early mission planning.

[ 75 ] The LM was named Eagle after the motif which was featured prominently on the mission insignia. At Scheer's suggestion, the CM was named Columbia after Columbiad , the giant cannon that launched a spacecraft (also from Florida) in Jules Verne 's 1865 novel From the Earth to the Moon . It also referred to Columbia , a historical name of the United States.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] In Collins' 1976 book, he said Columbia was in reference to Christopher Columbus .

[ 78 ] Mementos Apollo 11 space-flown silver Robbins medallion The astronauts had personal preference kits (PPKs), small bags containing personal items of significance they wanted to take with them on the mission.

[ 79 ] Five 0.5-pound (0.23 kg) PPKs were carried on Apollo 11: three (one for each astronaut) were stowed on Columbia before launch, and two on Eagle .

[ 80 ] Neil Armstrong's LM PPK contained a piece of wood from the Wright brothers ' 1903 Wright Flyer ' s left propeller and a piece of fabric from its wing, [ 81 ] along with a diamond-studded astronaut pin originally given to Slayton by the widows of the Apollo 1 crew. This pin had been intended to be flown on that mission and given to Slayton afterwards, but following the disastrous launch pad fire and subsequent funerals, the widows gave the pin to Slayton. Armstrong took it with him on Apollo 11.

[ 82 ] Site selection Map of Moon showing prospective sites for Apollo 11. Site 2 was chosen.

NASA's Apollo Site Selection Board announced five potential landing sites on February 8, 1968. These were the result of two years' worth of studies based on high-resolution photography of the lunar surface by the five uncrewed probes of the Lunar Orbiter program and information about surface conditions provided by the Surveyor program .

[ 83 ] The best Earth-bound telescopes could not resolve features with the resolution Project Apollo required.

[ 84 ] The landing site had to be close to the lunar equator to minimize the amount of propellant required, clear of obstacles to minimize maneuvering, and flat to simplify the task of the landing radar. Scientific value was not a consideration.

[ 85 ] Areas that appeared promising on photographs taken on Earth were often found to be totally unacceptable. The original requirement that the site be free of craters had to be relaxed, as no such site was found.

[ 86 ] Five sites were considered: Sites 1 and 2 were in the Sea of Tranquility ( Mare Tranquillitatis ); Site 3 was in the Central Bay ( Sinus Medii ); and Sites 4 and 5 were in the Ocean of Storms ( Oceanus Procellarum ).

[ 83 ] The final site selection was based on seven criteria: The site needed to be smooth, with relatively few craters; with approach paths free of large hills, tall cliffs or deep craters that might confuse the landing radar and cause it to issue incorrect readings; reachable with a minimum amount of propellant; allowing for delays in the launch countdown; providing the Apollo spacecraft with a free-return trajectory, one that would allow it to coast around the Moon and safely return to Earth without requiring any engine firings should a problem arise on the way to the Moon; with good visibility during the landing approach, meaning the Sun would be between 7 and 20 degrees behind the LM; and a general slope of less than two degrees in the landing area.

[ 83 ] The requirement for the Sun angle was particularly restrictive, limiting the launch date to one day per month.

[ 83 ] A landing just after dawn was chosen to limit the temperature extremes the astronauts would experience.

[ 87 ] The Apollo Site Selection Board selected Site 2, with Sites 3 and 5 as backups in the event of the launch being delayed. In May 1969, Apollo 10's lunar module flew to within 15 kilometers (9.3 mi) of Site 2, and reported it was acceptable.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] First-step decision During the first press conference after the Apollo 11 crew was announced, the first question was, "Which one of you gentlemen will be the first man to step onto the lunar surface?" [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Slayton told the reporter it had not been decided, and Armstrong added that it was "not based on individual desire".

[ 90 ] One of the first versions of the egress checklist had the lunar module pilot exit the spacecraft before the commander, which matched what had been done on Gemini missions, [ 92 ] where the commander had never performed the spacewalk.

[ 93 ] Reporters wrote in early 1969 that Aldrin would be the first man to walk on the Moon, and Associate Administrator George Mueller told reporters he would be first as well. Aldrin heard that Armstrong would be the first because Armstrong was a civilian, which made Aldrin livid. Aldrin attempted to persuade other Lunar Module pilots he should be first, but they responded cynically about what they perceived as a lobbying campaign. Attempting to stem interdepartmental conflict, Slayton told Aldrin that Armstrong would be first since he was the commander. The decision was announced in a press conference on April 14, 1969.

[ 94 ] For decades, Aldrin believed the final decision was largely driven by the Lunar Module's hatch location. Because the astronauts had their spacesuits on and the spacecraft was so small, maneuvering to exit the spacecraft was difficult. The crew tried a simulation in which Aldrin left the spacecraft first, but he damaged the simulator while attempting to egress. While this was enough for mission planners to make their decision, Aldrin and Armstrong were left in the dark on the decision until late spring.

[ 95 ] Slayton told Armstrong the plan was to have him leave the spacecraft first, if he agreed. Armstrong said, "Yes, that's the way to do it." [ 96 ] The media accused Armstrong of exercising his commander's prerogative to exit the spacecraft first.

[ 97 ] Chris Kraft revealed in his 2001 autobiography that a meeting occurred between Gilruth, Slayton, Low, and himself to make sure Aldrin would not be the first to walk on the Moon. They argued that the first person to walk on the Moon should be like Charles Lindbergh , a calm and quiet person. They made the decision to change the flight plan so the commander was the first to egress from the spacecraft.

[ 98 ] Pre-launch Saturn V SA-506, the rocket carrying the Apollo 11 spacecraft, moves out of the Vehicle Assembly Building towards Launch Complex 39 .

The ascent stage of LM-5 Eagle arrived at the Kennedy Space Center on January 8, 1969, followed by the descent stage four days later, and CSM-107 Columbia on January 23.

[ 6 ] There were several differences between Eagle and Apollo 10's LM-4 Snoopy ; Eagle had a VHF radio antenna to facilitate communication with the astronauts during their EVA on the lunar surface; a lighter ascent engine; more thermal protection on the landing gear; and a package of scientific experiments known as the Early Apollo Scientific Experiments Package (EASEP). The only change in the configuration of the command module was the removal of some insulation from the forward hatch.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] The CSM was mated on January 29, and moved from the Operations and Checkout Building to the Vehicle Assembly Building on April 14.

[ 6 ] The S-IVB third stage of Saturn V AS-506 had arrived on January 18, followed by the S-II second stage on February 6, S-IC first stage on February 20, and the Saturn V Instrument Unit on February 27. At 12:30 on May 20, the 5,443-tonne (5,357-long-ton; 6,000-short-ton) assembly departed the Vehicle Assembly Building atop the crawler-transporter , bound for Launch Pad 39A, part of Launch Complex 39 , while Apollo 10 was still on its way to the Moon. A countdown test commenced on June 26, and concluded on July 2. The launch complex was floodlit on the night of July 15, when the crawler-transporter carried the mobile service structure back to its parking area.

[ 6 ] In the early hours of the morning, the fuel tanks of the S-II and S-IVB stages were filled with liquid hydrogen .

[ 101 ] Fueling was completed by three hours before launch.

[ 102 ] Launch operations were partly automated, with 43 programs written in the ATOLL programming language .

[ 103 ] Slayton roused the crew shortly after 04:00, and they showered, shaved, and had the traditional pre-flight breakfast of steak and eggs with Slayton and the backup crew. They then donned their space suits and began breathing pure oxygen. At 06:30, they headed out to Launch Complex 39.

[ 104 ] Haise entered Columbia about three hours and ten minutes before launch time. Along with a technician, he helped Armstrong into the left-hand couch at 06:54. Five minutes later, Collins joined him, taking up his position on the right-hand couch. Finally, Aldrin entered, taking the center couch.

[ 102 ] Haise left around two hours and ten minutes before launch.

[ 105 ] The closeout crew sealed the hatch, and the cabin was purged and pressurized. The closeout crew then left the launch complex about an hour before launch time. The countdown became automated at three minutes and twenty seconds before launch time.

[ 102 ] Over 450 personnel were at the consoles in the firing room .

[ 101 ] Mission Launch and flight to lunar orbit The Apollo 11 Saturn V space vehicle lifts off with astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins and Edwin E. Aldrin Jr. at 9:32 am. EDT July 16, 1969, from Kennedy Space Center's Launch Complex 39A.

An estimated one million spectators watched the launch of Apollo 11 from the highways and beaches in the vicinity of the launch site. Dignitaries included the Chief of Staff of the United States Army , General William Westmoreland , four cabinet members , 19 state governors , 40 mayors , 60 ambassadors and 200 congressmen . Vice President Spiro Agnew viewed the launch with former president Lyndon B. Johnson and his wife Lady Bird Johnson .

[ 101 ] [ 106 ] Around 3,500 media representatives were present.

[ 107 ] About two-thirds were from the United States; the rest came from 55 other countries. The launch was televised live in 33 countries, with an estimated 25 million viewers in the United States alone. Millions more around the world listened to radio broadcasts.

[ 106 ] [ 101 ] President Richard Nixon viewed the launch from his office in the White House with his NASA liaison officer, Apollo astronaut Frank Borman .

[ 108 ] Lodging near Cape Canaveral was reported as being booked months ahead in advance for the launch by a Florida newspaper.

[ 109 ] Saturn V AS-506 launched Apollo 11 on July 16, 1969, at 13:32:00 UTC (9:32:00 EDT ).

[ 6 ] At 13.2 seconds into the flight, the launch vehicle began to roll into its flight azimuth of 72.058°. Full shutdown of the first-stage engines occurred about 2 minutes and 42 seconds into the mission, followed by separation of the S-IC and ignition of the S-II engines. The second stage engines then cut off and separated at about 9 minutes and 8 seconds, allowing the first ignition of the S-IVB engine a few seconds later.

[ 8 ] Apollo 11 entered a near-circular Earth orbit at an altitude of 100.4 nautical miles (185.9 km) by 98.9 nautical miles (183.2 km), twelve minutes into its flight. After one and a half orbits, a second ignition of the S-IVB engine pushed the spacecraft onto its trajectory toward the Moon with the trans-lunar injection (TLI) burn at 16:22:13 UTC. About 30 minutes later, with Collins in the left seat and at the controls, the transposition, docking, and extraction maneuver was performed. This involved separating Columbia from the spent S-IVB stage, turning around, and docking with Eagle still attached to the stage. After the LM was extracted, the combined spacecraft headed for the Moon, while the rocket stage flew on a trajectory past the Moon.

[ 110 ] [ 8 ] This was done to avoid the third stage colliding with the spacecraft, the Earth, or the Moon. A slingshot effect from passing around the Moon threw it into an orbit around the Sun .

[ 111 ] On July 19 at 17:21:50 UTC, Apollo 11 passed behind the Moon and fired its service propulsion engine to enter lunar orbit .

[ 8 ] [ 112 ] In the thirty orbits that followed, the crew saw passing views of their landing site in the southern Sea of Tranquility about 12 miles (19 km) southwest of the crater Sabine D . The site was selected in part because it had been characterized as relatively flat and smooth by the automated Ranger 8 and Surveyor 5 landers and the Lunar Orbiter mapping spacecraft, and because it was unlikely to present major landing or EVA challenges.

[ 113 ] It lay about 25 kilometers (16 mi) southeast of the Surveyor 5 landing site, and 68 kilometers (42 mi) southwest of Ranger 8's crash site.

[ 114 ] Lunar descent Columbia in lunar orbit, photographed from Eagle At 12:52:00 UTC on July 20, Aldrin and Armstrong entered Eagle , and began the final preparations for lunar descent.

[ 8 ] At 17:44:00 Eagle separated from Columbia .

[ 13 ] Collins, alone aboard Columbia , inspected Eagle as it pirouetted before him to ensure the craft was not damaged, and that the landing gear was correctly deployed.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] Armstrong exclaimed: "The Eagle has wings!" [ 116 ] As the descent began, Armstrong and Aldrin found themselves passing landmarks on the surface two or three seconds early, and reported that they were "long"; they would land miles west of their target point.

Eagle was traveling too fast. The problem could have been mascons —concen­tra­tions of high mass in a region or regions of the Moon's crust that contains a gravitational anomaly , potentially altering Eagle 's trajectory. Flight Director Gene Kranz speculated that it could have resulted from extra air pressure in the docking tunnel, or a result of Eagle ' s pirouette maneuver.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] Five minutes into the descent burn, and 6,000 feet (1,800 m) above the surface of the Moon, the LM guidance computer (LGC) distracted the crew with the first of several unexpected 1201 and 1202 program alarms. Inside Mission Control Center, computer engineer Jack Garman told Guidance Officer Steve Bales it was safe to continue the descent, and this was relayed to the crew. The program alarms indicated "executive overflows", meaning the guidance computer could not complete all its tasks in real-time and had to postpone some of them.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] Margaret Hamilton , the Director of Apollo Flight Computer Programming at the MIT Charles Stark Draper Laboratory later recalled: Eagle in lunar orbit photographed from Columbia To blame the computer for the Apollo 11 problems is like blaming the person who spots a fire and calls the fire department. Actually, the computer was programmed to do more than recognize error conditions. A complete set of recovery programs was incorporated into the software. The software's action, in this case, was to eliminate lower priority tasks and re-establish the more important ones. The computer, rather than almost forcing an abort, prevented an abort. If the computer hadn't recognized this problem and taken recovery action, I doubt if Apollo 11 would have been the successful Moon landing it was.

[ 121 ] During the mission, the cause was diagnosed as the rendezvous radar switch being in the wrong position, causing the computer to process data from both the rendezvous and landing radars at the same time.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] Software engineer Don Eyles concluded in a 2005 Guidance and Control Conference paper that the problem was due to a hardware design bug previously seen during testing of the first uncrewed LM in Apollo 5 . Having the rendezvous radar on (so it was warmed up in case of an emergency landing abort) should have been irrelevant to the computer, but an electrical phasing mismatch between two parts of the rendezvous radar system could cause the stationary antenna to appear to the computer as dithering back and forth between two positions, depending upon how the hardware randomly powered up. The extra spurious cycle stealing , as the rendezvous radar updated an involuntary counter, caused the computer alarms.

[ 124 ] Landing Armstrong pilots Eagle to its landing on the Moon, July 20, 1969.

When Armstrong again looked outside, he saw that the computer's landing target was in a boulder-strewn area just north and east of a 300-foot-diameter (91 m) crater (later determined to be West crater ), so he took semi-automatic control.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] Armstrong considered landing short of the boulder field so they could collect geological samples from it, but could not since their horizontal velocity was too high. Throughout the descent, Aldrin called out navigation data to Armstrong, who was busy piloting Eagle . Now 107 feet (33 m) above the surface, Armstrong knew their propellant supply was dwindling and was determined to land at the first possible landing site.

[ 127 ] Armstrong found a clear patch of ground and maneuvered the spacecraft towards it. As he got closer, now 250 feet (76 m) above the surface, he discovered his new landing site had a crater in it. He cleared the crater and found another patch of level ground. They were now 100 feet (30 m) from the surface, with only 90 seconds of propellant remaining. Lunar dust kicked up by the LM's engine began to impair his ability to determine the spacecraft's motion. Some large rocks jutted out of the dust cloud, and Armstrong focused on them during his descent so he could determine the spacecraft's speed.

[ 128 ] A light informed Aldrin that at least one of the 67-inch (170 cm) probes hanging from Eagle 's footpads had touched the surface a few moments before the landing and he said: "Contact light!" Armstrong was supposed to immediately shut the engine down, as the engineers suspected the pressure caused by the engine's own exhaust reflecting off the lunar surface could make it explode, but he forgot. Three seconds later, Eagle landed and Armstrong shut the engine down.

[ 129 ] Aldrin immediately said "Okay, engine stop. ACA—out of detent ." Armstrong acknowledged: "Out of detent. Auto." Aldrin continued: "Mode control—both auto. Descent engine command override off. Engine arm—off. 413 is in." [ 130 ] Landing site relative to West crater ACA was the Attitude Control Assembly —the LM's control stick. Output went to the LGC to command the reaction control system (RCS) jets to fire. "Out of Detent" meant the stick had moved away from its centered position; it was spring-centered like the turn indicator in a car. Address 413 of the Abort Guidance System (AGS) contained the variable that indicated the LM had landed.

[ 10 ] Eagle landed at 20:17:40 UTC on Sunday July 20 with 216 pounds (98 kg) of usable fuel remaining. Information available to the crew and mission controllers during the landing showed the LM had enough fuel for another 25 seconds of powered flight before an abort without touchdown would have become unsafe, [ 10 ] [ 131 ] but post-mission analysis showed that the real figure was probably closer to 50 seconds.

[ 132 ] Apollo 11 landed with less fuel than most subsequent missions, and the astronauts encountered a premature low fuel warning. This was later found to be the result of the propellant sloshing more than expected, uncovering a fuel sensor. On subsequent missions, extra anti-slosh baffles were added to the tanks to prevent this.

[ 10 ] Armstrong acknowledged Aldrin's completion of the post-landing checklist with "Engine arm is off", before responding to the CAPCOM, Charles Duke, with the words, "Houston, Tranquility Base here. The Eagle has landed." Armstrong's unrehearsed change of call sign from "Eagle" to "Tranquility Base" emphasized to listeners that landing was complete and successful.

[ 133 ] Duke expressed the relief at Mission Control: "Roger, Twan—Tranquility, we copy you on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We're breathing again. Thanks a lot." [ 10 ] [ 134 ] 3-D view from the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) of Apollo 11 landing site Two and a half hours after landing, before preparations began for the EVA, Aldrin radioed to Earth: This is the LM pilot. I'd like to take this opportunity to ask every person listening in, whoever and wherever they may be, to pause for a moment and contemplate the events of the past few hours and to give thanks in his or her own way.

[ 135 ] He then took communion privately. At this time NASA was still fighting a lawsuit brought by atheist Madalyn Murray O'Hair (who had objected to the Apollo 8 crew reading from the Book of Genesis ) demanding that their astronauts refrain from broadcasting religious activities while in space. For this reason, Aldrin chose to refrain from directly mentioning taking communion on the Moon. Aldrin was an elder at the Webster Presbyterian Church , and his communion kit was prepared by the pastor of the church, Dean Woodruff. Webster Presbyterian possesses the chalice used on the Moon and commemorates the event each year on the Sunday closest to July 20.

[ 136 ] The schedule for the mission called for the astronauts to follow the landing with a five-hour sleep period, but they chose to begin preparations for the EVA early, thinking they would be unable to sleep.

[ 137 ] Lunar surface operations Preparations for Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin to walk on the Moon began at 23:43 UTC.

[ 13 ] These took longer than expected; three and a half hours instead of two.

[ 138 ] During training on Earth, everything required had been neatly laid out in advance, but on the Moon the cabin contained a large number of other items as well, such as checklists, food packets, and tools.

[ 139 ] Six hours and thirty-nine minutes after landing, Armstrong and Aldrin were ready to go outside, and Eagle was depressurized.

[ 140 ] Eagle ' s hatch was opened at 02:39:33.

[ 13 ] Armstrong initially had some difficulties squeezing through the hatch with his portable life support system (PLSS).

[ 138 ] Some of the highest heart rates recorded from Apollo astronauts occurred during LM egress and ingress.

[ 141 ] At 02:51 Armstrong began his descent to the lunar surface. The remote-control unit on his chest kept him from seeing his feet. Climbing down the nine-rung ladder, Armstrong pulled a D-ring to deploy the modular equipment stowage assembly (MESA) folded against Eagle 's side and activate the TV camera.

[ 142 ] [ 15 ] Apollo 11 used slow-scan television (TV) incompatible with broadcast TV, so it was displayed on a special monitor and a conventional TV camera viewed this monitor (thus, a broadcast of a broadcast), significantly reducing the quality of the picture.

[ 143 ] The signal was received at Goldstone in the United States, but with better fidelity by Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station near Canberra in Australia. Minutes later the feed was switched to the more sensitive Parkes radio telescope in Australia.

[ 144 ] Despite some technical and weather difficulties, black and white images of the first lunar EVA were received and broadcast to at least 600 million people on Earth.

[ 144 ] Copies of this video in broadcast format were saved and are widely available, but recordings of the original slow scan source transmission from the lunar surface were likely destroyed during routine magnetic tape re-use at NASA.

[ 143 ] Video of Neil Armstrong and the first step on the Moon That's one small step ...

Problems playing this file? See media help .

After describing the surface dust as "very fine-grained" and "almost like a powder", [ 15 ] at 02:56:15, [ 145 ] six and a half hours after landing, Armstrong stepped off Eagle 's landing pad and declared: "That's one small step for [a] man, one giant leap for mankind." [ a ] [ 146 ] [ 147 ] Armstrong intended to say "That's one small step for a man", but the word "a" is not audible in the transmission, and thus was not initially reported by most observers of the live broadcast. When later asked about his quote, Armstrong said he believed he said "for a man", and subsequent printed versions of the quote included the "a" in square brackets. One explanation for the absence may be that his accent caused him to slur the words "for a" together; another is the intermittent nature of the audio and video links to Earth, partly because of storms near Parkes Observatory. A more recent digital analysis of the tape claims to reveal the "a" may have been spoken but obscured by static. Other analysis points to the claims of static and slurring as "face-saving fabrication", and that Armstrong himself later admitted to misspeaking the line.

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] About seven minutes after stepping onto the Moon's surface, Armstrong collected a contingency soil sample using a sample bag on a stick. He then folded the bag and tucked it into a pocket on his right thigh. This was to guarantee there would be some lunar soil brought back in case an emergency required the astronauts to abandon the EVA and return to the LM.

[ 151 ] Twelve minutes after the sample was collected, [ 146 ] he removed the TV camera from the MESA and made a panoramic sweep, then mounted it on a tripod.

[ 138 ] The TV camera cable remained partly coiled and presented a tripping hazard throughout the EVA. Still photography was accomplished with a Hasselblad camera that could be operated hand-held or mounted on Armstrong's Apollo space suit .

[ 152 ] Aldrin joined Armstrong on the surface. He described the view with the simple phrase: "Magnificent desolation." [ 15 ] Armstrong said moving in the lunar gravity , one-sixth of Earth's, was "even perhaps easier than the simulations ... It's absolutely no trouble to walk around." [ 15 ] Aldrin joined him on the surface and tested methods for moving around, including two-footed kangaroo hops. The PLSS backpack created a tendency to tip backward, but neither astronaut had serious problems maintaining balance. Loping became the preferred method of movement. The astronauts reported that they needed to plan their movements six or seven steps ahead. The fine soil was quite slippery. Aldrin remarked that moving from sunlight into Eagle 's shadow produced no temperature change inside the suit, but the helmet was warmer in sunlight, so he felt cooler in shadow.

[ 15 ] The MESA failed to provide a stable work platform and was in shadow, slowing work somewhat. As they worked, the moonwalkers kicked up gray dust, which soiled the outer part of their suits.

[ 152 ] Aldrin salutes the deployed United States flag on the lunar surface .

The astronauts planted the Lunar Flag Assembly containing a flag of the United States on the lunar surface, in clear view of the TV camera. Aldrin remembered, "Of all the jobs I had to do on the Moon the one I wanted to go the smoothest was the flag raising." [ 153 ] But the astronauts struggled with the telescoping rod and could only insert the pole about 2 inches (5 cm) into the hard lunar surface. Aldrin was afraid it might topple in front of TV viewers, but gave "a crisp West Point salute".

[ 153 ] Before Aldrin could take a photo of Armstrong with the flag, President Richard Nixon spoke to them through a telephone-radio transmission, which Nixon called "the most historic phone call ever made from the White House." [ 154 ] Nixon originally had a long speech prepared to read during the phone call, but Frank Borman, who was at the White House as a NASA liaison during Apollo 11, convinced Nixon to keep his words brief.

[ 155 ] Nixon: Hello, Neil and Buzz. I'm talking to you by telephone from the Oval Room at the White House. And this certainly has to be the most historic telephone call ever made from the White House. I just can't tell you how proud we all are of what you have done. For every American, this has to be the proudest day of our lives. And for people all over the world, I am sure that they too join with Americans in recognizing what an immense feat this is. Because of what you have done, the heavens have become a part of man's world. And as you talk to us from the Sea of Tranquility, it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to Earth. For one priceless moment in the whole history of man, all the people on this Earth are truly one: one in their pride in what you have done, and one in our prayers that you will return safely to Earth.

Armstrong: Thank you, Mr. President. It's a great honor and privilege for us to be here, representing not only the United States, but men of peace of all nations, and with interest and a curiosity, and men with a vision for the future. It's an honor for us to be able to participate here today.

Nixon: Thank you very much, and I look forward, all of us look forward, to seeing you on the Hornet on Thursday.

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] Aldrin's bootprint; part of an experiment to test the properties of the lunar regolith They deployed the EASEP , which included a Passive Seismic Experiment Package used to measure moonquakes and a retroreflector array used for the lunar laser ranging experiment .

[ 158 ] Then Armstrong walked 196 feet (60 m) from the LM to take photographs at the rim of Little West Crater while Aldrin collected two core samples . He used the geologist's hammer to pound in the tubes—the only time the hammer was used on Apollo 11—but was unable to penetrate more than 6 inches (15 cm) deep. The astronauts then collected rock samples using scoops and tongs on extension handles. Many of the surface activities took longer than expected, so they had to stop documenting sample collection halfway through the allotted 34 minutes. Aldrin shoveled 6 kilograms (13 lb) of soil into the box of rocks to pack them in tightly.

[ 159 ] Two types of rocks were found in the geological samples: basalt and breccia .

[ 160 ] Three new minerals were discovered in the rock samples collected by the astronauts: armalcolite , tranquillityite , and pyroxferroite . Armalcolite was named after Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins. All have subsequently been found on Earth.

[ 161 ] The plaque left on the ladder of Eagle While on the surface, Armstrong uncovered a plaque mounted on the LM ladder, bearing two drawings of Earth (of the Western and Eastern Hemispheres), an inscription, and signatures of the astronauts and President Nixon. The inscription read: Here men from the planet Earth first set foot upon the Moon July 1969, A. D. We came in peace for all mankind.

[ 15 ] At the behest of the Nixon administration to add a reference to God, NASA included the vague date as a reason to include A.D., which stands for Anno Domini ("in the year of our Lord").

[ 162 ] Mission Control used a coded phrase to warn Armstrong his metabolic rates were high, and that he should slow down. He was moving rapidly from task to task as time ran out. As metabolic rates remained generally lower than expected for both astronauts throughout the walk, Mission Control granted the astronauts a 15-minute extension.

[ 158 ] In a 2010 interview, Armstrong explained that NASA limited the first moonwalk's time and distance because there was no empirical proof of how much cooling water the astronauts' PLSS backpacks would consume to handle their body heat generation while working on the Moon.

[ 163 ] Lunar ascent Aldrin entered Eagle first. With some difficulty the astronauts lifted film and two sample boxes containing 21.55 kilograms (47.5 lb) of lunar surface material to the LM hatch using a flat cable pulley device called the Lunar Equipment Conveyor (LEC). This proved to be an inefficient tool, and later missions preferred to carry equipment and samples up to the LM by hand.

[ 138 ] Armstrong reminded Aldrin of a bag of memorial items in his sleeve pocket, and Aldrin tossed the bag down. Armstrong then jumped onto the ladder's third rung, and climbed into the LM. After transferring to LM life support , the explorers lightened the ascent stage for the return to lunar orbit by tossing out their PLSS backpacks, lunar overshoes, an empty Hasselblad camera, and other equipment. The hatch was closed again at 05:11:13. They then pressurized the LM and settled down to sleep.

[ 164 ] Aldrin next to the Passive Seismic Experiment Package with the Lunar Module Eagle in the background Presidential speech writer William Safire had prepared an In Event of Moon Disaster announcement for Nixon to read in the event the Apollo 11 astronauts were stranded on the Moon.

[ 165 ] The remarks were in a memo from Safire to Nixon's White House Chief of Staff H. R. Haldeman , in which Safire suggested a protocol the administration might follow in reaction to such a disaster.

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] According to the plan, Mission Control would "close down communications" with the LM, and a clergyman would "commend their souls to the deepest of the deep" in a public ritual likened to burial at sea . The last line of the prepared text contained an allusion to Rupert Brooke 's World War I poem " The Soldier ".

[ 167 ] The script for the speech does not make reference to Collins; as he remained onboard Columbia in orbit around the Moon, it was expected that he would be able to return the module to Earth in the event of a mission failure.

[ 168 ] While moving inside the cabin, Aldrin accidentally damaged the circuit breaker that would arm the main engine for liftoff from the Moon. There was a concern this would prevent firing the engine, stranding them on the Moon. The nonconductive tip of a Duro felt-tip pen [ 169 ] was sufficient to activate the switch.

[ 164 ] After more than 21 + 1 ⁄ 2 hours on the lunar surface, in addition to the scientific instruments, the astronauts left behind: an Apollo 1 mission patch in memory of astronauts Roger Chaffee , Gus Grissom , and Edward White , who died when their command module caught fire during a test in January 1967; two memorial medals of Soviet cosmonauts Vladimir Komarov and Yuri Gagarin , who died in 1967 and 1968 respectively; a memorial bag containing a gold replica of an olive branch as a traditional symbol of peace; and a silicon message disk carrying the goodwill statements by presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon along with messages from leaders of 73 countries around the world.

[ 170 ] The disk also carries a listing of the leadership of the US Congress, a listing of members of the four committees of the House and Senate responsible for the NASA legislation, and the names of NASA's past and then-current top management.

[ 171 ] Map showing landing site and photos taken After about seven hours of rest, the crew was awakened by Houston to prepare for the return flight. 
At that time, unknown to them, some hundred kilometers away from them the Soviet probe Luna 15 was about to descend and impact. Despite having been known to be orbiting the Moon at the same time, through a ground-breaking precautious goodwill exchange of data, the mission control of Luna 15 unexpectedly hastened its robotic sample-return mission , initiating descent, in an attempt to return before Apollo 11.

[ 172 ] Just two hours before Apollo 11's launch Luna 15 crashed at 15:50 UTC, with British astronomers monitoring Luna 15 and recording the situation one commented: "I say, this has really been drama of the highest order", [ 173 ] bringing the Space Race to a culmination.

[ 174 ] Roughly two hours later, at 17:54:00 UTC, the Apollo 11 crew on the surface safely lifted off in Eagle 's ascent stage to rejoin Collins aboard Columbia in lunar orbit.

[ 146 ] Film taken from the LM ascent stage upon liftoff from the Moon reveals the American flag, planted some 25 feet (8 m) from the descent stage, whipping violently in the exhaust of the ascent stage engine. Aldrin looked up in time to witness the flag topple: "The ascent stage of the LM separated ... I was concentrating on the computers, and Neil was studying the attitude indicator , but I looked up long enough to see the flag fall over." [ 175 ] Subsequent Apollo missions planted their flags farther from the LM.

[ 176 ] Columbia in lunar orbit During his day flying solo around the Moon, Collins never felt lonely. Although it has been said "not since Adam has any human known such solitude", [ 177 ] Collins felt very much a part of the mission. In his autobiography he wrote: "this venture has been structured for three men, and I consider my third to be as necessary as either of the other two".

[ 177 ] In the 48 minutes of each orbit when he was out of radio contact with the Earth while Columbia passed round the far side of the Moon, the feeling he reported was not fear or loneliness, but rather "awareness, anticipation, satisfaction, confidence, almost exultation".

[ 177 ] One of Collins' first tasks was to identify the Lunar Module on the ground. To give Collins an idea where to look, Mission Control radioed that they believed the Lunar Module landed about 4 miles (6.4 km) off target. Each time he passed over the suspected lunar landing site, he tried in vain to find the module. On his first orbits on the back side of the Moon, Collins performed maintenance activities such as dumping excess water produced by the fuel cells and preparing the cabin for Armstrong and Aldrin to return.

[ 178 ] Just before he reached the dark side on the third orbit, Mission Control informed Collins there was a problem with the temperature of the coolant. If it became too cold, parts of Columbia might freeze. Mission Control advised him to assume manual control and implement Environmental Control System Malfunction Procedure 17. Instead, Collins flicked the switch on the system from automatic to manual and back to automatic again, and carried on with normal housekeeping chores, while keeping an eye on the temperature. When Columbia came back around to the near side of the Moon again, he was able to report that the problem had been resolved. For the next couple of orbits, he described his time on the back side of the Moon as "relaxing". After Aldrin and Armstrong completed their EVA, Collins slept so he could be rested for the rendezvous. While the flight plan called for Eagle to meet up with Columbia , Collins was prepared for a contingency in which he would fly Columbia down to meet Eagle .

[ 179 ] Return Eagle 's ascent stage approaching Columbia Eagle rendezvoused with Columbia at 21:24 UTC on July 21, and the two docked at 21:35.

Eagle ' s ascent stage was jettisoned into lunar orbit at 23:41.

[ 9 ] Just before the Apollo 12 flight, it was noted that Eagle was still likely to be orbiting the Moon. Later NASA reports mentioned that Eagle 's orbit had decayed, resulting in it impacting in an "uncertain location" on the lunar surface.

[ 180 ] In 2021, however, some calculations show that the lander may still be in orbit.

[ 181 ] On July 23, the last night before splashdown, the three astronauts made a television broadcast in which Collins commented: "All this is possible only through the blood, sweat, and tears of a number of people ... All you see is the three of us, but beneath the surface are thousands and thousands of others, and to all of those, I would like to say, 'Thank you very much'." [ 182 ] Aldrin added: "This has been far more than three men on a mission to the Moon; more, still, than the efforts of a government and industry team; more, even, than the efforts of one nation. We feel that this stands as a symbol of the insatiable curiosity of all mankind to explore the unknown ..." [ 182 ] Armstrong concluded: The responsibility for this flight lies first with history and with the giants of science who have preceded this effort; next with the American people, who have, through their will, indicated their desire; next with four administrations and their Congresses, for implementing that will; and then, with the agency and industry teams that built our spacecraft, the Saturn, the Columbia, the Eagle, and the little EMU , the spacesuit and backpack that was our small spacecraft out on the lunar surface. We would like to give special thanks to all those Americans who built the spacecraft; who did the construction, design, the tests, and put their hearts and all their abilities into those craft. To those people tonight, we give a special thank you, and to all the other people that are listening and watching tonight, God bless you. Good night from Apollo 11.

[ 182 ] On the return to Earth, a bearing at the Guam tracking station failed, potentially preventing communication on the last segment of the Earth return. A regular repair was not possible in the available time but the station director, Charles Force, had his ten-year-old son Greg use his small hands to reach into the housing and pack it with grease. Greg was later thanked by Armstrong.

[ 183 ] Splashdown and quarantine Columbia floats on the ocean as Navy divers assist in retrieving the astronauts.

The aircraft carrier USS Hornet , under the command of Captain Carl J. Seiberlich , [ 184 ] was selected as the primary recovery ship (PRS) for Apollo 11 on June 5, replacing her sister ship, the LPH USS Princeton , which had recovered Apollo 10 on May 26.

Hornet was then at her home port of Long Beach, California .

[ 185 ] On reaching Pearl Harbor on July 5, Hornet embarked the Sikorsky SH-3 Sea King helicopters of HS-4 , a unit which specialized in recovery of Apollo spacecraft, specialized divers of UDT Detachment Apollo, a 35-man NASA recovery team, and about 120 media representatives. To make room, most of Hornet ' s air wing was left behind in Long Beach. Special recovery equipment was also loaded, including a boilerplate command module used for training.

[ 186 ] On July 12, with Apollo 11 still on the launch pad, Hornet departed Pearl Harbor for the recovery area in the central Pacific, [ 187 ] in the vicinity of 10°36′N 172°24′E ﻿ / ﻿ 10.600°N 172.400°E ﻿ / 10.600; 172.400 .

[ 188 ] A presidential party consisting of Nixon, Borman, Secretary of State William P. Rogers and National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger flew to Johnston Atoll on Air Force One , then to the command ship USS Arlington in Marine One . After a night on board, they would fly to Hornet in Marine One for a few hours of ceremonies. On arrival aboard Hornet , the party was greeted by the Commander-in-Chief, Pacific Command (CINCPAC) , Admiral John S. McCain Jr.

, and NASA Administrator Thomas O. Paine , who flew to Hornet from Pago Pago in one of Hornet ' s carrier onboard delivery aircraft.

[ 189 ] Weather satellites were not yet common, but US Air Force Captain Hank Brandli had access to top-secret spy satellite images. He realized that a storm front was headed for the Apollo recovery area. Poor visibility which could make locating the capsule difficult, and strong upper-level winds which "would have ripped their parachutes to shreds" according to Brandli, posed a serious threat to the safety of the mission.

[ 190 ] Brandli alerted Navy Captain Willard S. Houston Jr., the commander of the Fleet Weather Center at Pearl Harbor, who had the required security clearance. On their recommendation, Rear Admiral Donald C. Davis , commander of Manned Spaceflight Recovery Forces, Pacific, advised NASA to change the recovery area, each man risking his career. A new location was selected 215 nautical miles (398 km) northeast.

[ 191 ] [ 192 ] This altered the flight plan. A different sequence of computer programs was used, one never before attempted. In a conventional entry, trajectory event P64 was followed by P67. For a skip-out re-entry, P65 and P66 were employed to handle the exit and entry parts of the skip. In this case, because they were extending the re-entry but not actually skipping out, P66 was not invoked and instead, P65 led directly to P67. The crew were also warned they would not be in a full-lift (heads-down) attitude when they entered P67.

[ 191 ] The first program's acceleration subjected the astronauts to 6.5 standard gravities (64 m/s 2 ); the second, to 6.0 standard gravities (59 m/s 2 ).

[ 193 ] Before dawn on July 24, Hornet launched four Sea King helicopters and three Grumman E-1 Tracers . Two of the E-1s were designated as "air boss" while the third acted as a communications relay aircraft. Two of the Sea Kings carried divers and recovery equipment. The third carried photographic equipment, and the fourth carried the decontamination swimmer and the flight surgeon.

[ 194 ] At 16:44 UTC (05:44 local time) Columbia ' s drogue parachutes were deployed. This was observed by the helicopters. Seven minutes later Columbia struck the water forcefully 2,660 km (1,440 nmi) east of Wake Island , 380 km (210 nmi) south of Johnston Atoll, and 24 km (13 nmi) from Hornet , [ 9 ] [ 191 ] at 13°19′N 169°9′W ﻿ / ﻿ 13.317°N 169.150°W ﻿ / 13.317; -169.150 .

[ 195 ] 82 °F (28 °C) with 6 feet (1.8 m) seas and winds at 17 knots (31 km/h; 20 mph) from the east were reported under broken clouds at 1,500 feet (460 m) with visibility of 10 nautical miles (19 km; 12 mi) at the recovery site.

[ 196 ] Reconnaissance aircraft flying to the original splashdown location reported the conditions Brandli and Houston had predicted.

[ 197 ] During splashdown , Columbia landed upside down but was righted within ten minutes by flotation bags activated by the astronauts.

[ 198 ] A diver from the Navy helicopter hovering above attached a sea anchor to prevent it from drifting.

[ 199 ] More divers attached flotation collars to stabilize the module and positioned rafts for astronaut extraction.

[ 200 ] Crew of Apollo 11 in quarantine after returning to Earth, visited by Richard Nixon Apollo 11 Mobile Quarantine Facility on display at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center in Virginia in 2009 The divers then passed biological isolation garments (BIGs) to the astronauts, and assisted them into the life raft. The possibility of bringing back pathogens from the lunar surface was considered remote, but NASA took precautions at the recovery site. The astronauts were rubbed down with a sodium hypochlorite solution and Columbia wiped with Povidone-iodine to remove any lunar dust that might be present. The astronauts were winched on board the recovery helicopter. BIGs were worn until they reached isolation facilities on board Hornet . The raft containing decontamination materials was intentionally sunk.

[ 198 ] After touchdown on Hornet at 17:53 UTC, the helicopter was lowered by the elevator into the hangar bay, where the astronauts walked the 30 feet (9.1 m) to the mobile quarantine facility (MQF), where they would begin the Earth-based portion of their 21 days of quarantine.

[ 201 ] This practice would continue for two more Apollo missions, Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 , before the Moon was proven to be barren of life, and the quarantine process dropped.

[ 202 ] [ 203 ] Nixon welcomed the astronauts back to Earth. He told them: "[A]s a result of what you've done, the world has never been closer together before." [ 204 ] After Nixon departed, Hornet was brought alongside the 5-short-ton (4.5 t) Columbia , which was lifted aboard by the ship's crane, placed on a dolly and moved next to the MQF. It was then attached to the MQF with a flexible tunnel, allowing the lunar samples, film, data tapes and other items to be removed.

Hornet returned to Pearl Harbor, where the MQF was loaded onto a Lockheed C-141 Starlifter and airlifted to the Manned Spacecraft Center. The astronauts arrived at the Lunar Receiving Laboratory at 10:00 UTC on July 28.

Columbia was taken to Ford Island for deactivation, and its pyrotechnics made safe. It was then taken to Hickham Air Force Base , from whence it was flown to Houston in a Douglas C-133 Cargomaster , reaching the Lunar Receiving Laboratory on July 30.

[ 205 ] In accordance with the Extra-Terrestrial Exposure Law , a set of regulations promulgated by NASA on July 16 to codify its quarantine protocol, [ 206 ] the astronauts continued in quarantine. After three weeks in confinement (first in the Apollo spacecraft, then in their trailer on Hornet , and finally in the Lunar Receiving Laboratory), the astronauts were given a clean bill of health.

[ 207 ] On August 10, 1969, the Interagency Committee on Back Contamination met in Atlanta and lifted the quarantine on the astronauts, on those who had joined them in quarantine (NASA physician William Carpentier and MQF project engineer John Hirasaki ), [ 208 ] and on Columbia itself. Loose equipment from the spacecraft remained in isolation until the lunar samples were released for study.

[ 209 ] August 13, 1969 - New York City Celebrations Following their return to Earth, the Apollo 11 crew received widespread international acclaim. On August 13 , 1969 , astronauts Neil Armstrong , Buzz Aldrin , and Michael Collins were honored with ticker-tape parades in New York City and Chicago , with an estimated six million people lining the streets.

[ 210 ] That evening, a state dinner was held in Los Angeles at the Century Plaza Hotel to commemorate the historic achievement. The event was attended by members of Congress , 44 state governors , Chief Justice of the United States Warren E. Burger and his predecessor Earl Warren , as well as ambassadors from 83 nations.

President Richard Nixon and Vice President Spiro Agnew awarded each astronaut the Presidential Medal of Freedom , the highest civilian honor in the United States.

[ 211 ] Apollo 11 Astronauts - New York City - August 13, 1969 On September 16 , the astronauts addressed a joint session of Congress , where they presented two American flags —one to the House of Representatives and one to the Senate —that had traveled to the lunar surface aboard Eagle .

[ 212 ] One of the mission flags carried aboard the flight—the Flag of American Samoa —was later displayed at the Jean P. Haydon Museum in Pago Pago , the capital of American Samoa , recognizing the territory’s support role as a recovery staging area.

[ 213 ] Terrazzo tribute to Apollo 11 astronauts on the Hollywood Walk of Fame .

The celebrations continued with a 38-day world goodwill tour titled “Giant Leap”, which began on September 29 and concluded on November 5 , 1969. The astronauts visited 22 countries and met with numerous heads of state, prime ministers, royalty, and civic leaders.

[ 214 ] The tour, intended to thank the international community for their support of the space program, began in Mexico City and ended in Tokyo .

[ 215 ] Notable stops included Bogotá , Buenos Aires , Rio de Janeiro , Madrid , Paris , Amsterdam , Brussels , London , Rome , Belgrade , Tehran , Mumbai , Bangkok , Sydney , Guam , and Honolulu .

[ 216 ] Crowds in the tens or hundreds of thousands gathered to greet the astronauts in each city.

Numerous countries and organizations honored the Moon landing by issuing special commemorative items. These included postage stamps, coins, medals, plaques, and magazine features.

TIME , National Geographic , LIFE , and dozens of international publications featured the astronauts on their covers. Many of these commemoratives are now held in public and private collections, and some were placed aboard later Apollo missions in symbolic tribute.

[ 217 ] Additionally, the success of Apollo 11 contributed to a brief spike in interest in science and technology education, often referred to as the “Apollo effect,” influencing a generation of engineers and scientists.

[ 218 ] 8-Day NASA Mission timeline [9-Days] Date & Mission Day Summary & Milestones Launch and Translunar Flight July 16, 1969 (Day 1) Mission Day 1 (Launch from Earth) Summary (All times are in Earth-based Eastern Standard Time (EST) Liftoff at 09:32 EST (13:32 UTC) from Kennedy Space Center LC-39A Passed through Earth's atmosphere ~09:36 EST Reached Earth orbit at ~09:44 EST (~12 minutes after launch) Trans-lunar injection burn began at ~12:22 EST Escaped Earth's gravitational influence at ~16:16 EST Carried goodwill disc from 73 nations and Apollo 1 tribute Backup crew: Lovell , Haise , Anders Significant radio and television communications relayed to NASA's Manned Spacecraft Center July 17, 1969 (Day 2) Mission Day 2 (En Route to the Moon) Summary First live television broadcast from space at 03:58 EST Mid-course correction maneuver completed Crew ate first hot meals in space Collins noted a minor booster vibration Continued communication via Deep Space Network July 18, 1969 (Day 3) Mission Day 3 (Final System Checks) Summary Lunar Module Eagle inspected through tunnel Second television broadcast Armstrong : Earth is a “beautiful oasis in space” Command Module (CM) humorously renamed "the spacecraft formerly known as Columbia" Lunar Orbit and Surface Operations July 19, 1969 (Day 4) Mission Day 4 (Enter Lunar Orbit) Summary Entered Moon's gravitational sphere ~13:22 EST Lunar orbit insertion (LOI) burn executed behind the Moon lunar orbits completed Sea of Tranquility confirmed as landing site Photographic reconnaissance by Collins JULY 20, 1969 (DAY 5) Mission Day 5 (Moon Landing and First Moonwalk) Summary Lunar Module (LM) Eagle undocked; descent initiated; 1202 program alarm resolved LANDED AT 16:17 EST – “THE EAGLE HAS LANDED” First extravehicular activity (EVA): Armstrong and Aldrin began moonwalk at 22:56 EST "That's one small step..." / "Magnificent desolation" U.S. flag planted, experiments deployed 21.5 kg of lunar material collected Broadcast watched live by an estimated 600 million people worldwide, one of the most significant television events of the 20th century July 21, 1969 (Day 6) Mission Day 6 (Lunar Liftoff and Docking) Summary Lunar module (LM) ascent from Moon at 13:54 EST Docking with Command Module successful LM jettisoned into lunar orbit (final crash site unknown) Return to Earth July 22, 1969 (Day 7) Mission Day 7 (Begin Return to Earth) Summary Trans-Earth injection burn initiated Routine television and radio updates continued Crew demonstrated weightlessness Lunar dust noted to smell like “wet ashes” July 23, 1969 (Day 8) Mission Day 8 (Final Space Day) Summary Final television broadcast: reflections and gratitude shared at 21:17 EST Crew donned biological isolation garments Final reentry checks and orientation July 24, 1969 (Day 9) Mission Day 9 (Splashdown and Recovery) Summary Reentry began ~12:35 EST Splashdown at 12:50 EST in the Pacific Ocean Recovery by USS Hornet Crew entered Mobile Quarantine Facility (MQF); greeted by President Nixon Total mission duration: 8 days, 3 hours, 18 minutes Legacy Cultural significance Main article: Apollo 11 in popular culture A girl holding The Washington Post newspaper stating "'The Eagle Has Landed' – Two Men Walk on the Moon" Humans walking on the Moon and returning safely to Earth accomplished Kennedy's goal set eight years earlier. In Mission Control during the Apollo 11 landing, Kennedy's speech flashed on the screen, followed by the words "TASK ACCOMPLISHED, July 1969".

[ 219 ] The success of Apollo 11 demonstrated the United States' technological superiority; [ 219 ] and with the success of Apollo 11, America had won the Space Race .

[ 220 ] [ 221 ] New phrases permeated into the English language. "If they can send a man to the Moon, why can't they ...?" became a common saying following Apollo 11.

[ 222 ] Armstrong's words on the lunar surface also spun off various parodies.

[ 220 ] While most people celebrated the accomplishment, disenfranchised Americans saw it as a symbol of the divide in America, evidenced by protesters led by Ralph Abernathy outside of Kennedy Space Center the day before Apollo 11 launched.

[ 223 ] NASA Administrator Thomas Paine met with Abernathy at the occasion, both hoping that the space program can spur progress also in other regards, such as poverty in the US.

[ 224 ] Paine was then asked, and agreed, to host protesters as spectators at the launch, [ 224 ] and Abernathy, awestruck by the spectacle, [ 107 ] prayed for the astronauts.

[ 224 ] Racial and financial inequalities frustrated citizens who wondered why money spent on the Apollo program was not spent taking care of humans on Earth. A poem by Gil Scott-Heron called " Whitey on the Moon " (1970) illustrated the racial inequality in the United States that was highlighted by the Space Race.

[ 220 ] [ 225 ] [ 226 ] The poem starts with: A rat done bit my sister Nell.

(with Whitey on the moon) Her face and arms began to swell.

(and Whitey's on the moon) I can't pay no doctor bill.

(but Whitey's on the moon) Ten years from now I'll be paying still.

(while Whitey's on the moon) [...] [ 226 ] Twenty percent of the world's population watched humans walk on the Moon for the first time.

[ 227 ] While Apollo 11 sparked the interest of the world, the follow-on Apollo missions did not hold the interest of the nation.

[ 219 ] One possible explanation was the shift in complexity. Landing someone on the Moon was an easy goal to understand; lunar geology was too abstract for the average person. Another is that Kennedy's goal of landing humans on the Moon had already been accomplished.

[ 228 ] A well-defined objective helped Project Apollo accomplish its goal, but after it was completed it was hard to justify continuing the lunar missions.

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] While most Americans were proud of their nation's achievements in space exploration, only once during the late 1960s did the Gallup Poll indicate that a majority of Americans favored "doing more" in space as opposed to "doing less". By 1973, 59 percent of those polled favored cutting spending on space exploration. The Space Race had been won, and Cold War tensions were easing as the US and Soviet Union entered the era of détente . This was also a time when inflation was rising, which put pressure on the government to reduce spending. The space program was saved due to the perception that it was one of the few government programs that had achieved something great. Drastic cuts, warned Caspar Weinberger , the deputy director of the Office of Management and Budget , might send a signal that "our best years are behind us".

[ 231 ] After the Apollo 11 mission, officials from the Soviet Union said landing humans on the Moon was dangerous and unnecessary. At the time the Soviet Union was attempting to retrieve lunar samples robotically. The Soviets publicly denied there was a race to the Moon, and indicated they were not making an attempt.

[ 232 ] Mstislav Keldysh said in July 1969, "We are concentrating wholly on the creation of large satellite systems." It was revealed in 1989 that the Soviets had tried to send people to the Moon, but were unable due to technological difficulties.

[ 233 ] The public's reaction in the Soviet Union was mixed. The Soviet government limited the release of information about the lunar landing, which affected the reaction. A portion of the populace did not give it any attention, and another portion was angered by it.

[ 234 ] The Apollo 11 landing is referenced in the songs "Armstrong, Aldrin and Collins" by the Byrds on the 1969 album Ballad of Easy Rider , "Coon on the Moon" by Howlin' Wolf on the 1973 album The Back Door Wolf , and " One Small Step " by Ayreon on the 2000 album Universal Migrator Part 1: The Dream Sequencer .

Spacecraft Columbia on display in the Milestones of Flight exhibition hall at the National Air and Space Museum The command module Columbia went on a tour of the United States, visiting 49 state capitals, the District of Columbia , and Anchorage, Alaska .

[ 235 ] In 1971, it was transferred to the Smithsonian Institution , and was displayed at the National Air and Space Museum (NASM) in Washington, DC.

[ 236 ] It was in the central Milestones of Flight exhibition hall in front of the Jefferson Drive entrance, sharing the main hall with other pioneering flight vehicles such as the Wright Flyer , Spirit of St. Louis , Bell X-1 , North American X-15 and Friendship 7 .

[ 237 ] Columbia was moved in 2017 to the NASM Mary Baker Engen Restoration Hangar at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center in Chantilly, Virginia, to be readied for a four-city tour titled Destination Moon: The Apollo 11 Mission . This included Space Center Houston from October 14, 2017, to March 18, 2018, the Saint Louis Science Center from April 14 to September 3, 2018, the Senator John Heinz History Center in Pittsburgh from September 29, 2018, to February 18, 2019, and its last location at Museum of Flight in Seattle from March 16 to September 2, 2019.

[ 236 ] [ 238 ] Continued renovations at the Smithsonian allowed time for an additional stop for the capsule, and it was moved to the Cincinnati Museum Center . The ribbon cutting ceremony was on September 29, 2019.

[ 239 ] For 40 years Armstrong's and Aldrin's space suits were displayed in the museum's Apollo to the Moon exhibit, [ 240 ] until it permanently closed on December 3, 2018, to be replaced by a new gallery which was scheduled to open in 2022. A special display of Armstrong's suit was unveiled for the 50th anniversary of Apollo 11 in July 2019.

[ 241 ] [ 242 ] The quarantine trailer, the flotation collar and the flotation bags are in the Smithsonian's Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center annex near Washington Dulles International Airport in Chantilly, Virginia, where they are on display along with a test lunar module.

[ 243 ] [ 244 ] [ 245 ] Armstrong's space suit on display at the National Air and Space Museum in its new exhibit The descent stage of the LM Eagle remains on the Moon. In 2009, the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) imaged the various Apollo landing sites on the surface of the Moon, for the first time with sufficient resolution to see the descent stages of the lunar modules, scientific instruments, and foot trails made by the astronauts.

[ 246 ] The remains of the ascent stage are assumed to lie at an unknown location on the lunar surface. The ascent stage, Eagle , was not tracked after it was jettisoned.  The lunar gravity field is sufficiently non-uniform to make low Moon orbits unstable after a short time, leading the orbiting object to impact the surface.

[ 247 ] However, using a program developed by NASA, and high-resolution lunar gravity data, a paper was published, in 2021, indicating that Eagle might still be in orbit as late as 2020. Using the orbital elements published by NASA, a Monte Carlo method was used to generate parameter sets that bracket the uncertainties in these elements. All simulations, of the orbit, predicted that Eagle would never impact the lunar surface.

[ 248 ] F-1 Engine Injector Plate on temporary display at the Cincinnati Museum Center in 2019 In March 2012 a team of specialists financed by Amazon founder Jeff Bezos located the F-1 engines from the S-IC stage that launched Apollo 11 into space. They were found on the Atlantic seabed using advanced sonar scanning.

[ 249 ] His team brought parts of two of the five engines to the surface. In July 2013, a conservator discovered a serial number under the rust on one of the engines raised from the Atlantic, which NASA confirmed was from Apollo 11.

[ 250 ] [ 251 ] The S-IVB third stage which performed Apollo 11's trans-lunar injection remains in a solar orbit near to that of Earth.

[ 252 ] Pieces of fabric and wood from the first airplane, the 1903 Wright Flyer , traveled to the Moon in Apollo 11's Lunar Module Eagle and are displayed at the Wright Brothers National Memorial .

Moon rocks The main repository for the Apollo Moon rocks is the Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston , Texas. For safekeeping, there is also a smaller collection stored at White Sands Test Facility near Las Cruces, New Mexico . Most of the rocks are stored in nitrogen to keep them free of moisture. They are handled only indirectly, using special tools. Over 100 research laboratories worldwide conduct studies of the samples; approximately 500 samples are prepared and sent to investigators every year.

[ 253 ] [ 254 ] In November 1969, Nixon asked NASA to make up about 250 presentation Apollo 11 lunar sample displays for 135 nations, the fifty states of the United States and its possessions, and the United Nations. Each display included Moon dust from Apollo 11 and flags, including one of the Soviet Union, taken along by Apollo 11. The rice-sized particles were four small pieces of Moon soil weighing about 50 mg and were enveloped in a clear acrylic button about as big as a United States half-dollar coin . This acrylic button magnified the grains of lunar dust. Nixon gave the Apollo 11 lunar sample displays as goodwill gifts in 1970.

[ 255 ] [ 256 ] Experiment results The Passive Seismic Experiment ran until the command uplink failed on August 25, 1969. The downlink failed on December 14, 1969.

[ 257 ] As of 2018 [update] , the Lunar Laser Ranging experiment remains operational.

[ 258 ] Moonwalk camera The Hasselblad camera used during the moonwalk was thought to be lost or left on the Moon surface.

[ 259 ] Lunar Module Eagle memorabilia In 2015, after Armstrong died in 2012, his widow contacted the National Air and Space Museum to inform them she had found a white cloth bag in one of Armstrong's closets. The bag contained various items, which should have been left behind in the Lunar Module Eagle , including the 16mm Data Acquisition Camera that had been used to capture images of the first Moon landing.

[ 260 ] [ 261 ] The camera is currently on display at the National Air and Space Museum.

[ 262 ] Anniversary events Further information: Apollo 11 anniversaries 40th anniversary Columbia at the Mary Baker Engen Restoration Hangar On July 15, 2009, Life.com released a photo gallery of previously unpublished photos of the astronauts taken by Life photographer Ralph Morse prior to the Apollo 11 launch.

[ 263 ] From July 16 to 24, 2009, NASA streamed the original mission audio on its website in real time 40 years to the minute after the events occurred.

[ 264 ] It is in the process of restoring the video footage and has released a preview of key moments.

[ 265 ] In July 2010, air-to-ground voice recordings and film footage shot in Mission Control during the Apollo 11 powered descent and landing was re-synchronized and released for the first time.

[ 266 ] The John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum set up an Adobe Flash website that rebroadcasts the transmissions of Apollo 11 from launch to landing on the Moon.

[ 267 ] On July 20, 2009, Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins met with President Barack Obama at the White House.

[ 268 ] "We expect that there is, as we speak, another generation of kids out there who are looking up at the sky and are going to be the next Armstrong, Collins, and Aldrin", Obama said. "We want to make sure that NASA is going to be there for them when they want to take their journey." [ 269 ] On August 7, 2009, an act of Congress awarded the three astronauts a Congressional Gold Medal , the highest civilian award in the United States. The bill was sponsored by Florida Senator Bill Nelson and Florida Representative Alan Grayson .

[ 270 ] [ 271 ] A group of British scientists interviewed as part of the anniversary events reflected on the significance of the Moon landing: It was carried out in a technically brilliant way with risks taken ... that would be inconceivable in the risk-averse world of today ... The Apollo programme is arguably the greatest technical achievement of mankind to date ... nothing since Apollo has come close [to] the excitement that was generated by those astronauts—Armstrong, Aldrin and the 10 others who followed them.

[ 272 ] 50th anniversary Further information: Apollo 11 50th Anniversary commemorative coins On June 10, 2015, Congressman Bill Posey introduced resolution H.R. 2726 to the 114th session of the United States House of Representatives directing the United States Mint to design and sell commemorative coins in gold, silver and clad for the 50th anniversary of the Apollo 11 mission. On January 24, 2019, the Mint released the Apollo 11 Fiftieth Anniversary commemorative coins to the public on its website.

[ 273 ] [ 274 ] A documentary film, Apollo 11 , with restored footage of the 1969 event, premiered in IMAX on March 1, 2019, and broadly in theaters on March 8.

[ 275 ] [ 276 ] The Smithsonian Institute's National Air and Space Museum and NASA sponsored the "Apollo 50 Festival" on the National Mall in Washington DC. The three-day (July 18 to 20, 2019) outdoor festival featured hands-on exhibits and activities, live performances, and speakers such as Adam Savage and NASA scientists.

[ 277 ] Saturn V rocket projected onto the Washington Monument during the Apollo 11 50th anniversary show As part of the festival, a projection of the 363-foot (111 m) tall Saturn V rocket was displayed on the east face of the 555-foot (169 m) tall Washington Monument from July 16 through the 20th from 9:30 pm until 11:30 pm (EDT). The program also included a 17-minute show that combined full-motion video projected on the Washington Monument to recreate the assembly and launch of the Saturn V rocket. The projection was joined by a 40-foot (12 m) wide recreation of the Kennedy Space Center countdown clock and two large video screens showing archival footage to recreate the time leading up to the moon landing. There were three shows per night on July 19–20, with the last show on Saturday, delayed slightly so the portion where Armstrong first set foot on the Moon would happen exactly 50 years to the second after the actual event.

[ 278 ] On July 19, 2019, the Google Doodle paid tribute to the Apollo 11 Moon landing, complete with a link to an animated YouTube video with voiceover by astronaut Michael Collins .

[ 279 ] [ 280 ] Aldrin, Collins, and Armstrong's sons were hosted by President Donald Trump in the Oval Office.

[ 281 ] [ 282 ] Films and documentaries Footprints on the Moon , a 1969 documentary film by Bill Gibson and Barry Coe [ 283 ] Moonwalk One , a 1971 documentary film by Theo Kamecke [ 284 ] Apollo 11: As It Happened , a 1994 six-hour documentary on ABC News' coverage of the event [ 285 ] First Man , 2018 film by Damien Chazelle based on the 2005 James R. Hansen book First Man: The Life of Neil A. Armstrong .

Apollo 11 , a 2019 documentary film by Todd Douglas Miller with restored footage of the 1969 event [ 286 ] [ 287 ] Chasing the Moon , a July 2019 PBS three-night six-hour documentary, directed by Robert Stone , examined the events leading up to the mission. An accompanying book of the same name was also released.

[ 288 ] 8 Days: To the Moon and Back , a PBS and BBC Studios 2019 documentary film by Anthony Philipson re-enacting major portions of the mission using mission audio recordings, new studio footage, NASA and news archives, and computer-generated imagery.

[ 289 ] See also Apollo in Real Time – Interactive website of Apollo 11, 13, and 17 Exploration of the Moon – Missions to the Moon List of missions to the Moon List of species that have landed on the Moon List of photographs considered the most important References Notes ^ a b Eric Jones of the Apollo Lunar Surface Journal explains that the indefinite article "a" was intended, whether or not it was said; the intention was to contrast a man (an individual's action) and mankind (as a species).

[ 14 ] Citations In some of the following sources, times are shown in the format hours:minutes:seconds (e.g. 109:24:15), referring to the mission's Ground Elapsed Time (GET), [ 290 ] based on the official launch time of July 16, 1969, 13:32:00 UTC (000:00:00 GET).

[ 105 ] [ 6 ] ^ Byrne., Dave (July 8, 2019).

"Apollo 11 Image Library" .

hq.nasa.gov .

Archived from the original on February 24, 2020 . Retrieved June 10, 2021 .

^ "Apollo 11 Command and Service Module (CSM)" .

NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive .

Archived from the original on February 10, 2021 . Retrieved November 20, 2019 .

^ "Apollo 11 Lunar Module / EASEP" .

NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2019 . Retrieved November 20, 2019 .

^ a b "Apollo 11 Press Kit" (PDF) . history.nasa.gov. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 6, 2023 . Retrieved December 16, 2022 .

^ "Ground Ignition Weights" . history.nasa.gov . Retrieved May 31, 2022 .

^ a b c d e f Loff, Sarah (April 17, 2015).

"Apollo 11 Mission Overview" . NASA.

Archived from the original on February 9, 2018 . Retrieved September 22, 2018 .

^ a b c d e "Apollo 11 Mission Summary" .

Smithsonian Air and Space Museum .

Archived from the original on February 9, 2021 . Retrieved September 6, 2019 .

^ a b c d e f Orloff 2000 , p. 106.

^ a b c d e f Orloff 2000 , p. 109.

^ a b c d e Jones, Eric M., ed. (1995).

"The First Lunar Landing" .

Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal . NASA.

Archived from the original on December 27, 2016 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ Orloff 2000 , p. 97.

^ Williams, David R. (December 11, 2003).

"Apollo Landing Site Coordinates" .

NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive . NASA.

Archived from the original on December 25, 2018 . Retrieved October 18, 2021 .

^ a b c d Orloff 2000 , p. 107.

^ Jones, Eric (April 8, 2018).

"One Small Step" .

Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal .

Archived from the original on September 3, 2019 . Retrieved September 6, 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g Jones, Eric M., ed. (1995).

"One Small Step" .

Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal . NASA.

Archived from the original on August 8, 2019 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ Stenger, Richard (May 25, 2001).

"Man on the Moon: Kennedy speech ignited the dream" .

CNN . Archived from the original on June 6, 2010 . Retrieved December 30, 2018 .

^ Logsdon 1976 , p. 134.

^ Logsdon 1976 , pp. 13–15.

^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , p. 1.

^ Swenson, Grimwood & Alexander 1966 , pp. 101–106.

^ Swenson, Grimwood & Alexander 1966 , p. 134.

^ Swenson, Grimwood & Alexander 1966 , pp. 332–333.

^ Logsdon 1976 , p. 121.

^ Logsdon 1976 , pp. 112–117.

^ "Excerpt: 'Special Message to the Congress on Urgent National Needs' " . NASA. May 25, 1961.

Archived from the original on March 1, 2021 . Retrieved September 16, 2018 .

^ Keilen, Eugene (September 19, 1962).

" 'Visiting Professor' Kennedy Pushes Space Age Spending" (PDF) .

The Rice Thresher . p. 1.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 22, 2021 . Retrieved March 11, 2018 .

^ Boyd, Jade (August 30, 2012).

"JFK's 1962 Moon Speech Still Appeals 50 Years Later" . Rice University.

Archived from the original on February 2, 2018 . Retrieved March 20, 2018 .

^ "John F. Kennedy Moon Speech—Rice Stadium" . NASA.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2015 . Retrieved March 19, 2018 .

^ Fishman, Charles.

"What You Didn't Know About the Apollo 11 Mission" .

Smithsonian .

Archived from the original on February 9, 2021 . Retrieved June 17, 2019 .

^ Madrigal, Alexis C. (September 12, 2012).

"Moondoggle: The Forgotten Opposition to the Apollo Program" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on February 27, 2021 . Retrieved June 17, 2019 .

^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , p. 15.

^ Logsdon 2011 , p. 32.

^ "Address at 18th U.N. General Assembly" . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum. September 20, 1963.

Archived from the original on March 11, 2018 . Retrieved March 11, 2018 .

^ Glass, Andrew (September 20, 2017).

"JFK Proposes Joint Lunar Expedition with Soviets, September 20, 1963" . Politico.

Archived from the original on September 23, 2020 . Retrieved March 19, 2018 .

^ "The Rendezvous That Was Almost Missed: Lunar Orbit Rendezvous and the Apollo Program" .

NASA Langley Research Center Office of Public Affairs . NASA. December 1992.

Archived from the original on December 23, 2020 . Retrieved December 26, 2018 .

^ Swenson, Grimwood & Alexander 1966 , pp. 85–86.

^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , pp. 72–77.

^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , pp. 48–49.

^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , pp. 181–182, 205–208.

^ Butler, P. M. (August 29, 1989).

Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (PDF) .

NASA . pp. 1, 11, 134.

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 12, 2019 . Retrieved August 12, 2019 .

^ White, H. D.; Lokerson, D. C. (1971). "The Evolution of IMP Spacecraft Mosfet Data Systems".

IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science .

18 (1): 233– 236.

Bibcode : 1971ITNS...18..233W .

doi : 10.1109/TNS.1971.4325871 .

ISSN 0018-9499 .

^ "Apollo Guidance Computer and the First Silicon Chips" .

National Air and Space Museum .

Smithsonian Institution . October 14, 2015.

Archived from the original on May 22, 2021 . Retrieved September 1, 2019 .

^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , pp. 214–218.

^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , pp. 265–272.

^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , pp. 274–284.

^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , pp. 292–300.

^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , pp. 303–312.

^ Lindroos, Marcus.

"The Soviet Manned Lunar Program" (PDF) .

MIT OpenCourseWare .

Massachusetts Institute of Technology .

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 11, 2016 . Retrieved October 4, 2011 .

^ Brown, Jonathan (July 3, 2009).

"Recording tracks Russia's Moon gatecrash attempt" .

The Independent . London.

Archived from the original on September 10, 2011 . Retrieved January 10, 2011 .

^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , p. 374.

^ Hansen 2005 , pp. 312–313.

^ Collins 2001 , pp. 288–289.

^ Cunningham 2010 , p. 109.

^ a b c Orloff 2000 , p. 90.

^ Orloff 2000 , p. 72.

^ Hansen 2005 , pp. 338–339.

^ Collins 2001 , pp. 434–435.

^ a b Hansen 2005 , p. 359.

^ a b Slayton & Cassutt 1994 , p. 237.

^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , p. 261.

^ a b Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , p. 375.

^ Kranz 2000 , p. 27.

^ Orloff 2000 , p. 272.

^ Kranz 2000 , pp. 230, 236, 273, 320.

^ Glen E. Swanson, ed. (August 5, 2004).

SP-4223: Before This Decade is Out—Personal Reflections on the Apollo Program—Chapter 9—Glynn S. Lunney .

NASA . p. 211.

ISBN 978-0-16-050139-5 .

Archived from the original on February 27, 2021 . Retrieved June 21, 2019 .

Apollo 11 flight directors pose for a group photo in the Mission Control Center. Pictured left to right, and the shifts that they served during the mission, are (in front and sitting) Clifford E. Charlesworth (Shift 1), Gerald D. Griffin (Shift 1), Eugene F. Kranz (Shift 2), Milton L. Windler (Shift 4), and Glynn S. Lunney (Shift 3). (NASA Photo S-69-39192.) ^ Murray, Charles A.; Cox, Catherine Bly (July 1989).

Apollo, the race to the moon .

Simon & Schuster . pp. 356, 403, 437.

ISBN 978-0-671-61101-9 .

Archived from the original on May 22, 2021 . Retrieved June 9, 2019 .

^ Woods, David; MacTaggart, Ken; O'Brien, Frank (May 18, 2019).

"Day 4, part 4: Checking Out Eagle" . Apollo Flight Journal.

Archived from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved June 21, 2019 – via NASA .

^ Woods, David; MacTaggart, Ken; O'Brien, Frank (May 18, 2019).

"Day 3, part 1: Viewing Africa and Breakfast" . Apollo Flight Journal.

Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved June 21, 2019 – via NASA.

^ Reichhardt, Tony (June 7, 2019).

"Twenty People Who Made Apollo Happen" .

Air & Space/Smithsonian .

Smithsonian Institution .

Archived from the original on October 25, 2020 . Retrieved September 7, 2019 .

^ a b Collins 2001 , pp. 332–334.

^ Collins 2001 , p. 332.

^ a b Collins 2001 , p. 333.

^ "1971–78 Dollar Eisenhower" .

CoinSite . ROKO Design Group, Inc. 1994. Archived from the original on August 30, 2013 . Retrieved July 20, 2009 .

^ "Susan B. Anthony Dollar—1979–1999" . United States Mint. Archived from the original on August 11, 2014 . Retrieved August 12, 2014 .

^ Marshall Space Flight Center 1969 , p. 8.

^ Collins 2001 , pp. 334–335.

^ Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , p. 331.

^ Collins 1994 , p. 116.

^ "Kit, Pilot's Personal Preference, Apollo 11" .

Smithsonian Air and Space Museum . March 17, 2016.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2018 . Retrieved October 11, 2018 .

^ "Personal Preference Kits (PPKs)" . Space flown collectible artifacts.

Archived from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved December 24, 2018 .

^ Hansen 2005 , p. 527.

^ Slayton & Cassutt 1994 , pp. 191–192.

^ a b c d Garcia, Mark (February 8, 2018).

"50 Years Ago: Lunar Landing Sites Selected" .

NASA .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2021 . Retrieved September 22, 2018 .

^ Cortright 1975 , p. 79.

^ Harland 1999 , p. 19.

^ Cortright 1975 , pp. 98–99.

^ Collins 1994 , p. 7.

^ Cappellari 1972 , p. 976.

^ "Apollo 10" .

Smithsonian Air and Space Museum .

Archived from the original on February 6, 2021 . Retrieved December 26, 2018 .

^ a b Chaikin 1994 , p. 148.

^ Hansen 2005 , p. 360.

^ Collins 2001 , p. 347.

^ Aldrin & Abraham 2016 , pp. 57–58.

^ Hansen 2005 , pp. 363–365.

^ Chaikin 1994 , p. 149.

^ Chaikin 1994 , p. 150.

^ Schefter 1999 , p. 281.

^ Hansen 2005 , pp. 371–372.

^ Benson & Faherty 1978 , p. 472.

^ "Scientific Experiments" .

Smithsonian Air and Space Museum .

Archived from the original on October 24, 2020 . Retrieved September 22, 2018 .

^ a b c d Benson & Faherty 1978 , p. 474.

^ a b c Benson & Faherty 1978 , p. 475.

^ Benson & Faherty 1978 , pp. 355–356.

^ Collins 2001 , pp. 355–357.

^ a b Woods, W. David; MacTaggart, Kenneth D.; O'Brien, Frank (June 6, 2019).

"Day 1, Part 1: Launch" . Apollo Flight Journal.

Archived from the original on December 5, 2020 . Retrieved October 11, 2018 – via NASA.

^ a b Bilstein 1980 , pp. 369–370.

^ a b Brooks, Grimwood & Swenson 1979 , p. 338.

^ "President Richard Nixon's Daily Diary" (PDF) . Richard Nixon Presidential Library. July 16, 1969. p. 2.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 4, 2021 . Retrieved September 3, 2018 .

^ Cook, Jan (July 4, 1969).

"Apollo 11-Launch To Draw 1-Million" .

St. Petersburg Independent . pp. 3A . Retrieved February 5, 2025 – via Google News Archive.

^ Collins 2001 , pp. 374–375.

^ Marshall Space Flight Center 1969 , p. 7.

^ Woods, W. David; MacTaggart, Kenneth D.; O'Brien, Frank (February 10, 2017).

"Day 4, part 1: Entering Lunar Orbit" . Apollo Flight Journal.

Archived from the original on February 27, 2021 . Retrieved July 14, 2019 – via NASA.

^ "Apollo 11 Lunar Landing Mission" (PDF) (Press kit). Washington, D.C.: NASA. July 6, 1969. Release No: 69-83K.

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 11, 2013 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969 , p. 130.

^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969 , p. 9.

^ a b Collins & Aldrin 1975 , p. 209.

^ Mindell 2008 , pp. 220–221.

^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969 , p. 82.

^ Collins & Aldrin 1975 , pp. 210–212.

^ Hamilton & Hackler 2008 , pp. 34–43.

^ Hamilton, Margaret H.

(March 1, 1971). "Computer Got Loaded".

Datamation (Letter). p. 13.

ISSN 0011-6963 .

^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969 , pp. 190–192.

^ Martin, Fred H. (July 1994).

"Apollo 11: 25 Years Later" .

Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal . NASA.

Archived from the original on May 27, 2013 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ Eyles, Don (February 6, 2004).

"Tales from the Lunar Module Guidance Computer" .

27th annual Guidance and Control Conference . Breckenridge, Colorado: American Astronautical Society .

Archived from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ Chaikin 1994 , p. 196.

^ Mindell 2008 , pp. 195–197.

^ Chaikin 1994 , p. 197.

^ Chaikin 1994 , pp. 198–199.

^ Chaikin 1994 , p. 199.

^ Mindell 2008 , p. 226.

^ Orloff 2000 , p. 295.

^ Fjeld, Paul (June 2013).

"The Biggest Myth about the First Moon Landing" (PDF) .

Horizons .

38 (6): 5– 6.

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved March 29, 2019 .

^ Failure is Not an Option (TV production).

The History Channel . August 24, 2003.

OCLC 54435670 .

^ "James May speaks to Charles Duke" . BBC Archives. 2009.

Archived from the original on August 17, 2020 . Retrieved June 7, 2009 .

^ Jones, Eric M., ed. (1995).

"Post-landing Activities" .

Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal . NASA.

Archived from the original on May 10, 2013 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ Chaikin 1994 , pp. 204, 623.

^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969 , pp. 21–22.

^ a b c d Jones, Eric M.; Glover, Ken, eds. (1995).

"First Steps" .

Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal . NASA.

Archived from the original on October 9, 2006 . Retrieved September 23, 2006 .

^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969 , p. 22.

^ Cortright 1975 , p. 215.

^ Johnston, Dietlein & Berry 1975 , pp. 115–120.

^ Duggan, Paul (August 25, 2012).

"Neil Armstrong, first man to step on the Moon, dies at 82" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 12, 2021 . Retrieved May 25, 2013 .

^ a b Macey, Richard (August 5, 2006).

"One giant blunder for mankind: how NASA lost Moon pictures" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Sydney.

Archived from the original on May 29, 2020 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ a b Sarkissian 2001 , p. 287.

^ Stern, Jacob (July 23, 2019).

"One Small Controversy About Neil Armstrong's Giant Leap—When, exactly, did the astronaut set foot on the moon? No one knows" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved July 23, 2019 .

^ a b c Orloff 2000 , p. 108.

^ Canright, Shelley, ed. (July 15, 2004).

"Apollo Moon Landing—35th Anniversary" .

NASA Education . NASA.

Archived from the original on July 4, 2013 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

Includes the "a" article as intended.

^ Mikkelson, Barbara & David P.

"One Small Step" at Snopes.com : Urban Legends Reference Pages .

^ "Armstrong 'got Moon quote right' " . London: BBC News . October 2, 2006.

Archived from the original on January 27, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ Ghosh, Pallab (June 3, 2009).

"Armstrong's 'poetic' slip on Moon" . London: BBC News.

Archived from the original on February 23, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ Meyer, Charles (2009).

"Lunar Sample Compendium: Contingency Soil (10010)" (PDF) .

Astromaterials Research & Exploration Science . NASA.

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 10, 2013 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ a b Mission Evaluation Team 1969 , p. 23.

^ a b "A Flag on the Moon" .

The Attic .

Archived from the original on July 26, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2018 .

^ "Exhibit: Apollo 11 and Nixon" .

American Originals . Washington, D.C.: National Archives and Records Administration . March 1996.

Archived from the original on November 14, 2020 . Retrieved April 13, 2008 .

^ Borman & Serling 1988 , pp. 237–238.

^ "Richard Nixon: Telephone Conversation With the Apollo 11 Astronauts on the Moon" .

The American Presidency Project . UC Santa Barbara.

Archived from the original on March 2, 2021 . Retrieved October 26, 2018 .

^ "Apollo 11 Astronauts Talk With Richard Nixon From the Surface of the Moon – AT&T Archives" . AT&T Tech Channel. July 20, 2012.

Archived from the original on May 22, 2021 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 – via YouTube.

^ a b Jones, Eric M., ed. (1995).

"EASEP Deployment and Closeout" .

Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal . NASA.

Archived from the original on February 25, 2014 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ Harland 1999 , pp. 28–29.

^ "Lunar Sample Overview" . Lunar and Planetary Institute.

Archived from the original on February 7, 2021 . Retrieved December 28, 2018 .

^ University of Western Australia (January 17, 2012).

"Moon-walk mineral discovered in Western Australia" .

ScienceDaily .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2018 .

^ Gardner 2017 , p. 143.

^ "Neil Armstrong Explains His Famous Apollo 11 Moonwalk" . New York: Space.com . December 10, 2010.

Archived from the original on August 2, 2013 . Retrieved May 25, 2013 .

^ a b Jones, Eric M., ed. (1995).

"Trying to Rest" .

Apollo 11 Lunar Surface Journal . NASA.

Archived from the original on May 10, 2013 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

^ "White House 'Lost In Space' Scenarios" . New York: The Smoking Gun . August 8, 2005.

Archived from the original on February 25, 2021 . Retrieved May 25, 2013 .

Scanned copy of the "In Event of Moon Disaster" memo.

^ Mann, Jim (July 7, 1999).

"The Story of a Tragedy That Was Not to Be" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on August 30, 2013 . Retrieved May 25, 2013 .

^ a b Safire, William (July 12, 1999).

"Essay; Disaster Never Came" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved May 25, 2013 .

^ Elizabeth Howell (July 19, 2019).

"If Apollo 11 Had Gone Terribly Wrong, Here's What Nixon Would Have Told the Country" .

Space.com . Retrieved July 11, 2024 .

^ Thomas, Ashley (July 23, 2019).

"How a Felt-Tipped Marker Saved the Moon Landing" . Retrieved July 20, 2022 .

^ "The untold story: how one small silicon disc delivered a giant message to the Moon" .

collectSPACE . November 15, 2007.

Archived from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved November 20, 2019 .

^ "Apollo 11 Goodwill Messages" (PDF) (Press release). Washington, D.C.: NASA. July 13, 1969. Release No: 69-83F.

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 3, 2019 . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ Brown, Jonathan (July 3, 2009).

"Recording tracks Russia's Moon gatecrash attempt" .

The Independent . London.

^ Horton, Alex (July 19, 2019).

"The Soviets crashed a spacecraft onto the moon" .

Washington Post . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ "Missions: Luna 15" .

Solar System Exploration: NASA Science . Archived from the original on April 10, 2019 . Retrieved March 18, 2019 .

^ Collins & Aldrin 1975 , p. 219.

^ "American flags still standing on the Moon, say scientists" .

The Daily Telegraph . June 30, 2012.

Archived from the original on February 9, 2021 . Retrieved September 24, 2018 .

^ a b c Collins 2001 , p. 402.

^ Collins 2001 , pp. 401–407.

^ Collins 2001 , pp. 406–408, 410.

^ Williams, David R.

"Apollo Tables" .

NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive . NASA. Archived from the original on October 1, 2006 . Retrieved September 23, 2006 .

^ Meador, James (2021). "Long-term Orbit Stability of the Apollo 11 "Eagle"Lunar Module Ascent Stage".

arXiv : 2105.10088 [ physics.space-ph ].

^ a b c Collins & Aldrin 1975 , p. 222.

^ Rodriguez, Rachel (July 20, 2009).

"The 10-year-old who helped Apollo 11, 40 years later" . CNN.

Archived from the original on January 26, 2010 . Retrieved January 10, 2011 .

^ Carmichael 2010 , p. 3.

^ Carmichael 2010 , p. 21.

^ Carmichael 2010 , pp. 38–43, 71–72.

^ Carmichael 2010 , p. 85.

^ "Press Kit—Apollo 11 Lunar Landing Mission" (PDF) . NASA. July 6, 1969. p. 57.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved October 11, 2018 .

^ Carmichael 2010 , pp. 107–108, 145–146.

^ Richelson, Jeffrey T. (October 2013).

"Weather or Not" .

Air Force Magazine .

Archived from the original on July 22, 2019 . Retrieved July 22, 2019 .

^ a b c Woods, W. David; MacTaggart, Kenneth D.; O'Brien, Frank.

"Day 9: Re-entry and Splashdown" . Apollo Flight Journal.

Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved September 27, 2018 – via NASA.

^ Carmichael 2010 , pp. 136–137, 144–145.

^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969 , p. 28.

^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969 , pp. 169–170.

^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969 , p. 170.

^ US Department of Commerce, NOAA.

"SMG Weather History—Apollo Program" .

www.weather.gov .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2021 . Retrieved July 22, 2019 .

^ " 'They would get killed': The weather forecast that saved Apollo 11" .

Stars and Stripes .

Archived from the original on July 26, 2020 . Retrieved July 22, 2019 .

^ a b Mission Evaluation Team 1969 , pp. 164–167.

^ Carmichael 2010 , pp. 184–185.

^ Carmichael 2010 , pp. 186–188.

^ Carmichael 2010 , pp. 199–200.

^ Johnston, Dietlein & Berry 1975 , pp. 406–424.

^ Johnston, Richard S.; Dietlein, Lawrence F.; Berry, Charles A.; James f. Parker, Jr; West, Vita; Jones, Walton L. (January 1975).

"The Lunar Quarantine Program" .

Biomedical Results of Apollo . NASA-SP-368. SP-368.

Archived from the original on July 14, 2019 . Retrieved September 6, 2019 .

^ "Remarks to Apollo 11 Astronauts Aboard the U.S.S. Hornet Following Completion of Their Lunar Mission" .

The American Presidency Project . UC Santa Barbara. July 24, 1969.

Archived from the original on July 26, 2020 . Retrieved November 19, 2018 .

^ Mission Evaluation Team 1969 , pp. 166, 171–173.

^ Extra-Terrestrial Exposure, 34 Federal Register 11975 (July 16, 1969), codified at Federal Aviation Regulation pt.

1200 Archived May 22, 2021, at the Wayback Machine ^ "A Front Row Seat For History" .

NASAexplores . NASA. July 15, 2004. Archived from the original on March 19, 2006 . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ Carmichael 2010 , p. 118.

^ Ertel, Newkirk & Brooks 1978 , p. 312.

^ "Apollo 11 Astronauts Hailed by Millions in New York and Chicago".

The New York Times . August 14, 1969.

^ "Apollo Heroes Honored in Star-Studded Banquet".

Los Angeles Times . August 14, 1969.

^ "Apollo 11 Crew Speaks to Congress" . NASA.

^ "Apollo 11 Flag on Display in American Samoa" . Government of American Samoa.

^ Chaikin, Andrew (1995).

A Man on the Moon The Voyages of the Apollo Astronauts . Penguin Books.

ISBN 9780140241464 .

^ "Apollo Astronauts Begin Global Tour".

The Washington Post . September 30, 1969.

^ NASA Special Publication SP-287: Apollo 11 . NASA. 1970.

^ "The World Salutes Apollo 11".

National Geographic . November 1969.

^ Logsdon, John M. (1999). "The Legacy of Apollo".

Issues in Science and Technology .

15 (3).

^ a b c Launius, Roger D.

"Project Apollo: A Retrospective Analysis" .

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved July 19, 2023 .

^ a b c Chaikin 2007 , p. 57.

^ Schefter 1999 , p. 288.

^ Beard, David; Kirkpatrick, Nick (July 17, 2014).

"We Put a Man on the Moon, So Why Can't We ...?" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on June 26, 2020 . Retrieved January 4, 2018 .

^ Schefter 1999 , p. 283.

^ a b c Niiler, Eric (July 11, 2019).

"Why Civil Rights Activists Protested the Moon Landing" .

HISTORY . Retrieved November 10, 2021 .

^ Madrigal, Alexis C. (May 28, 2011).

"Gil Scott-Heron's Poem, 'Whitey on the Moon' " .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on February 16, 2021 . Retrieved January 3, 2019 .

^ a b Chiroux, Matthis (March 11, 2012).

"Whitey on the Moon, Again?" .

Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2014 . Retrieved January 3, 2019 .

^ Hsu, Tiffany (July 15, 2019).

"The Apollo 11 Mission Was Also a Global Media Sensation" .

The New York Times . Retrieved July 20, 2023 .

^ Chaikin 2007 , p. 58.

^ Compton, William David (1989).

"Where No Man Has Gone Before: A History of Apollo Lunar Exploration Missions" .

NASA Special Publication .

494 : 420.

Bibcode : 1989NASSP.494..420C .

Archived from the original on June 26, 2019 . Retrieved January 4, 2019 .

^ "Apollo 11" . History. August 23, 2018.

Archived from the original on January 4, 2019 . Retrieved January 3, 2019 .

^ McCurdy 1997 , pp. 106–107.

^ Chaikin 1994 , p. 631.

^ Wilford, John Noble (December 18, 1989).

"Russians Finally Admit They Lost Race to Moon" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 13, 2020 . Retrieved January 8, 2019 .

^ Das, Saswato R. (July 16, 2009).

"The Moon Landing through Soviet Eyes: A Q&A with Sergei Khrushchev, son of former premier Nikita Khrushchev" .

Scientific American .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2021 . Retrieved January 7, 2019 .

^ Needell, Allan (February 25, 2017).

"The Last Time the Command Module Columbia Toured" .

Smithsonian Air and Space Museum .

Archived from the original on November 1, 2020 . Retrieved November 9, 2018 .

^ a b "Apollo 11 Command Module Columbia " .

Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum .

Archived from the original on July 20, 2019 . Retrieved August 27, 2017 .

^ "Museum in DC" .

Smithsonian Air and Space Museum . May 3, 2016.

Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved September 25, 2018 .

^ Maksel, Rebecca (February 22, 2017).

"Apollo 11 Moonship To Go On Tour" .

Air and Space Magazine .

Archived from the original on August 27, 2017 . Retrieved August 27, 2017 .

^ "Neil Armstrong's sons help open exhibit of father's spacecraft in Ohio" .

collectSPACE . September 30, 2019.

Archived from the original on March 1, 2021 . Retrieved October 18, 2019 .

^ "Apollo to the Moon" .

Smithsonian Air and Space Museum . March 20, 2003.

Archived from the original on September 25, 2018 . Retrieved September 25, 2018 .

^ " 'Apollo to the Moon' no more: Air and Space Museum closes gallery" .

collectSPACE .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2018 .

^ "Neil Armstrong's Apollo 11 spacesuit unveiled at Smithsonian" .

Reuters . July 16, 2019.

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved December 21, 2019 .

^ "Mobile Quarantine Facility" .

Smithsonian Air and Space Museum . March 20, 2016.

Archived from the original on August 10, 2018 . Retrieved September 30, 2018 .

^ "Apollo 11 Flotation Collar" .

Smithsonian Air and Space Museum . March 20, 2016.

Archived from the original on August 9, 2018 . Retrieved September 30, 2018 .

^ "National Air and Space Museum Moves Apollo Artifact to Future Home" .

Smithsonian Air and Space Museum . September 15, 2015.

Archived from the original on October 23, 2020 . Retrieved September 25, 2018 .

^ "LRO Sees Apollo Landing Sites" . NASA. July 17, 2009.

Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved September 25, 2018 .

^ "Location of Apollo Lunar Modules" .

Smithsonian Air and Space Museum .

Archived from the original on July 26, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2018 .

^ Meador, James (October 2021). "Long-term orbit stability of the Apollo 11 "Eagle" Lunar Module Ascent Stage".

Planetary and Space Science .

205 : 105304.

arXiv : 2105.10088 .

Bibcode : 2021P&SS..20505304M .

doi : 10.1016/j.pss.2021.105304 .

ISSN 0032-0633 .

S2CID 235125876 .

^ "Amazon boss Jeff Bezos 'finds Apollo 11 Moon engines' " . London: BBC News. March 28, 2012.

Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ Kolawole, Emi (July 19, 2013).

"Bezos Expeditions retrieves and identifies Apollo 11 engine #5, NASA confirms identity" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2021 . Retrieved February 13, 2017 .

^ "Apollo 11 engine find confirmed" .

Albuquerque Journal . Albuquerque, New Mexico. July 21, 2013. p. 5.

Archived from the original on April 7, 2019 . Retrieved December 23, 2018 – via Newspapers.com.

^ "Apollo 11 SIVB NSSDCA/COSPAR ID: 1969-059B" .

NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive . NASA.

Archived from the original on January 25, 2021 . Retrieved December 30, 2018 .

^ "Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility" . NASA.

Archived from the original on January 25, 2021 . Retrieved September 25, 2018 .

^ Flavin, Kristen (September 10, 2016).

"The mystery of the missing Moon rocks" . World.

Archived from the original on October 21, 2020 . Retrieved September 25, 2018 .

^ Pearlman, Robert .

"Where today are the Apollo 11 goodwill lunar sample displays?" . collectSPACE.

Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved November 2, 2012 .

^ Earth magazine, March 2011, pp. 42–51 ^ Bates, Lauderdale & Kernaghan 1979 , pp. 2-3 & 4-32.

^ Todaro, Chelsea (March 5, 2018).

"Report: Humans have left 500,000 pounds of 'trash' on the Moon" .

Palm Beach Post .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2020 . Retrieved September 27, 2018 .

^ "An Audience with Neil Armstrong (2011 interview)" .

Slartibartfast . May 2011.

Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved July 19, 2019 – via YouTube.

^ Allen, Nick (February 9, 2015).

"Neil Armstrong's widow discovers moon camera in cupboard" .

Daily Telegraph .

ISSN 0307-1235 .

Archived from the original on November 29, 2020 . Retrieved July 19, 2019 .

^ Jones, Eric; Lotzmann, Ulli; Glover, Ken; Needell, Allan (January 6, 2016).

"Lunar Surface Flown Apollo 11 Artifacts From the Neil Armstrong Estate" .

Apollo Lunar Surface Journal .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved July 19, 2019 .

^ "The Armstrong Purse: Flown Apollo 11 Lunar Artifacts" .

National Air and Space Museum . February 6, 2015.

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved July 19, 2019 .

^ "Up Close With Apollo 11" .

Life . Archived from the original on May 21, 2013 . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ "Apollo 11 Onboard Audio" .

Apollo 40th Anniversary . NASA. July 26, 2013.

Archived from the original on June 3, 2013 . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ Garner, Robert, ed. (March 16, 2015).

"Apollo 11 Partial Restoration HD Videos (Downloads)" . NASA.

Archived from the original on June 28, 2013 . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ Riley, Christopher (July 20, 2010).

"Sound restored to mission control film shot during Apollo 11 Moon landing" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved July 11, 2013 .

^ "We Choose the Moon" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . Archived from the original on June 17, 2009 . Retrieved July 19, 2009 .

^ "Apollo 11 Crew Meets With President Obama" .

Image of the Day Gallery . NASA. July 20, 2009.

Archived from the original on November 11, 2013 . Retrieved June 9, 2014 .

^ Zeleny, Jeff (July 21, 2009).

"Obama Hails Apollo Crew From a Lens of Childhood" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 11, 2021 . Retrieved February 14, 2017 .

^ "Text of S.951 as Engrossed in Senate: New Frontier Congressional Gold Medal Act—U.S. Congress—OpenCongress" . OpenCongress.org. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012 . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ "Text of H.R.2245 as Enrolled Bill: New Frontier Congressional Gold Medal Act—U.S. Congress—OpenCongress" . OpenCongress.org. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012 . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ "Moon landings: British scientists salute space heroes" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. July 17, 2009. Archived from the original on March 8, 2013 . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ Pub. L.

114–282: Apollo 11 50th Anniversary Commemorative Coin Act (text) (PDF) ^ "Apollo 11 50th Anniversary Commemorative Coin Program" .

United States Mint . October 11, 2018.

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved February 1, 2019 .

^ Kenny, Glenn (February 27, 2019).

" 'Apollo 11' Review: The 1969 Moon Mission Still Has the Power to Thrill" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved February 28, 2019 .

^ Rubin, Rebecca (February 13, 2019).

" 'Apollo 11' Documentary Gets Exclusive Imax Release" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on December 19, 2020 . Retrieved September 6, 2019 .

^ "Apollo 50 Festival" .

Smithsonian Air and Space Museum . July 2019.

Archived from the original on February 11, 2021 . Retrieved July 21, 2019 .

^ "Apollo 50 Go For the Moon" .

Smithsonian Air and Space Museum . July 2019.

Archived from the original on February 11, 2021 . Retrieved July 21, 2019 .

^ "50th Anniversary of the Moon Landing" .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2021 . Retrieved July 20, 2019 .

^ Bartels, Meghan (July 19, 2019).

"Google (and Apollo 11's Michael Collins) Celebrate Moon Landing's 50th with EPIC Google Doodle" .

Space.com .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2021 . Retrieved September 7, 2019 .

^ Dunn, Marcia (July 19, 2019).

"Apollo 11 astronauts reunite on 50th anniversary of moonshot" . ABC. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 20, 2019 . Retrieved July 21, 2019 .

^ Haynes, Danielle (July 19, 2019).

"Trump, Apollo 11 astronauts discuss merits of going to moon before Mars" .

UPI .

Archived from the original on February 5, 2021 . Retrieved September 7, 2019 .

^ "Moon Landing Film Coming to Theaters" .

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. September 1, 1969. p. 69.

Archived from the original on September 5, 2019 . Retrieved September 5, 2019 – via Newspapers.com.

^ Jones, Sam (May 25, 2009).

"The moon shoot: film of Apollo mission on show again after 35 years in the can" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on July 26, 2020 . Retrieved September 5, 2019 .

^ "Space Specials at a Glance" .

Florida Today . Cocoa, Florida. July 17, 1994. p. 115.

Archived from the original on September 27, 2021 . Retrieved September 14, 2019 – via Newspapers.com.

^ Kenny, Glenn (February 27, 2019).

" 'Apollo 11' Review: The 1969 Moon Mission Still Has the Power to Thrill" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved February 28, 2019 .

^ Rubin, Rebecca (February 13, 2019).

" 'Apollo 11' Documentary Gets Exclusive Imax Release" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on December 19, 2020 . Retrieved July 20, 2019 .

^ Foust, Jeff (July 9, 2019).

"Review: Chasing the Moon" .

Space News . Archived from the original on July 12, 2019 . Retrieved July 12, 2019 .

^ Howell, Elizabeth (July 17, 2019).

" '8 Days: To the Moon and Back' Shows Apollo 11 Milestones" .

Space.com .

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved July 20, 2019 .

^ Orloff 2000 , p. iv.

Sources Aldrin, Buzz ; Abraham, Ken (2016).

No Dream is Too High: Life Lessons from a Man who Walked on the Moon . Washington D.C.: National Geographic.

ISBN 978-1-4262-1649-7 .

OCLC 1023166907 .

Bates, James R.; Lauderdale, W. W.; Kernaghan, Harold (April 1979).

ALSEP Termination Report (PDF) (Report). Washington, D.C.: NASA. RP-1036.

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 27, 2021 . Retrieved September 27, 2018 .

Benson, Charles D.; Faherty, William B. (1978).

Moonport: A History of Apollo Launch Facilities and Operations (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: NASA. SP-4204.

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 13, 2020 . Retrieved September 22, 2018 .

Bilstein, Roger E. (1980).

Stages to Saturn: A Technological History of the Apollo/Saturn Launch Vehicle (PDF) . NASA History Series. NASA.

ISBN 9780160489099 . SP-4206.

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 15, 2020 . Retrieved September 19, 2018 .

Borman, Frank ; Serling, Robert J. (1988).

Countdown: An Autobiography . New York: Silver Arrow.

ISBN 978-0-688-07929-1 .

OCLC 937625026 .

Brooks, Courtney G.; Grimwood, James M.; Swenson, Loyd S. Jr. (1979).

Chariots for Apollo: A History of Manned Lunar Spacecraft . NASA History Series. Washington, D.C.: Scientific and Technical Information Branch, NASA.

ISBN 978-0-486-46756-6 .

LCCN 79001042 .

OCLC 4664449 . SP-4205.

Archived from the original on July 14, 2019 . Retrieved July 20, 2010 .

Cappellari, J.O. Jr. (May–June 1972). "Where on the Moon? An Apollo Systems Engineering Problem".

Bell System Technical Journal .

51 (5): 955– 1126.

doi : 10.1002/j.1538-7305.1972.tb02642.x .

ISSN 0005-8580 .

OCLC 17779623 .

Carmichael, Scott W. (2010).

Moon Men Return: USS Hornet and the Recovery of the Apollo 11 Astronauts . Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-59114-110-5 .

OCLC 562772897 .

Chaikin, Andrew (1994).

A Man on the Moon: The Triumphant Story Of The Apollo Space Program . New York: Penguin Group.

ISBN 978-0-14-027201-7 .

OCLC 890357362 .

Chaikin, Andrew (2007). "Live from the Moon: The Societal Impact of Apollo". In Dick, Steven J.; Launius, Roger D. (eds.).

Societal Impact of Spaceflight (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: NASA.

OCLC 175218028 . SP-4801.

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 25, 2021 . Retrieved January 4, 2019 .

Collins, Michael ; Aldrin, Edwin E. Jr.

(1975). "The Eagle Has landed". In Cortright, Edgar M (ed.).

Apollo Expeditions to the Moon . Washington, D.C.: NASA. pp.

203– 224.

OCLC 1623434 . SP-350.

Archived from the original on February 19, 2008 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

Collins, Michael (2001) [1974].

Carrying the Fire: An Astronaut's Journeys . New York: Cooper Square Press.

ISBN 978-0-8154-1028-7 .

LCCN 2001017080 .

OCLC 45755963 .

Collins, Michael (1994) [1976].

Flying to the Moon: An Astronauts Story . New York: Square Fish.

ISBN 978-0-374-42356-8 .

OCLC 29388756 .

Cortright, Edgar M (1975). "Scouting the Moon". In Cortright, Edgar M (ed.).

Apollo Expeditions to the Moon . Washington, D.C.: NASA. pp.

79– 102.

OCLC 1623434 . SP-350.

Archived from the original on February 19, 2008 . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

Cunningham, Walter (2010) [1977].

The All-American Boys . ipicturebooks.

ISBN 978-1-876963-24-8 .

OCLC 713908039 .

Ertel, Ivan D.; Newkirk, Roland W.; Brooks, Courtney G. (1978).

The Apollo Spacecraft—A Chronology. Vol. IV. Part 3 (1969 3rd quarter) . Washington, D.C.: NASA. SP-4009.

Archived from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved October 24, 2017 .

Gardner, William (2017).

Before the Fall: An Inside View of the Pre-Watergate White House . London; New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-351-31458-9 .

Hamilton, Margaret H.

; Hackler, William R. (December 2008). "Universal Systems Language: Lessons Learned from Apollo".

Computer .

41 (12): 34– 43.

doi : 10.1109/MC.2008.541 .

ISSN 0018-9162 .

S2CID 15870726 .

Hansen, James R.

(2005).

First Man: The Life of Neil A. Armstrong . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-7432-5631-5 .

LCCN 2005049992 .

OCLC 937302502 .

Harland, David (1999).

Exploring the Moon: The Apollo Expeditions . London; New York: Springer.

ISBN 978-1-85233-099-6 .

OCLC 982158259 .

Johnston, Richard S.; Dietlein, Lawrence F.; Berry, Charles A., eds. (1975).

Biomedical Results of Apollo (PDF) . Vol. NASA-SP-368. Washington, D.C.: NASA. SP-368.

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 2, 2019 . Retrieved November 2, 2019 .

Kranz, Gene (2000).

Failure Is Not An Option . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-7432-0079-0 .

OCLC 829406416 .

Logsdon, John M. (1976).

The Decision to Go to the Moon: Project Apollo and the National Interest . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

OCLC 849992795 .

Logsdon, John M. (2011).

John F. Kennedy and the Race to the Moon . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-230-11010-6 .

OCLC 707157323 .

Mission Evaluation Team (November 1969).

Apollo 11 Mission Report (PDF) . Houston, Texas: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center .

OCLC 10970862 . SP-238.

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 4, 2018 . Retrieved December 17, 2024 .

Marshall Space Flight Center (June 1969).

Technical Information Summary, Apollo-11 (AS-506) Apollo Saturn V Space Vehicle (PDF) . Huntsville, Alabama: NASA. Document ID: 19700011707; Accession Number: 70N21012; Report Number: NASA-TM-X-62812; S&E-ASTR-S-101-69.

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 29, 2020 . Retrieved June 12, 2013 .

McCurdy, Howard E.

(1997).

Space and the American Imagination . Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.

ISBN 978-1-56098-764-2 .

OCLC 36186250 .

Mindell, David A. (2008).

Digital Apollo: Human and Machine in Spaceflight . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-13497-2 .

LCCN 2007032255 .

OCLC 751829782 .

Orloff, Richard W. (2000).

Apollo by the Numbers: A Statistical Reference . NASA History Series. Washington, D.C.: NASA History Division, Office of Policy and Plans.

ISBN 978-0-16-050631-4 .

LCCN 00061677 .

OCLC 829406439 . SP-2000-4029.

Archived from the original on August 23, 2007 . Retrieved June 12, 2013 .

Sarkissian, John M. (2001).

"On Eagle's Wings: The Parkes Observatory's Support of the Apollo 11 Mission" .

Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia .

18 (3): 287– 310.

Bibcode : 2001PASA...18..287S .

doi : 10.1071/AS01038 .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2020 . Retrieved May 24, 2013 .

Schefter, James (July 1999).

The Race: The Uncensored Story of How America Beat Russia to the Moon . New York: Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-385-49253-9 .

Slayton, Donald K. "Deke" ; Cassutt, Michael (1994).

Deke! U.S. Manned Space: From Mercury to the Shuttle . New York: Forge.

ISBN 978-0-312-85503-1 .

LCCN 94002463 .

OCLC 29845663 .

Swenson, Loyd S. Jr.; Grimwood, James M.; Alexander, Charles C. (1966).

This New Ocean: A History of Project Mercury . The NASA History Series. Washington, D.C.: National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

OCLC 569889 . SP-4201.

Archived from the original on June 17, 2010 . Retrieved June 28, 2007 .

External links Apollo 11 at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote English Wikisource has original text related to this article: In Event of Moon Disaster Listen to this article ( 1 hour and 29 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 13 July 2020 ( 2020-07-13 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) "Apollo 11 transcripts" at Spacelog Apollo 11 in real time Apollo 11 Press Conference filmed by KPRC-TV at Texas Archive of the Moving Image Apollo 11 and 13 Checklists at The Museum of Flight Digital Collections.

Apollo 11, 12, and 14 Traverses , at the Lunar and Planetary Institute Multimedia Garner, Robert (ed.).

"Apollo 11 Partial Restoration HD Videos (Downloads)" . NASA . Retrieved June 13, 2013 .

Remastered videos of the original landing.

Dynamic timeline of lunar excursion . Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera The short film Moonwalk One is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive .

The Eagle Has Landed: The Flight of Apollo 11 (1969) ( transcript ) from US National Archives (via YouTube) Apollo 11 Restored EVA Part 1 (1 hour of restored footage) Apollo 11: As They Photographed It (Augmented Reality) — The New York Times , Interactive, July 18, 2019 "Coverage of the Flight of Apollo 11" as aired on CBS Radio and WCCO Radio (Minneapolis/St. Paul) for RadioTapes.com. Radio station recordings (airchecks) covering the flight of Apollo 11.

v t e Apollo program List of missions canceled missions List of Apollo astronauts Launch complexes Launch Complex 34 Launch Complex 37 Launch Complex 39 A B Ground facilities Mission Control Center Cape Kennedy Air Force Station Crawler-transporter Kennedy Space Center Manned Space Flight Network Launch vehicles Little Joe II Saturn Saturn I Saturn IB Saturn V Spacecraft and rover Apollo spacecraft Command and Service Module Lunar Module Lunar Roving Vehicle Flights Uncrewed AS-101 AS-102 AS-201 AS-202 Apollo 4 Apollo 5 Apollo 6 † Crewed Apollo 1 † Apollo 7 Apollo 8 Apollo 9 Apollo 10 Apollo 11 Apollo 12 Apollo 13 † Apollo 14 Apollo 15 Apollo 16 Apollo 17 Saturn development Saturn-Apollo 1 SA-2 SA-3 SA-4 SA-5 AS-203 Apollo 4 Apollo 6 † Abort tests QTV Pad Abort Test-1 A-001 A-002 A-003 Pad Abort Test-2 A-004 Pegasus flights AS-103 AS-104 AS-105 Apollo 8 specific Earthrise Genesis reading Apollo 11 specific Command Module Columbia Lunar Module Eagle Tranquility Base Double crater Little West crater Goodwill messages Lunar sample displays Missing tapes Anniversaries 50th Anniversary commemorative coins In popular culture Apollo 12 specific Statio Cognitum Surveyor 3 Surveyor crater Bench Crater meteorite J002E3 Moon Museum Reports of Streptococcus mitis on the Moon Apollo 13 specific "Houston, we've had a problem" Apollo 14 specific Modular Equipment Transporter Fra Mauro formation Big Bertha Moon tree Apollo 15 specific Journey Lunar operations Solo operations Return to Earth Hadley–Apennine Fallen Astronaut Genesis Rock Great Scott Hadley Rille meteorite Seatbelt basalt Postal covers incident Apollo 16 specific Big Muley Apollo 17 specific The Blue Marble Taurus–Littrow Tracy's Rock Nansen-Apollo crater Shorty crater Lunar sample display Lunar basalt 70017 Troctolite 76535 Apollo Lunar Sounder Experiment Fe, Fi, Fo, Fum, and Phooey Post-Apollo capsule use Skylab 2 3 4 Apollo–Soyuz Related Lunar orbit rendezvous Stolen and missing Moon rocks Third-party evidence for Apollo Moon landings Symbol † indicates failure or partial failure v t e Lunar landing missions Active Robotic Chang'e 4 Past Crewed Apollo 11 12 14 15 16 17 Robotic Blue Ghost M1 Chandrayaan-3 Chang'e 3 5 6 Luna 9 13 16 17 20 21 23 24 IM-1 2 SLIM Surveyor 1 3 5 6 7 Failed Apollo 13 Beresheet Chandrayaan-2 Hakuto-R M1 M2 Luna 5 7 8 15 18 25 OMOTENASHI Peregrine Surveyor 2 4 Planned Artemis Artemis III (2027) IV (2028) V (2030) VI (2031) VII (2032) CLEP Chang'e 7 (2026) 8 (2028) CLPS Blue Moon Pathfinder (2025) Griffin M1 (2025) IM-3 (2026) Blue Ghost M2 (2026) M3 (2028) M4 (2029) KLEP Korean lunar lander (2032) Luna-Glob Luna 27 (2028) 28 (2030) Others Hakuto-R M3 ( ispace , 2026) Proposed CLPS Redwire Draper Firefly Masten MoonEx OrbitBeyond McCandless Others Beresheet 2 ( SpaceIL ) Nyx Moon ( The Exploration Company ) v t e Spacecraft missions to the Moon Exploration programs American Apollo Artemis CLPS Lunar Orbiter Lunar Precursor Pioneer Ranger Surveyor Chinese Chang'e Indian Chandrayaan Japanese Japanese Lunar Exploration Program South Korean Korean Lunar Exploration Program Russian Luna-Glob Soviet Crewed Luna Lunokhod Zond Active missions Orbiters ARTEMIS CAPSTONE Chandrayaan-2 Chang'e 5-T1 Danuri Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Queqiao 1 and 2 Tiandu-1 2 ICUBE-Q Landers Chang'e 4 Rovers Yutu-2 Flybys ArgoMoon Past missions Crewed landings Apollo 11 12 14 15 16 17 ( List of Apollo astronauts ) Orbiters Apollo 8 10 Artemis I Chang'e 1 2 5 Chandrayaan-1 3 Clementine Explorer 35 49 GRAIL Hiten LADEE Longjiang-2 Luna 10 11 12 14 19 22 Lunar Orbiter 1 2 3 4 5 Lunar Prospector PFS-1 PFS-2 SMART-1 SELENE (Kaguya, Okina, Ouna) Lunar Trailblazer Impactors LCROSS Luna 2 Moon Impact Probe Ranger 4 6 7 8 9 Landers Apollo Lunar Module ×6 Blue Ghost M1 Chandrayaan-3 Chang'e 3 Chang'e 5 6 Luna 9 13 16 17 20 21 23 24 SLIM Surveyor 1 3 5 6 7 Rovers Lunar Roving Vehicle Apollo 15 16 17 Lunokhod 1 2 Yutu Pragyan 2 3 LEV-1 LEV-2 ( Sora-Q ) Jinchan Yaoki MAPP Micro-Nova AstroAnt Sample return Apollo 11 12 14 15 16 17 Luna 16 20 24 Chang'e 5 6 Failed landings Beresheet Emirates Lunar Mission Hakuto-R M1 M2 IM-1 2 Luna 5 7 8 15 18 25 OMOTENASHI Surveyor 2 4 Vikram Peregrine Flybys 4M Apollo 13 Chang'e 5-T1 Geotail Galileo ICE Longjiang-1 Luna 1 3 4 6 LunaH-Map Lunar Flashlight Lunar IceCube LunIR Mariner 10 NEA Scout Nozomi Pioneer 4 Ranger 5 STEREO TESS WMAP Wind Zond 3 5 6 7 8 PAS-22 Planned missions Artemis II (2026) III (2027) IV (2028) V (2030) Lunar Gateway CLPS Blue Moon Pathfinder (2025) Griffin M1 (2025) IM-3 (2026) Blue Ghost M2 (2026) M3 (2028) IM-4 (TBD) Luna-Glob 26 (2027) 27 (2028) 28 (2030) 29 (2030s) 30 (2030s) 31 (2030s) CLEP Chang'e 7 (2026) 8 (2028) Chandrayaan 4 (2027) 5 (LUPEX) (2028) KLEP Korean lunar lander (2032) Others ispace M3 (2026) Lunar Pathfinder (2026) DESTINY + (2028) Cislunar Explorers (2020s) CU-E 3 (2020s) MoonRanger (2020s) Argonaut M1 (2031) International Lunar Research Station (2030s) Proposed missions Robotic ALINA Artemis-7 Beresheet 2 Blue Moon BOLAS Garatéa-L ISOCHRON LunaNet Lunar Crater Radio Telescope McCandless Moon Diver Crewed DSE-Alpha Boeing Lunar Lander Lockheed Martin Lunar Lander Lunar Orbital Station Cancelled / concepts Altair Baden-Württemberg 1 #dearMoon project European Lunar Explorer First Lunar Outpost International Lunar Network LEO LK Lunar-A Lunar Lander Lunar Mission One Lunar Observer Lunokhod 3 MoonLITE MoonRise OrbitBeyond Project Harvest Moon Prospector Resource Prospector SELENE-2 Ukrselena XL-1 VIPER Related Colonization of the Moon Google Lunar X Prize List of lunar probes List of missions to the Moon List of artificial objects on the Moon List of species that have landed on the Moon Lunar resources Apollo 17 Moon mice Moon landing conspiracy theories Third-party evidence for Apollo Moon landings Apollo 11 anniversaries List of crewed lunar landers Missions are ordered by launch date. Crewed missions are in italics .

v t e ← 1968 Orbital launches in 1969 1970 → Venera 5 Venera 6 Kosmos 263 Soyuz 4 Soyuz 5 7K-L1 No.13L OSO-5 OPS 7585 Kosmos 264 US-A No.5 Isis 1 Meteor-1 No.11 OPS 3890 OPS 2644 Intelsat III F-3 Kosmos 265 OPS 0757 Luna E-8 No.201 7K-L1S No.3 Mariner 6 Kosmos 266 ESSA-9 Kosmos 267 Apollo 9 OPS 4248 Kosmos 268 Kosmos 269 Kosmos 270 Kosmos 271 Kosmos 272 OV1-17 OV1-18 OV1-19 Orbiscal 2 OPS 3722 OPS 2285 Kosmos 273 Kosmos 274 Meteor-1 No.12 2M No.521 Mariner 7 Kosmos 275 2M No.522 Kosmos 276 Kosmos 277 Kosmos 278 Molniya-1 No.16 OPS 3148 Nimbus 3 SECOR 13 Kosmos 279 OPS 5310 Kosmos 280 OPS 1101 OPS 1721 Kosmos 281 Apollo 10 Kosmos 282 Intelsat III F-4 OPS 6909 OPS 6911 ERS-29 ERS-26 OV5-9 Kosmos 283 Kosmos 284 Kosmos 285 OPS 1077 OGO-6 Luna E-8-5 No.402 Kosmos 286 Explorer 41 Kosmos 287 Kosmos 288 Biosatellite 3 STV-2 7K-L1S No.5 Kosmos 289 Luna 15 Apollo 11 Kosmos 290 Molniya-1 No.18 OPS 1127 DS-P1-Yu No.23 OPS 3654 Intelsat III F-5 OPS 8285 Kosmos 291 Zond 7 OSO-6 PAC-1 ATS-5 Kosmos 292 Kosmos 293 Kosmos 294 Kosmos 295 OPS 7807 Pioneer E ERS-32 Kosmos 296 Kosmos 297 Kosmos 298 Kosmos 299 Unnamed OPS 3531 OPS 4710 Kosmos 300 Kosmos 301 OPS 7613 NRL PL-161 NRL PL-162 NRL PL-163 NRL PL-164 NRL PL-176 Timation 2 Tempsat 2 SOICAL Cone SOICAL Cylinder ESRO-1B Meteor-1 No.15 Soyuz 6 Soyuz 7 Soyuz 8 Interkosmos 1 Kosmos 302 Kosmos 303 Kosmos 304 Kosmos 305 Kosmos 306 Kosmos 307 OPS 8455 Kosmos 308 Azur Kosmos 309 Apollo 12 Kosmos 310 Skynet 1A Kosmos 311 Kosmos 312 7K-L1e No.1 Kosmos 313 OPS 6617 Kosmos 314 Kosmos 315 Kosmos 316 Kosmos 317 Interkosmos 2 Unnamed Payloads are separated by bullets ( · ), launches by pipes ( | ). Crewed flights are indicated in underline . Uncatalogued launch failures are listed in italics . Payloads deployed from other spacecraft are denoted in (brackets).

v t e NASA Policy and history History ( creation ) NACA (1915) National Aeronautics and Space Act (1958) Space Task Group (1958) Paine (1986) Rogers (1986) Ride (1987) Space Exploration Initiative (1989) Augustine (1990) U.S. National Space Policy (1996) CFUSAI (2002) CAIB (2003) Vision for Space Exploration (2004) Aldridge (2004) Augustine (2009) General Space Race Administrator and Deputy Administrator Chief Scientist Astronaut Corps Ranks and positions Chief Budget NASA research spinoff technologies NASA+ NASA TV NASA Social Launch Services Program Mercury Control Center Manned Space Flight Network Kennedy Space Center Vehicle Assembly Building Launch Complex 39 Launch Complex 48 Launch Control Center Operations and Checkout Building Johnson Space Center Mission Control Lunar Sample Laboratory Science Mission Directorate Human spaceflight programs Past X-15 ( suborbital ) Mercury Gemini Apollo Skylab Apollo–Soyuz (with the Soviet space program ) Space Shuttle Shuttle– Mir (with Roscosmos ) Constellation Current International Space Station Commercial Orbital Transportation Services Commercial Crew Orion Artemis Lunar Gateway Robotic programs Past Hitchhiker Mariner Mariner Mark II MESUR Mars Surveyor '98 New Millennium Lunar Orbiter Pioneer Planetary Observer Ranger Surveyor Viking Project Prometheus Mars Exploration Mars Exploration Rover Current Living With a Star Lunar Precursor Robotic Program Earth Observing System Great Observatories program Explorers Voyager Discovery New Frontiers Solar Terrestrial Probes Commercial Lunar Payload Services SIMPLEx Individual featured missions (human and robotic) Past Apollo 11 COBE Mercury 3 Mercury-Atlas 6 Magellan Pioneer 10 Pioneer 11 Galileo timeline GALEX GRAIL WMAP Space Shuttle Spitzer Space Telescope Sojourner rover Spirit rover LADEE MESSENGER Aquarius Cassini Dawn Kepler space telescope Opportunity rover timeline observed RHESSI InSight Ingenuity helicopter flights Currently operating Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter 2001 Mars Odyssey New Horizons International Space Station Hubble Space Telescope Chandra X-ray Observatory Swift THEMIS Mars Exploration Rover Curiosity rover timeline GOES 14 Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter GOES 15 SDO Juno Mars Science Laboratory timeline NuSTAR Voyager 1 Voyager 2 MAVEN MMS OSIRIS-APEX TESS Mars 2020 Perseverance rover timeline James Webb Space Telescope timeline PACE Europa Clipper Future NISAR Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope DAVINCI VERITAS Communications and navigation Near Earth Network Space Network Deep Space Network ( Goldstone Madrid Canberra Space Flight Operations Facility ) Deep Space Atomic Clock NASA lists Astronauts by name by year Gemini astronauts Apollo astronauts Space Shuttle crews NASA aircraft NASA missions uncrewed missions Apollo missions Space Shuttle missions United States rockets NASA cancellations NASA cameras on spacecraft NASA images and artwork Earthrise The Blue Marble Family Portrait Pale Blue Dot Pillars of Creation Mystic Mountain Solar System Family Portrait The Day the Earth Smiled Fallen Astronaut Deep fields Lunar plaques Pioneer plaques Voyager Golden Record Apollo 11 goodwill messages NASA insignia Gemini and Apollo medallions Mission patches Astronomy Picture of the Day Hubble Space Telescope anniversary images Related " We choose to go to the Moon " Apollo 8 Genesis reading Apollo 15 postal covers incident Apollo Lunar Module Space Mirror Memorial The Astronaut Monument Lunar sample displays Moon rocks stolen or missing U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame Space program on U.S. stamps Apollo 17 Moon mice Moon tree Other primates in space NASA International Space Apps Challenge Astronauts Day National Astronaut Day Nikon NASA F4 Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other SNAC Yale LUX Portals : Texas Solar System Outer space Spaceflight Astronomy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Apollo_11&oldid=1305860926 " Categories : LQ12 quadrangle Apollo 11 1969 on the Moon Buzz Aldrin Apollo program missions Neil Armstrong Michael Collins (astronaut) Crewed missions to the Moon Soft landings on the Moon Spacecraft launched by Saturn rockets Successful space missions Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Featured articles Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use American English from July 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2025 Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with hAudio microformats Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2018 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikisource templates with missing id Spoken articles Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 14:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Apollo 11 103 languages Add topic

