Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Commercial book scanners 2 Large-scale projects Toggle Large-scale projects subsection 2.1 Collaborative projects 3 Destructive scanning methods Toggle Destructive scanning methods subsection 3.1 Unbinding 3.2 Cutting 3.3 Scanning 4 Robotic book scanners 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Book scanning 12 languages Deutsch Español Հայերեն Hrvatski עברית 日本語 Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of converting physical media into digital media This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Book scanning" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Internet Archive Scribe book scanner in 2011 Internet Archive book scanner Book scanning or book digitization (also: magazine scanning or magazine digitization ) is the process of converting physical books and magazines into digital media such as images , electronic text , or electronic books (e-books) by using an image scanner .

[ 1 ] Large scale book scanning projects have made many books available online.

[ 2 ] Digital books can be easily distributed, reproduced, and read on-screen . Common file formats are DjVu , Portable Document Format (PDF), and Tag Image File Format (TIFF). To convert the raw images optical character recognition (OCR) [ 1 ] is used to turn book pages into a digital text format like ASCII or other similar format, which reduces the file size and allows the text to be reformatted, searched, or processed by other applications.

[ 1 ] Image scanners may be manual or automated. In an ordinary commercial image scanner, the book is placed on a flat glass plate (or platen), and a light and optical array moves across the book underneath the glass. In manual book scanners, the glass plate extends to the edge of the scanner, making it easier to line up the book's spine.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] A problem with scanning bound books is that when a book that is not very thin is laid flat, the part of the page close to the spine (the gutter) is significantly curved, distorting the text in that part of the scan. One solution is to separate the book into separate pages by cutting or unbinding. A non-destructive method is to hold the book in a V-shaped holder and photograph it, rather than lay it flat and scan it. The curvature in the gutter is much less pronounced this way.

[ 3 ] Pages may be turned by hand or by automated paper transport devices. Transparent plastic or glass sheets are usually pressed against the page to flatten it.

After scanning, software adjusts the document images by lining it up, cropping it, picture-editing it, and converting it to text and final e-book form. Human proofreaders usually check the output for errors.

Scanning resolution for book digitization varies depending on the purpose and nature of the material. While 300 dpi ( 118 dots/centimeter ) is generally adequate for text conversion, archival institutions recommend higher resolutions for preservation and rare materials. The National Archives of Australia suggests 400 ppi for bound books and 600 ppi for rare or significant documents, [ 4 ] while the Federal Agencies Digitization Guidelines Initiative (FADGI) recommends a minimum of 400 ppi for archival materials.

[ 5 ] These higher resolutions ensure the capture of fine details and support long-term preservation efforts, while a tiered approach balances quality with practical constraints such as storage capacity and resource limitations. This strategy allows institutions to optimize digitization efforts, applying higher resolutions selectively to rare or significant materials while using standard resolutions for more common documents.

[ 6 ] High-end scanners capable of thousands of pages per hour can cost thousands of dollars, but do-it-yourself (DIY), manual book scanners capable of 1,200 pages per hour have been built for US$300.

[ 7 ] Commercial book scanners [ edit ] czur of a V-shaped book scanner Sketch of a typical manual book scanner Commercial book scanners are not like normal scanners ; these book scanners are usually a high quality digital camera with light sources on either side of the camera mounted on some sort of frame to provide easy access for a person or machine to flip through the pages of the book. Some models involve V-shaped book cradles, which provide support for book spines and also center book position automatically.

The advantage of this type of scanner is that it is very fast, compared to the productivity of overhead scanners.

Large-scale projects [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Projects like Project Gutenberg (est. 1971), [ 8 ] Million Book Project (est. circa 2001), Google Books (est. 2004), and the Open Content Alliance (est. 2005) scan books on a large scale.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] One of the main challenges to this is the sheer volume of books that must be scanned. In 2010 the total number of works appearing as books in human history was estimated to be around 130 million.

[ 11 ] All of these must be scanned and then made searchable online for the public to use as a universal library . Currently, there are three main ways that large organizations are relying on: outsourcing, scanning in-house using commercial book scanners, and scanning in-house using robotic scanning solutions.

As for outsourcing, books are often shipped to be scanned by low-cost sources to India or China . Alternatively, due to convenience, safety and technology improvement, many organizations choose to scan in-house by using either overhead scanners which are time-consuming, or digital camera-based scanning machines which are substantially faster and is a method employed by Internet Archive as well as Google.

[ 10 ] [ 12 ] Traditional methods have included cutting off the book's spine and scanning the pages in a scanner with automatic page-feeding capability, with subsequent rebinding of the loose pages.

Once the page is scanned, the data is either entered manually or via OCR, another major cost of the book scanning projects.

[ according to whom?

] Due to copyright issues, most scanned books are those that are out of copyright; however, Google Books is known to scan books still protected under copyright unless the publisher specifically prohibits this.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Collaborative projects [ edit ] There are many collaborative digitization projects throughout the United States.  Two of the earliest projects were the Collaborative Digitization Project in Colorado and NC ECHO – North Carolina Exploring Cultural Heritage Online, [ 14 ] based at the State Library of North Carolina .

These projects establish and publish best practices for digitization and work with regional partners to digitize cultural heritage materials. Additional criteria for best practices have more recently been established in the UK, Australia and the European Union.

[ 15 ] Wisconsin Heritage Online [ 16 ] is a collaborative digitization project modeled after the Colorado Collaborative Digitization Project. Wisconsin uses a wiki [ 17 ] to build and distribute collaborative documentation. Georgia's collaborative digitization program, the Digital Library of Georgia, [ 18 ] presents a seamless virtual library on the state's history and life, including more than a hundred digital collections from 60 institutions and 100 agencies of government. The Digital Library of Georgia is a GALILEO [ 19 ] initiative based at the University of Georgia Libraries.

In the twentieth century, the Hill Museum and Manuscript Library photographed books in Ethiopia that were subsequently destroyed amidst political violence in 1975. The library has since worked to photograph manuscripts in Middle Eastern countries.

[ 20 ] In South Asia, the Nanakshahi trust is digitizing manuscripts of Gurmukhī script .

In Australia, there have been many collaborative projects between the National Library of Australia and universities to improve the repository infrastructure that digitized information would be stored in.

[ 21 ] Some of these projects include, the ARROW (Australian Research Repositories Online to the World) project and the APSR (Australian Partnership for Sustainable Repository) project.

Destructive scanning methods [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Book scanning" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) For book scanning on a low budget, the least expensive way to scan a book or magazine is to cut off the binding. This converts the book or magazine into a sheaf of separate sheets which can be loaded into a standard automatic document feeder (ADF) and scanned using inexpensive and common scanning technology. The method is not suitable for rare or valuable books. There are two technical difficulties with this process, first with the cutting and second with the scanning.

Unbinding [ edit ] More precise and less destructive than cutting pages is to unbind by hand using suitable tools. This technique has been successfully employed for tens of thousands of pages of archival original paper scanned for the Riazanov Library digital archive project from newspapers and magazines and pamphlets, varying from 50 to 100 years old and more, and often composed of fragile, brittle paper. Although the monetary value for some collectors (and for most sellers of this sort of material) is destroyed by unbinding, it in many cases actually greatly assists preservation of the pages, making them more accessible to researchers [ 1 ] and less likely to be damaged when subsequently examined. A disadvantage is that unbound stacks of pages are "fluffed up", and therefore more exposed to oxygen in the air, which may in some cases speed deterioration. This can be addressed by putting weights on the pages after they are unbound, and storage in appropriate containers.

[ 1 ] Hand unbinding will preserve text that runs into the gutters of bindings, and most critically allows more easy and complete high quality scans to be made of two-page-wide material, such as center cartoons, graphic art, and photos in magazines. The digital archive of The Liberator 1918-1924 on Marxists Internet Archive demonstrates the quality of two-page-wide graphic art scans made possible by careful hand unbinding, then scanning.

Unbinding techniques vary with the binding technology, from simply removing a few staples, to unbending and removing nails, to meticulously grinding down layers of glue on the spine of a book to precisely the right point, followed by laborious removal of the string used to hold the book together.

With some newspapers (such as Labor Action 1950-1952) there are columns on the center of facing pages that run across the pages. Chopping off part of the spine of a bound volume of such papers will lose part of this text. Even the Greenwood Reprint of this publication failed to preserve the text content of those center columns, cutting off significant amounts of text there. Only when bound volumes of the original newspaper were meticulously unbound, and the opened pairs of center pages were scanned as a single page on a flat bed scanner was the center column content made digitally available. Alternatively, one can present the two facing center pages as three scans: one of each individual page, and one of a page sized area situated over the center of the two pages.

Cutting [ edit ] One way of cutting a stack of 500 to 1,000 pages in one pass is to use a guillotine paper cutter , a large steel table with a paper vise that screws down onto the stack and firmly secures it before cutting.

[ 2 ] A large sharpened steel blade which moves straight down cuts the entire length of each sheet in one operation. A lever on the blade permits several hundred pounds of force to be applied to the blade for a quick one-pass cut.

A clean cut through a thick stack of paper cannot be made with a traditional inexpensive sickle-shaped hinged paper cutter . These cutters are only intended for a few sheets, with up to ten sheets being the practical cutting limit. A large stack of paper applies torsional forces on the hinge, pulling the blade away from the cutting edge on the table. The cut becomes more inaccurate as the cut moves away from the hinge, and the force required to hold the blade against the cutting edge increases as the cut moves away from the hinge.

The guillotine cutting process dulls the blade over time, requiring that it be resharpened.

Coated paper such as slick magazine paper dulls the blade more quickly than plain book paper, due to the kaolinite clay coating. Additionally, removing the binding of an entire hardcover book causes excessive wear due to cutting through the cover's stiff backing material. Instead the outer cover can be removed and only interior pages need be cut.

An alternate method of unbinding books is to use a table saw.  While this method is potentially dangerous and does not leave as smooth an edge as the guillotine paper cutter method, it is more readily available to the average person.  The ideal method is to clamp the book between two thick boards using heavy machine screws to provide the clamping force.  The entire wood and book package is fed through the table saw using the rip fence as a guide.  A sharp fine carbide tooth blade is ideal for generating an acceptable cut.  The quality of the cut depends on the blade, feed rate, type of paper, paper coating, and binding material.

Scanning [ edit ] Turning the pages in between taking scans Once the paper is liberated from the spine, it can be scanned one sheet at a time using a flatbed scanner or automatic document feeder (ADF).

Pages with a decorative riffled edging or curving in an arc due to a non-flat binding can be difficult to scan using an ADF, as they are designed to scan pages of uniform shape and size, and variably sized or shaped pages can lead to improper scanning. The riffled edges or curved edge can be guillotined off to render the outer edges flat and smooth before the binding is cut.

The coated paper of magazines and bound textbooks can make them difficult for the rollers in an ADF to pick up and guide along the paper path. An ADF which uses a series of rollers and channels to flip sheets over may jam or misfeed when fed coated paper. Generally there are fewer problems by using as straight a paper path as is possible, with few bends and curves. The clay can also rub off the paper over time and coat sticky pickup rollers, causing them to loosely grip the paper. The ADF rollers may need periodic cleaning to prevent this slipping.

Magazines can pose a bulk-scanning challenge due to small nonuniform sheets of paper in the stack, such as magazine subscription cards and fold out pages. These need to be removed before the bulk scan begins, and are either scanned separately if they include worthwhile content, or are simply left out of the scan process.

Robotic book scanners [ edit ] Video of the robotic book scanner Robotic V-shaped Book Scanner A robotic or automated book scanner is a device that digitizes printed books by using robotic systems to turn pages and capture images of each page without the need for human hands to touch the book. The scanner consists of a mechanism to automatically turn pages, one or more cameras to photograph each page, and software to compile these images into a digital file. These scanners are used to digitize large quantities of books quickly. Some models allow for manual operation if a book is too delicate or complex for the robot to handle alone. The process is designed to be gentle on books, often using special cradles and glass plates to avoid damage during scanning.

[ 22 ] Most high-end commercial robotic scanners use air and suction technology to turn and separate pages. These scanners utilize a vacuum or air suction to gently lift a page from the stack, while a puff of air is used to turn the page over, allowing the device to scan both sides efficiently.

[ 23 ] Some use newer approaches such as bionic fingers for turning pages. Some scanners take advantage of ultrasonic or photoelectric sensors to detect dual pages and prevent skipping of pages.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] With reports of machines being able to scan up to 2,900 pages per hour, [ 24 ] robotic book scanners are specifically designed for large-scale digitization projects.

[ 1 ] Google's patent 7508978 shows an infrared camera technology which allows detection and automatic adjustment of the three-dimensional shape of the page.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Robotic book scanners that use air and suction technology rely on specialized systems to turn and separate pages without causing damage to fragile or rare books. These scanners utilize a vacuum or air suction to gently lift a page from the stack, while a puff of air is used to turn the page over, allowing the device to scan both sides efficiently See also [ edit ] Digital library Institutional repository Optical character recognition Planetary scanner Europeana References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h "6 Factors to Consider while Digitizing Books at Scale" .

hurixdigital . July 22, 2019. Archived from the original on January 17, 2022 . Retrieved October 17, 2022 .

^ a b c d Harman, Mike (March 23, 2021).

"An 8-Step Guide to Digitization for Book Publishers" .

Kitaboo . Archived from the original on January 22, 2022 . Retrieved October 17, 2022 .

^ JThomas (April 2012).

"A Scanner for books with text VERY close to the gutter" .

DIY Book Scanner .

^ "Preservation Digitisation Standards" (PDF) . NAA . Retrieved 28 February 2025 .

^ "Technical Guidelines for Digitizing Cultural Heritage Materials" (PDF) . FADGI . Retrieved 28 February 2025 .

^ "Digitising the Queensland Ambulance Service Museum Archive: Preserving History for Future Generations" . Avantix. August 2024 . Retrieved 28 February 2025 .

^ "DIY High-Speed Book Scanner from Trash and Cheap Cameras" . instructables.com . Retrieved 19 January 2014 .

^ "Libraries & Archivists Are Digitizing 480,000 Books Published in 20th Century That Are Secretly in the Public Domain" .

Open Culture . September 27, 2019. Archived from the original on October 2, 2019 . Retrieved October 19, 2022 .

^ a b Leetaru, Kalev (2008).

"Mass book digitization: The deeper story of Google Books and the Open Content Alliance" .

First Monday .

doi : 10.5210/fm.v13i10.2101 . Retrieved October 19, 2022 .

^ a b c Kahle, Brewster (March 13, 2017).

"Transforming Our Libraries from Analog to Digital: A 2020 Vision" .

Educause . Archived from the original on March 15, 2017 . Retrieved October 19, 2022 .

^ Taycher, Leonid (2010-08-05).

"As of Aug 5, 2010, google estimates that there are 129,864,880 different books in the world" . Googleblog.blogspot.co.at . Retrieved 2014-08-08 .

^ a b Howard, Jennifer (August 10, 2017).

"What Happened to Google's Effort to Scan Millions of University Library Books?" .

EdSurge . Archived from the original on January 5, 2022 . Retrieved October 17, 2022 .

^ Somers, James (April 20, 2017).

"Torching the Modern-Day Library of Alexandria" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on April 20, 2017 . Retrieved October 19, 2022 .

^ "North Carolina ECHO : Exploring Cultural Heritage Online" .

ncecho.org .

^ Awre, Chris (April 30, 2005).

"Digital Libraries: Principles and Practice in a Global Environment" .

Ariadne (43). Archived from the original on April 5, 2022 . Retrieved October 19, 2022 .

^ "Recollection Wisconsin" . 29 November 2006.

^ "Wisconsin Heritage Online [licensed for non-commercial use only] / FrontPage" .

pbworks.com .

^ "Welcome to the Digital Library of Georgia" .

usg.edu .

^ "GALILEO" .

usg.edu .

^ "Codices decoded". The Economist. 18 December 2010. p. 151.

^ Libraries in the twenty-first century: Charting new directions in information services. Edited by Stuart Ferguson, 2007, pg 84 ^ Sinmaz, E. K., Kocaseçer, M., & Ayyildiz, M. (2022). The Effect of Book Preconditioning on Page-Turning Success Rate during Automated Book Digitization.

Instruments & Experimental Techniques , 65 (5), 826–833. https://doi.org/10.1134/S0020441222050281 ^ mchamberlin (2025-03-26).

"McFarlin's new ScanRobot protects rare books while increasing access for students, scholars" .

The University of Tulsa . Retrieved 2025-05-29 .

^ Rapp, David.

"Product Watch: Library Scanners" .

Library Journal . Retrieved 11 May 2014 .

^ US 7508978 , Lefevere, Francois-Marie & Saric, Marin, "Detection of grooves in scanned images", issued March 24, 2009,  assigned to Google ^ The Secret Of Google's Book Scanning Machine Revealed , by Maureen Clements, April 30, 2009.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Book scanners .

Do It Yourself book scanner device forum Google Open Source Linear Book Scanner Stanford University video shows some book scanning University of Tokyo high speed scanner v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐r29ct
Cached time: 20250816020959
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.434 seconds
Real time usage: 0.526 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2496/1000000
Revision size: 25084/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 104060/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11004/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 100565/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.263/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6232268/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  431.364      1 -total
 42.33%  182.617      1 Template:Reflist
 30.85%  133.082     19 Template:Cite_web
 16.34%   70.489      1 Template:Books
 16.07%   69.317      1 Template:Navbox
 13.82%   59.632      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 13.45%   58.007      1 Template:Short_description
  9.93%   42.821      4 Template:Ambox
  9.53%   41.127      2 Template:More_citations_needed
  6.84%   29.496      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7354493:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816020959 and revision id 1295935805. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Book_scanning&oldid=1295935805 " Categories : Book terminology Digital libraries Publishing Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from January 2016 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2016 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 19:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Book scanning 12 languages Add topic

