Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Scandal and exile 3 Return and decline 4 Bibliography 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Bernardim Ribeiro 13 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego עברית Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Portuguese poet and writer Bernardim Ribeiro Bernardim Ribeiro , marble sculpture by António Alberto Nunes.

Born 1482 Torrão , Portugal Died October 1552 (1552-10-00) (aged 69–70) Lisbon , Portugal Nationality Portuguese Occupation(s) Poet and writer Bernardim Ribeiro (1482 – October 1552) was a Renaissance Portuguese poet and writer.

Early life [ edit ] Ribeiro was a native of Torrão in the Alentejo . His father, Damião Ribeiro, was implicated in a conspiracy against King John II in 1484, and had to flee to Castile , while young Bernardim and his mother took refuge with their relatives António and Inês Zagalo at Quinta dos Lobos, near Sintra .

[ 1 ] When Manuel I came to the Portuguese throne in 1495, he rehabilitated the families persecuted by his predecessor, and Ribeiro was able to leave his retreat and return to Torrão. Meanwhile, Dona Inês had married a rich landowner of Estremoz , and in 1503 she was summoned to court and appointed one of the attendants to the Infanta Beatriz . Ribeiro accompanied her, and through her influence the king took him under his protection and sent him to the University of Lisbon , where he studied from 1506 to 1512. When he obtained his degree in law, the king showed him further favour by appointing him to the post of Escrivão da Câmara , or secretary, and later by bestowing on him the habit of the Military Order of Saint James of the Sword .

[ 1 ] Scandal and exile [ edit ] Ribeiro's poetic career began with his coming to court, and his early verses are to be found in the Cancioneiro Geral of Garcia de Resende . He took part in the historic Serões do Paço , or palace evening entertainments, which largely consisted of poetical improvisations. There he met, and earned the friendship of the poets Sá de Miranda and Cristóvão Falcão , who became his literary comrades and the confidantes of his romance, in which hope deferred and bitter disappointment ended in tragedy.

[ 1 ] Ribeiro had early conceived a violent passion for his cousin, Dona Joana Zagalo, the daughter of his protector, Dona Inês. However, her family opposed her marriage to a singer and dreamer with small means and prospects, and finally compelled her to wed a rich man, one Pero Gato. When the latter died shortly afterwards, Joanna retired to a house in the country, where it was rumoured that Ribeiro was a visitor, and in 1521 she went into seclusion in the convent of St Clare at Estremoz, where she died some years later. It was alleged that Ribeiro's conduct had caused a scandal which led the king to deprive him of his office and exile him.

[ 1 ] Ribeiro poured out his heart in five eclogues , the earliest in Portuguese, written in the popular octosyllabic verse; and now, hopeless of the future and broken in spirit, he decided to go to Italy , for a poet the land of promise. He started early in 1522, travelling widely in the peninsula, and during his stay he wrote his moving knightly and pastoral romance Livro das saudades , mostly known as Menina e moça (taken from its incipit ), in which he related the story of his unfortunate passion, personifying himself under the anagram of "Bimnarder," and Dona Inês under that of "Aonia." [ 1 ] The title can be translated as Maiden and Modest , and is regarded as one of the finest examples of the genre of pastoral romance in Renaissance literature .

[ citation needed ] Return and decline [ edit ] When he returned home in 1524, the new king, John III , restored him to his former post, and it is said that he paid a last visit to his love at St Clare's convent and found her in a fit of madness. From that time his mental powers declined. About 1534 he suffered a long illness, and he continued to decline until his death. He was unable to fulfil the duties of his office, and in 1549 the king bestowed upon him a pension for his support. He did not live long to enjoy it, as in 1552 he died at All Saints Hospital in Lisbon .

[ 1 ] The Menina e Moça was not printed until after Ribeiro's death, and then first in Ferrara in 1554. On its appearance the book made such a sensation that its reading was forbidden, because it disclosed a family tragedy which the allegory could not hide. It is divided into two parts, the first of which is certainly the work of Ribeiro. However, opinion has been divided on the second. One edition of the first part was made by Dr José Pessanha (Oporto, 1891), and a more current edition was made in 2012 (see bibliography). Ribeiro's verses, including his five eclogues, were reprinted in a limited edition by Dr Xavier da Cunha (Lisbon, 1886).

[ 1 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Ribeiro, Bernardim (2012).

Maiden and Modest: A Renaissance Pastoral Romance . Trans. by Gregory Rabassa (1st ed.). Dartmouth, Massachusetts: Tagus Press at UMass Dartmouth.

ISBN 978-1-933227-37-5 .

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Prestage 1911 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Prestage, Edgar (1911). " Ribeiro, Bernardim ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 23 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 284.

External links [ edit ] Works by Bernardim Ribeiro at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Bernardim Ribeiro at the Internet Archive Works by Bernardim Ribeiro at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Vatican Israel Catalonia Artists MusicBrainz People DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bernardim_Ribeiro&oldid=1232502019 " Categories : 1482 births 1552 deaths Portuguese male poets Portuguese Renaissance writers 16th-century Portuguese poets 15th-century Portuguese writers People from Setúbal District Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2015 Articles with hCards Articles containing Portuguese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica articles with no significant updates This page was last edited on 4 July 2024, at 02:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bernardim Ribeiro 13 languages Add topic

