Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Beliefs Toggle Beliefs subsection 1.1 Modern Christian groups 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Early Christianity 2.2 Following the Reformation 3 Points of dissent Toggle Points of dissent subsection 3.1 Scriptural support 3.2 Questions about co-equal deity of Jesus 3.2.1 Matthew 26:39 3.2.2 John 1:1 3.2.3 John 10:30 3.2.4 John 10:33 3.2.5 John 20:28–29 3.2.6 2 Corinthians 13:14 3.2.7 Philippians 2:5–6 3.2.8 Hebrews 9:14 3.3 Terminology 3.4 Holy Spirit 3.4.1 Unitarian 3.4.2 Binitarianism 3.4.3 Modalist groups 3.4.4 Latter-day Saint movement 3.4.5 Other groups 4 Relationship with mainstream Christianity Toggle Relationship with mainstream Christianity subsection 4.1 Ecumenism 4.2 Heresy and apostasy 4.3 Specific groups' relationships with Nicene Christianity 4.3.1 Pentecostalism 4.3.2 Mormonism 5 Inter-religious dialogue beyond Christianity 6 Arguments for the pagan origins of the Trinity Toggle Arguments for the pagan origins of the Trinity subsection 6.1 Hellenic influences 7 Christian groups with nontrinitarian positions Toggle Christian groups with nontrinitarian positions subsection 7.1 Early Christian 7.2 Unitarian and Universalism 7.3 Latter Day Saints 7.4 Bible Students and splinter groups 7.5 Sacred Name movement 7.6 Oneness Protestant groups 7.7 World Wide Church of God splinter groups 7.8 New religious movements 7.9 Other Nontrinitarians 7.10 Country-specific 8 People 9 See also 10 Citations 11 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Nontrinitarianism 44 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Anti-trinitarian ) Rejection of the Christian doctrine of the Trinity This article is about a doctrinal position within Christian theology . For the doctrine of God's unity in religions generally, see Monotheism .

Part of a series on Christianity Jesus Christ Nativity Baptism Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Bible Foundations Old Testament New Testament Gospel Canon Church Creed New Covenant Theology God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Apologetics Baptism Christology History of theology Mission Salvation Universalism History Tradition Apostles Peter Paul Mary Early Christianity Church Fathers Constantine Councils Augustine Ignatius East–West Schism Crusades Aquinas Reformation Luther Denominations (full list) Nicene Catholic Latin Eastern Old Catholic Palmarian Catholic Independent Catholic Sedevacantism Eastern Orthodox Oriental Orthodox Church of the East Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Free Evangelical Lutheran Methodist Moravian [Hussite] Pentecostal Plymouth Brethren Quaker Reformed United Protestant Waldensian Non-denominational Christianity Restorationist Christadelphians Iglesia ni Cristo Irvingians Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Members Church of God International The New Church (Swedenborgian) Unitarians and Universalists Related topics Civilization Criticism Culture Ecumenism Glossary Index Liturgy Other religions Prayer Sermon Symbolism Worship Glossary Index Outline Christianity portal v t e Part of a series on the History of Christian theology Background Christian theology Diversity in early Christian theology Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Early Christianity Proto-orthodox Christianity Timeline History of Christianity Template:History of Christianity Ecclesiastical polity Trinitarianism Nontrinitarianism Christology Paterology Pneumatology Mariology Biblical canon Deuterocanon Hermeneutics Theological hermeneutics African American Asian American Philosophical theology Christian philosophy Christian apologetics Persecution and tolerance Historical theology Ecumenical Creeds Apostles' Nicene Chalcedonian Athanasian Patristics and Councils Great church ante-Nicene period Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Cappadocian Fathers Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Augustine Nicaea Ephesus Chalcedon Post-Nicene development Heresy Monophysitism Monothelitism Byzantine Iconoclasm Gregory I Alcuin Photios East–West Schism Scholasticism Aquinas Anselm Palamas Reformation Martin Luther Theology 95 Theses John Calvin Radical Evangelicalism theology Five solae Book of Concord Arminianism English Counter- Trent Jansenism From the Reformation to the World Wars Natural Onto- Practical Pietism John Wesley Great Awakenings Holiness movement Restoration Movement Dispensationalism Covenant theology Existentialism Dogmatics Fundamental/foundational Liberal Catholic Anglo-Catholic Critical realism Political Since the World Wars Vatican II of religions Situational ethics Nouvelle théologie ( Ressourcement ) Death of God Postliberal  •  Narrative Continental philosophy Radical orthodoxy Neo-orthodoxy Reconciliation Analytic in Thomism Theopoetics Ecumenism Digital Systematic Biblical Constructive Eco- Environmental Public Contextualisation and Inculturation Indigenous church mission theory Sino-Christian Feminism in Feminist theology Asian Womanist New Queer Liberation Black Dalit Latin American Minjung Palestinian Postcolonial Fourth Great Awakening Christian Zionism Paleo-orthodoxy Dominion theology extraterrestrials Moderate Christianity Conservative Christianity Emerging church Progressive Christianity Confessing Movement Biotheology Theophysics Christianity portal v t e Nontrinitarianism is a form of Christianity that rejects the orthodox Christian theology of the Trinity —the belief that God is three distinct hypostases or persons who are coeternal, coequal, and indivisibly united in one being, or essence (from the Ancient Greek ousia ). Certain religious groups that emerged during the Protestant Reformation have historically been known as antitrinitarian .

[ citation needed ] According to churches that consider the decisions of ecumenical councils final, trinitarianism was definitively declared to be Christian doctrine at the 4th-century ecumenical councils, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] that of the First Council of Nicaea (325), which declared the full divinity of the Son , [ 4 ] and the First Council of Constantinople (381), which declared the divinity of the Holy Spirit .

[ 5 ] In terms of number of adherents, nontrinitarian denominations comprise a small minority of modern Christians. After the denominations in the Oneness Pentecostal movement, the largest nontrinitarian Christian denominations are the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , Jehovah's Witnesses , La Luz del Mundo , and Iglesia ni Cristo . There are a number of other smaller groups, including Christadelphians , Church of the Blessed Hope , Christian Scientists , Dawn Bible Students , Living Church of God , Assemblies of Yahweh , Members Church of God International , Unitarian Christians , Unitarian Universalist Christians , The Way International , the Philadelphia Church of God , The Church of God International , the United Church of God , Church of God General Conference , Restored Church of God , Christian Disciples Church , and Church of God of the Faith of Abraham.

[ 6 ] Nontrinitarian views differ widely on the nature of God , Jesus , and the Holy Spirit . Various nontrinitarian philosophies, such as adoptionism and monarchianism , existed prior to the codification of the Trinity doctrine in AD 325, 381, and 431, at the Councils of Nicaea , Constantinople , and Ephesus .

[ 7 ] Nontrinitarianism was later renewed by Cathars in the 11th through 13th centuries, in the Unitarian movement during the Protestant Reformation , in the Age of Enlightenment of the 18th century, and in some groups arising during the Second Great Awakening of the 19th century.

[ citation needed ] The doctrine of the Trinity, as held in mainstream Christianity, is not present in the other major monotheistic Abrahamic religions . Also mainstream trinitarian Christians dispute labeling nontrinitarian groups as members within Christianity.

Beliefs [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( November 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Christian apologists and other Church Fathers of the 2nd and 3rd centuries, having adopted and formulated the Logos Christology , considered the Son of God as the instrument used by the supreme God, the Father, to bring the creation into existence.

Justin Martyr , Theophilus of Antioch , Hippolytus of Rome and Tertullian in particular state that the internal Logos of God (Gr.

Logos endiathetos , Lat.

ratio )—his impersonal divine reason—was begotten as Logos uttered (Gr.

Logos prophorikos , Lat.

sermo, verbum ), the Word personified, becoming an actual person to be used for the purpose of creation.

[ 8 ] The Encyclopædia Britannica (11th edition) states: "to some Christians the doctrine of the Trinity appeared inconsistent with the unity of God. ... they therefore denied it, and accepted Jesus Christ, not as incarnate God, but as God's highest creature by whom all else was created. ... [this] view in the early Church long contended with the orthodox doctrine." [ 9 ] Although the Trinitarian view became the orthodox doctrine in mainstream Christianity, variations of the nontrinitarian view are still held by a relatively small number of Christian groups and denominations.

Various views exist regarding the relationships between the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit .

Those who believe that Jesus is not Almighty God, nor absolutely equal to God, and not the co-eternal or co-equal with Father in everything, but was either God's subordinate Son and Servant, the highest Angel and Son of God that eventually became a perfect Man, God's true firstborn before ages, a perfect messenger sent from God, the greatest prophet of Israel, and the Jewish Messiah, or the perfect created human: Adoptionism (2nd century AD) holds that Jesus became divine at his baptism (sometimes associated with the Gospel of Mark ) or at his resurrection (sometimes associated with Saint Paul and Shepherd of Hermas ); Arianism – Arius (AD c.

250 or 256–336) believed that the pre-existent Son of God was directly created by the Father, before all ages, and that he was subordinate to God the Father . Arius' position was that the Son was brought forth as the very first of God's creations, and that the Father later created all things through the Son. Arius taught that in the creation of the universe, the Father was the ultimate creator, supplying all the materials and directing the design, while the Son worked the materials, making all things at the bidding and in the service of God, by which "through [Christ] all things came into existence". Arianism became the dominant view in some regions in the time of the Roman Empire , notably the Visigoths until 589.

[ 10 ] The Third Council of Sirmium in 357 was the high point of Arianism. The Seventh Arian Confession (Second Sirmium Confession) held that both homoousios (of one substance) and homoiousios (of similar substance) were unbiblical and that the Father is greater than the Son in all things, and that the Father alone is infinite and eternal, and that the Logos is God's true firstborn and subservient Son who was made perfect flesh for our sakes and for the glory of the Father (this confession was later known as the Blasphemy of Sirmium): "But since many persons are disturbed by questions concerning what is called in Latin substantia , but in Greek ousia , that is, to make it understood more exactly, as to 'coessential,' or what is called, 'like-in-essence,' there ought to be no mention of any of these at all, nor exposition of them in the Church, for this reason and for this consideration, that in divine Scripture nothing is written about them, and that they are above men's knowledge and above men's understanding"; [ 11 ] Psilanthropism – Ebionites (1st to 4th centuries AD) observed Jewish law , denied the literal virgin birth and regarded Jesus as the Jewish Messiah and the greatest prophet of God only; [ 12 ] Socinianism – Photinus taught that Jesus was the sinless Messiah and redeemer, and the only perfect human son of God, but that he had no pre-human existence. They interpret verses such as John 1:1 to refer to God's "plan" existing in God's mind before Christ's birth, and that it was God's plan that "became flesh", as the perfect man Jesus; Unitarianism views Jesus as the son of God, subordinate and distinct from his Father; [ 13 ] Many Gnostic traditions held that the Christ is a heavenly Aeon but not one with the Father.

Those who believe that the Father, the resurrected Son and the Holy Spirit are different aspects of one God, as perceived by the believer, rather than three distinct persons: Modalism – Sabellius (fl. c.

215) stated that God took numerous forms in both the Hebrew and the Christian Greek Scriptures , and that God has manifested himself in three primary modes regarding the salvation of mankind . He contended that "Father, Son, and Spirit" were different roles played by the same divine person in various circumstances in history; [ 14 ] thus God is Father in creation (God created a Son through the virgin birth), Son in redemption (God manifested himself as Jesus for the purpose of his death upon the cross), and Holy Spirit in regeneration (God's Spirit within the Son and within the souls of Christian believers). In this view, God is not three distinct persons, but rather one person manifesting himself in multiple ways.

[ 14 ] Trinitarians condemn this view as a heresy. The chief critic of Sabellianism was Tertullian , who labeled the movement " Patripassianism ", from the Latin words pater for "father", and passus from the verb "to suffer", because it implied that the Father suffered on the cross. It was coined by Tertullian in his work Adversus Praxeas , Chapter I: "By this Praxeas did a twofold service for the devil at Rome: he drove away prophecy, and he brought in heresy; he put to flight the Paraclete , and he crucified the Father."  The term homoousion ( ὁμοούσιον , literally same being ) later adopted by the Trinitarian Nicene Council for its anti-Arian creed had previously been used by Sabellians.

[ 15 ] Those who believe that Jesus Christ is Almighty God, but that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are actually three distinct almighty "Gods" with distinct natures, acting as one divine group, united in purpose: Tri-theism – John Philoponus , an Aristotelian and monophysite in Alexandria, in the middle of the 6th century, saw in the Trinity three separate natures, substances, and deities, according to the number of divine persons.

[ 16 ] He sought to justify this view by the Aristotelian categories of genus , species and individuum . In the Middle Ages, Roscellin of Compiegne , the founder of Nominalism , argued for three distinct almighty Gods, with three distinct natures, who were one in mind and purpose, existing together eternally, interacting together from times past, in perfect cooperation, acting together as one divine group or godhead over the universe, in creation and redemption. And that the Logos took on a subservient role, but was equal in power and eternity with the One called Father. Roscellin said, though, like Philoponus, that unless the three persons are tres res (three things with distinct natures), the whole Trinity must have been incarnate . And therefore, since only the Logos was made flesh, the other two persons must have had distinct "natures", separate from the Logos, and so had to be separate and distinct Gods, though all three were one in divine work and plan and operation. In this view, they would be considered "three Gods in one Godhead". This notion was condemned by St. Anselm .

[ 17 ] Those who believe that the Holy Spirit is not a person: Binitarianism – Adherents include those people through history who believed that God is only two co-equal and co-eternal persons, the Father and the Word, not three. They taught that the Holy Spirit is not a distinct person, but is the power or divine influence of the Father and Son, emanating out to the universe, in creation, and to believers; Dualism ; Marcionism – Marcion (AD c.

110–160) believed there were two deities, one of creation and judgment (in the Hebrew Bible ) and one of redemption and mercy (in the New Testament ).

Modern Christian groups [ edit ] Christadelphians hold the unitarian belief that although Jesus is the Son of God, this is only a relational title toward the Father who alone is truly God. Christ's personhood, therefore, is human, not divine, [ 18 ] (believing this to be necessary in order to save humans from their sins [ 19 ] ). The "Holy Spirit" terminology in the Bible is interpreted as referring to God's impersonal power, [ 20 ] or God's character/mind [ 21 ] (depending on the context).

Church of God General Conference (Abrahamic Faith) .

[ 22 ] The Cooneyites is a Christian sect that split from the Two by Twos in 1928 following Edward Cooney 's excommunication from the main group; they deny the Living Witness Doctrine.

[ clarification needed ] Iglesia ni Cristo ( Tagalog for Church of Christ ) views Jesus as human but endowed by God with attributes not found in ordinary humans, though lacking attributes found in God. They contend that it is God's will to worship Jesus.

[ 23 ] INC rejects the Trinity as heresy, adopting a version of unitarianism.

Jehovah's Witnesses (and other Bible Student movement groups such as the Associated Bible Students [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] ) teach that God the Father is uniquely Almighty God. They believe that Jesus is God's first and only direct creation, and that God is greater than Jesus. They contrast worship of God with relative "obeisance" (in the sense of homage , as to a king) to Jesus, [ 27 ] and consider Jesus to be God's high priest and mediator for imperfect humans. They believe that Jesus is Michael the archangel and the " Angel of the Lord " of Exodus, and that he left heaven to be born as a perfect human, and then resumed his pre-human identity in heaven, but exalted to God's right hand .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] They do not believe that the Holy Spirit is an actual person, but consider it to be God's divine active force.

[ 30 ] The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) teaches that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are distinct beings that are not united in substance, a view sometimes called social trinitarianism . They believe the three individual deities are "one" in will or purpose, as Jesus was "one" with his disciples, and that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit constitute a single godhead united in purpose.

[ 31 ] Latter-day Saints believe that Christ is the Firstborn of the Father, [ 32 ] that he is subordinate to God the Father (Matthew 26:39), [ 33 ] and that Christ created the universe.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Latter-day Saints do not subscribe to the ideas that Christ was unlike the Father in substance [ 35 ] and that the Father could not appear on earth, [ 36 ] or that Christ was adopted by the Father, [ 32 ] as presented in Arianism.

[ 34 ] [ 37 ] Latter-day Saints assert that both God and the resurrected Christ have perfected glorified, physical bodies, [ 38 ] but do not otherwise classify deity in terms of substance. While Latter-day Saints regard God the Father as the supreme being and literal father of the spirits of all humankind, they also teach that Christ and the Holy Spirit are equally divine and that they share in the Father's "comprehension of all things".

[ 39 ] The Members Church of God International believes in the divinity of Christ but rejects the doctrine of Trinity.

Oneness Pentecostalism is a subset of Pentecostalism that believes God is only one person, and that he manifests himself in different ways, faces, or "modes": "Father, Son, and Holy Spirit (or Holy Ghost) are different designations for the one God. God is the Father. God is the Holy Spirit. The Son is God manifest in flesh. The term Son always refers to the Incarnation , and never to deity apart from humanity." [ 40 ] Oneness Pentecostals believe that Jesus was "Son" only when he became flesh on earth, but was the Father prior to being made human. They refer to the Father as the "Spirit" and the Son as the "Flesh". Oneness Pentecostals reject the Trinity doctrine, viewing it as pagan and unscriptural, and hold to the Jesus' Name doctrine with respect to baptisms. Oneness Pentecostals are often referred to as "Modalists" or "Sabellians" or "Jesus Only".

[ 41 ] Denominations within the Sabbatarian tradition ( Armstrongism ) believe that Christ the Son and God the Father are co-eternal, but do not teach that the Holy Spirit is a being or person. Armstrong theology holds that God is a "Family" that expands eventually, that "God reproduces Himself", but that originally there was a co-eternal "Duality", God and the Word, rather than a "Trinity".

Swedenborgianism holds that the Trinity exists in one person, the Lord God Jesus Christ. The Father, the being or soul of God, was born into the world and put on a body from Mary . Throughout his life, Jesus put away all human desires and tendencies until he was completely divine. After his resurrection, he influences the world through the Holy Spirit, which is his activity. In this view, Jesus Christ is the one God; the Father as to his soul, the Son as to his body, and the Holy Spirit as to his activity in the world. This view is very similar in many ways to Sabellianism, Modalism, Oneness, or Jesus Only beliefs.

Numerous Unitarian Christian organizations exist around the world, the oldest of which is the Unitarian Church of Transylvania . An umbrella organization for these groups is the International Council of Unitarians and Universalists , though only some members and affiliates of that body consider themselves exclusively or predominantly Christian. In the United States, "Unitarian" often refers to members and congregations within the Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA), a non-Christian group formed in 1961 from the merger of the American Unitarian Association with the Universalist Church of America .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Though both of these predecessor groups were originally Christian, the UUA does not have a shared creed and does not identify as a Christian Unitarian organization.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] History [ edit ] Part of a series on the History of Christian theology Background Christian theology Diversity in early Christian theology Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Early Christianity Proto-orthodox Christianity Timeline History of Christianity Template:History of Christianity Ecclesiastical polity Trinitarianism Nontrinitarianism Christology Paterology Pneumatology Mariology Biblical canon Deuterocanon Hermeneutics Theological hermeneutics African American Asian American Philosophical theology Christian philosophy Christian apologetics Persecution and tolerance Historical theology Ecumenical Creeds Apostles' Nicene Chalcedonian Athanasian Patristics and Councils Great church ante-Nicene period Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Cappadocian Fathers Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Augustine Nicaea Ephesus Chalcedon Post-Nicene development Heresy Monophysitism Monothelitism Byzantine Iconoclasm Gregory I Alcuin Photios East–West Schism Scholasticism Aquinas Anselm Palamas Reformation Martin Luther Theology 95 Theses John Calvin Radical Evangelicalism theology Five solae Book of Concord Arminianism English Counter- Trent Jansenism From the Reformation to the World Wars Natural Onto- Practical Pietism John Wesley Great Awakenings Holiness movement Restoration Movement Dispensationalism Covenant theology Existentialism Dogmatics Fundamental/foundational Liberal Catholic Anglo-Catholic Critical realism Political Since the World Wars Vatican II of religions Situational ethics Nouvelle théologie ( Ressourcement ) Death of God Postliberal  •  Narrative Continental philosophy Radical orthodoxy Neo-orthodoxy Reconciliation Analytic in Thomism Theopoetics Ecumenism Digital Systematic Biblical Constructive Eco- Environmental Public Contextualisation and Inculturation Indigenous church mission theory Sino-Christian Feminism in Feminist theology Asian Womanist New Queer Liberation Black Dalit Latin American Minjung Palestinian Postcolonial Fourth Great Awakening Christian Zionism Paleo-orthodoxy Dominion theology extraterrestrials Moderate Christianity Conservative Christianity Emerging church Progressive Christianity Confessing Movement Biotheology Theophysics Christianity portal v t e Main articles: History of Unitarianism and List of schisms in Christianity Early Christianity [ edit ] Main article: Apostolic Age See also: Caesaropapism The First Council of Nicaea depicted with Arius beneath the feet of Emperor Constantine and the bishops Although nontrinitarian beliefs continued and were dominant among some peoples—for example, the Lombards , Ostrogoths , Visigoths and Vandals —for hundreds of years, the Trinity doctrine eventually gained prominence in the Roman Empire. Nontrinitarians typically argue that early nontrinitarian beliefs, such as Arianism , were systematically suppressed (often to the point of death).

[ 46 ] After the First Council of Nicaea , Roman Emperor Constantine I issued an edict against Arius ' writings, which included systematic book burning .

[ 47 ] In spite of the decree, Constantine ordered the readmission of Arius to the church, removed the bishops (including Athanasius ) who upheld the teaching of Nicaea, [ 48 ] allowed Arianism to grow within the Empire and to spread to Germanic tribes on the frontier, [ 49 ] and was himself baptized by an Arian bishop, Eusebius of Nicomedia .

[ 50 ] His successors as Christian emperors promoted Arianism, until Theodosius I came to the throne in 379 and supported Nicene Christianity.

The Easter letter that Athanasius issued in 367, when the Eastern Empire was ruled by the Arian Emperor Valens , specified the books that belong to the Old Testament and the New Testament , together with seven other books to be read "for instruction in the word of godliness"; it also excluded what Athanasius called apocryphal writings, falsely presented as ancient.

[ 51 ] Elaine Pagels writes: "In AD 367, Athanasius , the zealous bishop of Alexandria ... issued an Easter letter in which he demanded that Egyptian monks destroy all such unacceptable writings, except for those he specifically listed as 'acceptable' even 'canonical'—a list that constitutes the present 'New Testament'".

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Nontrinitarians see the Nicene Creed and the results of the Council of Chalcedon as essentially political documents, resulting from the subordination of true doctrine to state interests by leaders of the Catholic Church , so that the church became, in their view, an extension of the Roman Empire. Nontrinitarians (both Modalists and Unitarians) assert that Athanasius and others at Nicaea adopted Greek Platonic philosophy and concepts, and incorporated them in their views of God and Christ.

[ 54 ] The author H. G. Wells , later famous for his contribution to science-fiction, wrote in The Outline of History : "We shall see presently how later on all Christendom was torn by disputes about the Trinity. There is no evidence that the apostles of Jesus ever heard of the Trinity, at any rate from him." [ 55 ] The question of why such a central doctrine to the Christian faith would never have been explicitly stated in scripture or taught in detail by Jesus himself was sufficiently important to 16th century historical figures such as Michael Servetus to lead them to argue the question. The Geneva City Council , in accord with the judgment of the cantons of Zürich, Bern, Basel, and Schaffhausen, condemned Servetus to be burned at the stake for this and his opposition to infant baptism.

The Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics describes the five stages that led to the formulation of the doctrine of the Trinity: [ 56 ] The acceptance of the pre-human existence of Jesus as the ( middle-platonic ) Logos , namely, as the medium between the transcendent sovereign God and the created cosmos. The doctrine of Logos was accepted by the Apologists and by other Fathers of the 2nd and 3rd centuries, such as Justin the Martyr , Hippolytus , Tertullian , Ireneus , Clement of Alexandria , Origen , Lactantius , and in the 4th century by Arius ; The doctrine of the timeless generation of the Son from the Father as it was articulated by Origen in his effort to support the ontological immutability of God , that he is ever-being a father and a creator. The doctrine of the timeless generation was adopted by Athanasius of Alexandria ; The acceptance of the idea that the son of God is of the same transcendent nature ( homoousios ) as his father. This position was declared in the Nicene Creed , which specifically states the son of God is as immutable as his father; The acceptance that the Holy Spirit also has ontological equality as a third person in a divine Trinity and the final Trinitarian terminology by the teachings of the Cappadocian Fathers ; The addition of the Filioque to the Nicene Creed, as accepted by the Roman Catholic Church.

Following the Reformation [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: information on other sects such as Mormonism and Jehovah's Witnesses. You can help by adding to it .

( August 2016 ) By 1530, following the Protestant Reformation , and the German Peasants' War of 1524–1525, large areas of Northern Europe were Protestant, and forms of nontrinitarianism began to surface among some " Radical Reformation " groups, particularly Anabaptists . The first recorded English antitrinitarian was John Assheton (1548), an Anglican priest. The Italian Anabaptist " Council of Venice " (1550) and the trial of Michael Servetus (1553) marked the clear emergence of markedly antitrinitarian Protestants. Though the only organised nontrinitarian churches were the Polish Brethren who split from the Calvinists (1565, expelled from Poland 1658), and the Unitarian Church of Transylvania (founded 1568).

In 1733, Voltaire 's Letters on the English listed Isaac Newton as a member of Antitrinitarians.

[ 57 ] Nonconformists , Dissenters and Latitudinarians in Britain were often Arians or Unitarians , and the Doctrine of the Trinity Act 1813 allowed nontrinitarian worship in Britain. In America, Arian and Unitarian views were also found among some Millennialist and Adventist groups, though the Unitarian Church itself began to decline in numbers and influence after the 1870s.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Points of dissent [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this section by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Nontrinitarianism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Nontrinitarian Christians with Arian or Semi-Arian views contend that the weight of scriptural evidence supports Subordinationism , the Son's total submission to the Father, and God's paternal supremacy over the Son in every aspect. They acknowledge the Son's high rank at God's right hand , but teach that the Father is still greater than the Son in all things.

While acknowledging that the Father, Son, and Spirit are essential in creation and salvation, they argue that that in itself does not confirm that the three are each co-equal or co-eternal. They also affirm that God is only explicitly identified as "one" in the Bible, and that the doctrine of the Trinity, which word literally meaning a set of three , ascribes a co-equal threeness to the being of the infinite God that is not explicitly scriptural.

Scriptural support [ edit ] This section contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Critics of the Trinity doctrine argue that, for a teaching described as fundamental, it lacks direct scriptural support. Proponents of the doctrine assert that although the doctrine is not stated directly in the New Testament, it is instead an interpretation of elements contained therein that imply the doctrine that was later formulated in the 4th century.

William Barclay , a Church of Scotland minister, stated that: It is important and helpful to remember that the word Trinity is not itself a New Testament word. It is even true in at least one sense to say that the doctrine of the Trinity is not directly New Testament doctrine. It is rather a deduction from and an interpretation of the thought and the language of the New Testament.

[ 60 ] The New Catholic Encyclopedia states: The doctrine of the Holy Trinity is not taught [explicitly] in the [Old Testament] [...] The formulation 'one God in three Persons' was not solidly established [by a council] [...] prior to the end of the 4th century.

[ 61 ] Similarly, Encyclopedia Encarta states: The doctrine is not taught explicitly in the New Testament, where the word God almost invariably refers to the Father.

[...] The term trinitas was first used in the 2nd century, by the Latin theologian Tertullian, but the concept was developed in the course of the debates on the nature of Christ [...] In the 4th century, the doctrine was finally formulated.

[ 62 ] Encyclopædia Britannica says: Neither the word Trinity nor the explicit doctrine appears in the New Testament, nor did Jesus and his followers intend to contradict the Shema in the Old Testament: "Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord" (Deuteronomy 6:4).

[...] The doctrine developed gradually over several centuries and through many controversies.

[...] by the end of the 4th century, under the leadership of Basil of Caesarea , Gregory of Nyssa , and Gregory of Nazianzus (the Cappadocian Fathers), the doctrine of the Trinity took substantially the form it has maintained ever since.

[ 63 ] The Anchor Bible Dictionary states: One does not find in the NT the trinitarian paradox of the coexistence of the Father, Son, and Spirit within a divine unity .

[ 64 ] Catholic historian Joseph F. Kelly, speaking of legitimate theological development, writes: The Bible may not use the word 'Trinity', but it refers to God the Father frequently; the Gospel of John emphasized the divinity of the Son; several New Testament books treat the Holy Spirit as divine. The ancient theologians did not violate biblical teaching but sought to develop its implications.

[...] [Arius'] potent arguments forced other Christians to refine their thinking about the Trinity.
At two ecumenical councils, Nicea I in 325 and Constantinople I in 381, the church at large defined the Trinity in the way now so familiar to us from the Nicene Creed. This exemplifies development of doctrine at its best. The Bible may not use the word 'Trinity', but trinitarian theology does not go against the Bible. On the contrary, Catholics believe that trinitarianism has carefully developed a biblical teaching for later generations.

[ 2 ] Questions about co-equal deity of Jesus [ edit ] American Catholic priest and Trinitarian R.E. Brown (1928–1988) wrote a journal article [ 65 ] that sorted relevant biblical verses into three classes. He described the following block as "texts that seem to imply that the title 'God' was not used for Jesus" and are "negative evidence which is often somewhat neglected in Catholic treatments of the subject": [ 65 ] Mark 10:18 , Matthew 27:46 , John 20:17 , Ephesians 1:17 , 2 Corinthians 1:3 , 1 Peter 1:3 , John 17:3 , 1 Corinthians 8:6 , Ephesians 4:4–6 , 1 Corinthians 12:4–6 , 2 Corinthians 13:14 , 1 Timothy 2:5 , John 14:28 , Mark 13:32 , Philippians 2:5–10 , and 1 Corinthians 15:24–28 ; he lists these as "texts where, by reason of textual variants or syntax, the use of 'God' for Jesus is dubious": [ 65 ] Gal 2:20 , Acts 20:28 , John 1:18 , Colossians 2:2 , 2 Thessalonians 1:12 , 1John 5:20 , Romans 9:5 , and 2 Peter 1:1 ; and only finds the following three as "texts where clearly Jesus is called God": [ 65 ] Hebrews 1:8–9 , John 1:1 , and John 20:28 .

The Septuagint translate אלוהים ‎ (Elohim) as θεος (Theos).

[ 66 ] At Deuteronomy 6:4 (the Shema Yisrael , quoted by Jesus at Mark 12:29 ), the plural form of the Hebrew word "God" ( Elohim ) is used, generally understood to denote majesty, excellence, and the superlative.

[ 67 ] It has been stated that in the original Greek in Mark 12:29, there are no "plural modifiers" in that Greek word there for "one" ( heis ), but that in Mark 12 it is simply a masculine singular "one". And that because of that, there is no valid reason to believe that the Hebrew word for "one" in Deuteronomy 6 ( echad ) was necessarily a "plural one", rather than just simply numerical "one".

[ 68 ] At Deuteronomy 6:4, the Tetragrammaton appears twice in this verse, leading Jehovah's Witnesses and certain Jewish scholars to conclude that belief in a singular (and therefore indivisible) supremely powerful God is essential to the Shema .

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Matthew 26:39 [ edit ] In Matthew 26:39 Jesus prays with a distinction between God and himself, "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt.".

John 1:1 [ edit ] In John 1:1 there is a distinction between God and the Logos. Non-trinitarians claim a mistranslation of the second part of John 1:1 which, when literally translated word-for-word reads "and the word [logos] was with the God [ho theos]." Trinitarians contend that the third part of the verse (John 1:1c) translates as "and the Word was God", pointing to a distinction as subjects between God and the Logos but an equivalence in nature.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] Some nontrinitarians assert that the Koine Greek ( kai theos ên ho logos ) should be translated as "and a God was the Word" (or "and the Word was a god"). Based on their contention that the article of theos is anarthrous , lacking a definite article, they believe the verse refers to Jesus' pre-human existence as "a god" or a divine one as distinct from "the God". Nontrinitarians also contend that the author of John's gospel could have written kai ho theos ên ho logos ("and the Word was the God") if that were his intended meaning.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] John 10:30 [ edit ] John 10:30 – Nontrinitarians such as Arians believe that when Jesus said, "I and the Father are one," he did not mean that they were actually "one substance", or "one God", or co-equal and co-eternal, but rather that he and the Father have a "unity of purpose", and that the context indicates that Jesus was saying that they were "one" in pastoral work . The point being that the Father and the Son were united in the divine work of saving the 'sheep'. Nontrinitarian Christians also cite John 17:21 , [ 77 ] wherein Jesus prayed regarding his disciples: "That they may all be one, as you, Father, are in me, and I in you, that they may be in us," adding "that they may be one even as we are one". They argue that the same Greek word ( hen ) for "one" throughout John 17 indicates that Jesus did not expect for his followers to literally become a single Being, or "one in substance", with each other, or with God, and therefore that Jesus also did not expect his hearers to think that he and God the Father were one entity either.

[ 77 ] John 10:33 [ edit ] While Trinitarians often use John 10:33 as proof for the divinity of Jesus, unitarian critics argue that the Pharisees accusing Jesus of making himself God should not be the center of attention, when reading this passage. Instead, they emphasize that Jesus' response to the accusations in John 10:34-36 is of much greater concern. In fact, he refuses to be God but instead claims to be the son of God and makes a direct reference to Psalms 82:6 in which God calls his children Gods without taking away from his own glory.

[ 78 ] John 20:28–29 [ edit ] John 20:28 –29 – "And Thomas answered and said to Him, "My Lord and my God!" Jesus said to him, "Thomas, because you have seen Me, you have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed"". Since Thomas called Jesus God , Jesus's statement appears to endorse Thomas's assertion. Nontrinitarians sometimes respond that it is plausible that Thomas is addressing the Lord Jesus and then the Father.

[ citation needed ] Another possible answer is that Jesus himself said, "Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods?" ( John 10:34 ) referring to Psalm 82:6–8.

[ citation needed ] The word "gods" in verse 6 and "God" in verse 8 is the same Hebrew word "'elohim", [ 79 ] which means, "gods in the ordinary sense; but specifically used (in the plural thus, especially with the article) of the supreme God; occasionally applied by way of deference to magistrates; and sometimes as a superlative", [ 80 ] and can also refer to powers and potentates, in general, or as "God, god, gods, rulers, judges or angels", [ 79 ] and as "divine ones, goddess, godlike one".

[ 81 ] Therefore, the point being that Jesus was a power or mighty one to the Apostles, as the resurrected Messiah, and as the reflection of God the Father.

2 Corinthians 13:14 [ edit ] 2 Corinthians 13:14 – "The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the sharing in the Holy Spirit be with all of you." It is argued by Trinitarians that the appearance of "Father, Son, and Spirit" together in Paul's prayer for Grace on all believers, and are considered essential for salvation, that the verse is consistent with a triune godhead. Nontrinitarians such as Arians reply [ citation needed ] that they do not disagree that all three are necessary for salvation and grace, but argue that the passage does not explicitly say that all three are co-equal or co-eternal.

[ 82 ] [ unreliable source?

] Philippians 2:5–6 [ edit ] Philippians 2:5 –6 – "Have this mind among yourselves, which is yours in Christ Jesus, [or "which was also in Christ Jesus",] who, though he was in the form of God, did not count equality with God a thing to be grasped" (ESV). The word translated in the English Standard Version as "a thing to be grasped" is ἁρπαγμόν. Other translations of the word are indicated in the Holman Christian Standard Bible : "Make your own attitude that of Christ Jesus, who, existing in the form of God, did not consider equality with God as something to be used for His own advantage" [or "to be grasped", or "to be held on to"].

[ 83 ] The King James Version has: "Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God." [ 84 ] Nontrinitarians make the argument that the passage is simply saying that Christ did not consider equality with God something graspable, and that better English translations make it clearer.

[ 85 ] Another point is that the original Greek had no definite article for "form of God", which would mean "a form of divinity", and also that the term "morphe" for "form" in Koine Greek would simply mean a general external quality or station, but not necessarily the absolute thing itself, and therefore they argue that the passage does not explicitly teach either co-equality, co-eternity, or consubstantiality.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] Hebrews 9:14 [ edit ] Hebrews 9:14 – "How much more will the Blood of Christ, who through an eternal Spirit, offered himself without blemish to God, cleanse our consciences from dead works, that we may render sacred service to the living God?" Most nontrinitarians agree [ citation needed ] that the Holy Spirit had no beginning, but believe it is not an actual person. Nontrinitarians contend that it is obvious that God the Father in the passage is the One who is ultimately reached, and therefore is greater than the other two entities, and that a "co-equal trinity" is not explicitly taught in the passage, but only inferred.

[ 88 ] Terminology [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( July 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) "The term 'Trinity' is not in the Bible", [ 89 ] and some nontrinitarians use this as an argument to state [ 90 ] that the doctrine of the Trinity relies on non-biblical terminology, and that the number three is never clearly associated with God necessarily, other than within the Comma Johanneum which is of spurious or disputed authenticity. They argue [ citation needed ] that the only number clearly unambiguously ascribed to God in the Bible is one, and that the Trinity, literally meaning three-in-one, ascribes a co-equal threeness to God that is not explicitly biblical.

Nontrinitarians cite other examples [ citation needed ] of terms or phrases not found in the Bible; multiple "persons" in relation to God, the terms " God the Son ", " God-Man ", " God the Holy Spirit ", " eternal Son ", and " eternally begotten ". While the Trinitarian term hypostasis is found in the Bible, it is used only once in reference to God [ 91 ] where it states that Jesus is the express image of God's person. The Bible does not explicitly use the term in relation to the Holy Spirit nor explicitly mentions the Son having a distinct hypostasis from the Father.

[ 92 ] The First Council of Nicaea included in its Creed the major term homoousios (of the same essence), which was used also by the Council of Chalcedon to speak of a double consubstantiality of Christ, "consubstantial with the Father as touching his Godhead, and consubstantial with us as touching his manhood".

[ 93 ] Nontrinitarians accept what Pier Franco Beatrice wrote: "The main thesis of this paper is that homoousios came straight from Constantine's Hermetic background. ... The Plato recalled by Constantine is just a name used to cover precisely the Egyptian and Hermetic theology of the "consubstantiality" of the Logos-Son with the Nous-Father, having recourse to a traditional apologetic argument. In the years of the outbreak of the Arian controversy, Lactantius might have played a decisive role in influencing Constantine's Hermetic interpretation of Plato's theology and consequently the emperor's decision to insert homoousios in the Creed of Nicaea ." [ 94 ] Trinitarians see the absence of the actual word "Trinity" and other Trinity-related terms in the Bible as no more significant than the absence in the Bible of the words "monotheism", "omnipotence", "oneness", "Pentecostal", "apostolic", "incarnation" and even "Bible" itself.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] They maintain that, 'while the word Trinity is not in the Bible, the substance or drift of the doctrine is definitely biblical, if not explicitly than at least implicitly.' [ 2 ] [ 60 ] [ 97 ] Holy Spirit [ edit ] For uses of this term in other religions, see Holy Spirit .

See also: Holy Spirit (Christian denominational variations) Nontrinitarian views about the Holy Spirit differ from mainstream Christian doctrine and generally fall into several distinct categories. Most scriptures traditionally used in support of the Trinity refer to the Father and the Son , but not to the Holy Spirit .

Unitarian [ edit ] Groups with Unitarian theology such as Polish Socinians , the 18th–19th-century Unitarian Church and Christadelphians consider the Holy Spirit to be an aspect of God's power rather than a person.

[ 98 ] Christadelphians believe that the phrase Holy Spirit refers to God's power or character, depending on the context.

[ 21 ] Similarly, Jehovah's Witnesses believe that the Holy Spirit is not an actual person but is God's "active force" that he uses to accomplish his will.

[ 99 ] Binitarianism [ edit ] Groups with Binitarian theology, such as Armstrongites , believe that the Logos and God the Father are co-equal and co-eternal, but they do not believe that the Holy Spirit is an actual person, like the Father and the Son. They believe the Holy Spirit is the Power, Mind, or Character of God, depending on the context. They teach, "The Holy Spirit is the very essence, the mind, life and power of God. It is not a Being. The Spirit is inherent in the Father and the Son, and emanates from Them throughout the entire universe." [ 100 ] Modalist groups [ edit ] Oneness Pentecostalism , as with other modalist groups, teach that the Holy Spirit is a mode of God, rather than a distinct or separate person in the godhead, and that the Holy Spirit is another name for God the Father. According to Oneness theology, the Holy Spirit is the Father operating in a certain capacity or manifestation. The United Pentecostal Church teaches that there is no personal distinction between God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] [ 103 ] The two titles "Father" and "Holy Spirit" (as well as others) are said to not reflect separate "persons" within the Godhead, but rather two different ways in which the one God reveals himself to his creatures. The Oneness view of Bible verses that mention God and his Spirit (e.g. Isaiah 48:16) is that they do not imply two "persons" any more than various scriptural references to a man and his spirit or soul (such as in Luke 12:19) imply two "persons" existing within one body.

[ 104 ] [ unreliable source?

] [ dead link ] Latter-day Saint movement [ edit ] See also: Holy Spirit in Mormonism and God in Mormonism In the LDS Church, the Holy Ghost (usually synonymous with Holy Spirit) [ 105 ] is considered to be the third distinct member of the Godhead (Father, Son and Holy Ghost), [ 106 ] and to have a body of "spirit", [ 107 ] which makes him unlike the Father and the Son who are said to have bodies "as tangible as man's".

[ 108 ] According to LDS doctrine, the Holy Spirit is believed to be a person, [ 108 ] [ 109 ] with a body of spirit, able to pervade all worlds.

[ 110 ] Latter-day Saints believe that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are part of the Godhead, but that the Father is greater than the Son, and that the Son is greater than the Holy Spirit in position and authority, but not in nature (i.e., they equally share the "God" nature).

[ 110 ] They teach that the Father, Son, and Spirit are three ontologically separate, self-aware entities who share a common "God" nature distinct from our "human" nature, who are "One God" in the sense of being united (in the same sense that a husband and wife are said to be "one"), similar to Social trinitarianism .

A number of Latter Day Saint sects , most notably the Community of Christ (the second largest Latter Day Saint denomination), the Church of Christ (Temple Lot) , [ 111 ] and derived groups, follow a traditional Protestant trinitarian theology.

Other groups [ edit ] The Unity Church interprets the religious terms Father, Son, and Holy Spirit metaphysically , as three aspects of mind action: mind, idea, and expression. They believe this is the process through which all manifestation takes place.

[ 112 ] Groups in the Rastafari movement generally state that it is Haile Selassie who embodies both God the Father and God the Son, while the Holy (or " Hola ") Spirit is to be found within every human being. Rastas also say that the true church is the human body, and that it is this church (or " structure ") that contains the Holy Spirit.

Relationship with mainstream Christianity [ edit ] See also: Christian denomination As the Nicene Creed's declaration of the Trinity is held as the foundational belief for mainstream Christians , [ 113 ] nontrinitarian sects may be regarded as cults or heresies by other Christians, [ 114 ] or accused of not being Christians at all.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] On the other hand, nontrinitarians may see mainstream Christians as having fallen or apostasized from the original Christian church .

Ecumenism [ edit ] Main article: Ecumenism See also: Inclusivism § Christianity Ecumenism is a type of interfaith dialogue within Christianity based on shared essential, core beliefs. Ecumenism is usually built on the basis of shared belief in trinitarian baptism, which by definition excludes nontrinitarians. This makes it especially difficult for trinitarian and nontrinitarian churches to recognize the other side's baptisms and communions, or for them to worship together. However, unity of action on shared community goals is easier to accomplish.

[ 115 ] Heresy and apostasy [ edit ] Main articles: Heresy in Christianity and Great Apostasy See also: Restorationism and List of heresies in the Catholic Church Orthodoxy sets certain beliefs as correct, by tradition. Beliefs not within those guidelines be designated heterodox or heretical . Many nontrinitarians believe that the traditions of mainstream Christianity itself are incorrect, in a Great Apostasy foretold by Paul.

The Catholic Church has specifically designated many varieties of nontrinitarianism "heresies", including Arianism, Modalism, and Tritheism. They have also specifically named Mormonism and Jehovah's Witnesses as heresies (as well as Protestantism and Calvinism).

Fundamentalist or evangelical Protestantism has also targeted some nontrinitarians as part of the Christian countercult movement . However, more cautious authors argue that strange beliefs alone are not enough to designate a "cult"; the group's behavior is a more important factor.

[ 114 ] Specific groups' relationships with Nicene Christianity [ edit ] Pentecostalism [ edit ] Pentecostalism has a peculiar relationship with ecumenism. There is a theological division between Oneness and trinitarian Pentecostals , and ecumenical groups within Pentecostalism tend to follow those lines. However, many Pentecostals think of ecumenism less as a need for a formal, cooperative institution between groups, and more as a spiritual experience. In addition, many Pentecostal believers are insufficiently focused on abstract theology to identify as trinitarian or nontrinitarian.

[ 117 ] Mormonism [ edit ] Main article: Mormonism and Nicene Christianity Mormonism, particularly its largest sect, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, has a complex relationship with mainstream Christianity, due in part to its nontrinitarianism. It also has other unusual doctrines, which lead many evangelical Christians to challenge its inclusion within Christianity.

[ 116 ] Mormonism's second-largest sect, the Community of Christ , is a trinitarian group and participates in a variety of ecumenical organizations, such as the National Council of Churches of Christ .

[ 118 ] Inter-religious dialogue beyond Christianity [ edit ] See also: Islamic view of the Trinity and Shituf The Trinity doctrine is integral in inter-religious disagreements with the other two main Abrahamic religions , Judaism and Islam; the former rejects Jesus' divine mission entirely, and the latter accepts Jesus as a human prophet and the Messiah but not as the son of God, although accepting virgin birth. The rejection of the Trinity doctrine has led to comparisons between nontrinitarian theology and Judaism and Islam.

In an 1897 article in the Jewish Quarterly Review , Montefiore describes Unitarianism as a bridge between Judaism and mainstream Christianity, calling it both a "phase of Judaism" and a "phase of Christianity".

[ 119 ] In Islam, the concept of a co-equal trinity is totally rejected, with Quranic verses calling the doctrine of the Trinity blasphemous.

[ 120 ] Early Islam was originally seen as a variant of Arianism , a heresy in Orthodox and Catholic Christianity, by the Byzantine emperor in the 600s. In the 700s, many Arians in Spain considered Muhammad a prophet. In the mid-1500s, many Socinian unitarians were suspected of having Islamic leanings. Socinians praised Islam, though considering the Qur'an to contain errors, for its belief in the unity of God. Bilal Cleland claimed that "an anonymous writer" in A Letter of Resolution concerning the Doctrine of the Trinity and Incarnation (1693) states that Islam's greater number of adherents and military supremacy resulted from more closely maintaining correct doctrine than mainstream Christianity.

[ 121 ] Arguments for the pagan origins of the Trinity [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( November 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Horus, Osiris, and Isis Reims altar depicting a tricephalic Celtic god Some nontrinitarians also say that a link between the doctrine of the Trinity and the Egyptian Christian theologians of Alexandria suggests that Alexandrian theology, with its strong emphasis on the deity of Jesus, served to infuse Egypt's pagan religious heritage into Christianity. They accuse the Church of adopting these Egyptian tenets after adapting them to Christian thinking by means of Greek philosophy.

[ 122 ] They say the development of the idea of a co-equal triune godhead was based on pagan Greek and Platonic influence, including many basic concepts from Aristotelian philosophy incorporated into the biblical God. As an example, they mention that Aristotle stated: "All things are three, and thrice is all: and let us use this number in the worship of the gods; for, as Pythagoreans say, everything and all things are bound by threes, for the end, the middle, and the beginning have this number in everything, and these compose the number of the Trinity." [ 123 ] [ 124 ] However, Trinitarians have argued that the words attributed to Aristotle differ in a number of ways from what has been published as the philosopher's original text in Greek , [ 125 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] which omits "let us use this number in the worship of the gods", and are not supported by translations of the works of Aristotle by scholars such as Stuart Leggatt, W. K. C. Guthrie , J.

L. Stocks, Thomas Taylor and Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire .

[ 128 ] Some anti-trinitarians note also that the Greek philosopher Plato believed in a special "threeness" in life and in the universe. In Phaedo , he introduces the word "triad" (in Greek τριάς), [ 129 ] which is rendered in English as "trinity". This was adopted by 3rd and 4th century professed Christians as roughly corresponding to "Father, Word, and Spirit (Soul)".

[ 130 ] Nontrinitarian Christians contend that such notions and adoptions make the Trinity doctrine extra-biblical.

[ citation needed ] They [ who?

] say there is a widely acknowledged synthesis of Christianity with Platonic philosophy evident in trinitarian formulas appearing by the end of the 3rd century. They allege that beginning with the Constantinian period, these pagan ideas were forcibly imposed on the churches as Catholic doctrine. Most groups subscribing to the theory of a Great Apostasy generally concur in this thesis.

[ citation needed ] The early apologists, including Justin Martyr , Tertullian and Irenaeus , frequently discussed the parallels and contrasts between Christianity, Paganism and other syncretic religions , and answered charges of borrowing from paganism in their apologetical writings.

[ citation needed ] Hellenic influences [ edit ] See also: Hellenization Stuart G Hall (formerly Professor of Ecclesiastical History at King's College, London) describes the subsequent process of philosophical/theological amalgamation in Doctrine and Practice in the Early Church (1991), where he writes: The apologists began to claim that Greek culture pointed to and was consummated in the Christian message, just as the Old Testament was. This process was done most thoroughly in the synthesis of Clement of Alexandria. It can be done in several ways. You can rake through Greek literature, and find (especially in the oldest seers and poets) references to 'God' which are more compatible with monotheism than with polytheism (so at length Athenagoras.) You can work out a common chronology between the legends of prehistoric (Homer) Greece and the biblical record (so Theophilus.) You can adapt a piece of pre-Christian Jewish apologetic, which claimed that Plato and other Greek philosophers got their best ideas indirectly from the teachings of Moses in the Bible, which was much earlier. This theory combines the advantage of making out the Greeks to be plagiarists (and therefore second-rate or criminal), while claiming that they support Christianity by their arguments at least some of the time. Especially this applied to the question of God.

[ 131 ] The neo-Platonic trinities, such as that of the One , the Nous and the Soul , are not considered a trinity necessarily of consubstantial equals as in mainstream Christianity. However, the neo-Platonic trinity has the doctrine of emanation, or "eternal derivation", a timeless procedure of generation having as a source the One and claimed to be paralleled with the generation of the light from the Sun. This was adopted by Origen and later on by Athanasius, and applied to the generation of the Son from the Father, because they believed that this analogy could be used to support the notion that the Father, as immutable, always had been a Father, and that the generation of the Son is therefore eternal and timeless.

[ 132 ] The synthesis of Christianity with Platonic philosophy was further incorporated in the trinitarian formulas that appeared by the end of the 3rd century. "The Greek philosophical theology" was "developed during the Trinitarian controversies over the relationships among the persons of the Godhead".

[ 133 ] The allegation of borrowing was raised by some disputants when the Nicene doctrine was being formalized and adopted by the bishops. For example, in the 4th century, Marcellus of Ancyra , who taught the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit were one person (hypostasis), said in his On the Holy Church, 9 : Now with the heresy of the Ariomaniacs, which has corrupted the Church of God ... These then teach three hypostases, just as Valentinus the heresiarch first invented in the book entitled by him 'On the Three Natures'. For he was the first to invent three hypostases and three persons of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and he is discovered to have filched this from Hermes and Plato ." [ 134 ] In his Introduction to the 1964 book Meditations , the Anglican priest Maxwell Staniforth discussed the profound influence of Stoic philosophy on Christianity. In particular: Again in the doctrine of the Trinity, the ecclesiastical conception of Father, Word, and Spirit finds its germ in the different Stoic names of the Divine Unity. Thus Seneca , writing of the supreme Power which shapes the universe, states, 'This Power we sometimes call the All-ruling God, sometimes the incorporeal Wisdom, sometimes the holy Spirit, sometimes Destiny.' The Church had only to reject the last of these terms to arrive at its own acceptable definition of the Divine Nature; while the further assertion 'these three are One', which the modern mind finds paradoxical, was no more than commonplace to those familiar with Stoic notions.

[ 135 ] Christian groups with nontrinitarian positions [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of Christian denominations § nontrinitarian .

This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( December 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Early Christian [ edit ] Arianism Esoteric Gnosticism Subordinationism Ebionites Nazarene Judeo-Christianity Unitarian and Universalism [ edit ] Unitarianism Unitarian Universalism Latter Day Saints [ edit ] Latter Day Saint movement The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) Remnant Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints Bible Students and splinter groups [ edit ] Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses [ 136 ] Sacred Name movement [ edit ] Assemblies of Yahweh Yahweh's Assembly in Messiah Oneness Protestant groups [ edit ] Creation Seventh Day Adventist Church Elias Hicks (Hicksite Quakers) Shakers Oneness Pentecostals Many members of the Non-subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland World Wide Church of God splinter groups [ edit ] Church of the Blessed Hope (sometimes called "Church of God of the Abrahamic Faith") Grace Communion International Philadelphia Church of God Living Church of God United Church of God New religious movements [ edit ] Church of Christ, Scientist ( Christian Scientists ) [ 137 ] [ 138 ] Unity Church New Church (Swedenborgian) Unification Church ( Family Federation for World Peace and Unification ) Two by Twos (sometimes called The Truth or Cooneyites ) [ 139 ] Other Nontrinitarians [ edit ] Christadelphians Church of God General Conference La Luz del Mundo Monarchianism Muggletonianism Polish Brethren Socinianism The Way International Country-specific [ edit ] Filipino Iglesia ni Cristo ( Church of Christ ) Members Church of God International Kingdom of Jesus Christ Independent Russian Doukhobors Molokan Chinese Diaspora Christian Disciples Church People [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sabellius , c.

220 ( Modalist : the eponymous heresiarch of Sabellianism , or "monarchic modalism"), rejected the idea of co-eternal co-equal distinct persons in the Godhead, but taught that God is a singular Person who manifests himself in multiple and various ways, faces, modes, and operations in history and specific circumstances Theodotus of Byzantium Artemon Paul of Samosata , 269, Bishop of Antioch, believed in monarchianism, the doctrine that says that the Father alone is supreme and that God is not co-equal persons, but one unequal almighty person. Bishop Paul also held to adoptionism which teaches that Jesus was adopted as the Son of God at his baptism, resurrection, or ascension.

Lucian of Antioch , 312, Christian presbyter, ( theologian ) and ( martyr ) Arius , 336, presbyter of Alexandria, major theologian of the doctrine of Arianism in 4th century. He opposed the Homoousian declarations of the Alexandrian Bishop Alexander of Alexandria , making him a primary topic of the First Council of Nicea in AD 325.

Eusebius of Nicomedia , 341, (Arian) Eusebius of Caesarea , (Christian historian) Constantius II , Byzantine Emperor , 361 Antipope Felix II , 365 Aëtius of Antioch , 367 Ulfilas , Apostle to the Goths, 383 Priscillian , 385, considered first Christian to be executed for heresy Francesco della Sega , (1528–1565) Ludwig Haetzer , 1529 Michael Servetus , 1553, burned at the stake in Geneva under John Calvin Sebastian Castellio , 1563 Ferenc Dávid , 1579 Justus Velsius , c.

1581 Fausto Paolo Sozzini , 1604 John Milton , 1608–1674. (disputed) Edward Wightman , 1612, burned at the stake Isaac Newton , 1642–1726/27 John Biddle , 1662 Thomas Aikenhead , 1697, last person to be hanged for blasphemy in Britain John Locke , 1704 [ 140 ] Elias Hicks , 1742, Quaker William Whiston , 1752, expelled from University of Cambridge in 1710 for Arianism; famous for translating Josephus Jonathan Mayhew , 1766 Emanuel Swedenborg , 1772, provided the theology for Swedenborgianism Joseph Priestley , 1804 John Adams Thomas Jefferson John Quincy Adams Millard Fillmore William Howard Taft Joseph Smith , 1805, founder of the Latter-day Saint movement ( Mormonism ) Mary Baker Eddy , 1821, founder of Christian Science William Ellery Channing , 1842 Robert Hibbert , 1849 John Thomas (Christadelphian), 1871 Ralph Waldo Emerson , 1882 Robert Roberts (Christadelphian), 1898 Benjamin Wilson , 1900 James Martineau , 1900 Félix Manalo , 1914 Charles Taze Russell , 1916, founder of the Bible Student movement and Jehovah's Witnesses , author of Millennial Dawn Joseph Franklin Rutherford , 2nd president of the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society Alan Hayward (Christadelphian), 1923 Johannes Greber (Catholic priest) Eliseo Soriano , 1947 William Branham , 1965 Herbert W. Armstrong , 1986, founder of the Worldwide Church of God , a Sabbatarian Christian Church , and was an advocate of the doctrine of Binitarianism.

Anthony Buzzard (Biblical Unitarian) See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Bibliotheca antitrinitariorum Bahá'í Faith Christomonism Christians of Saint John Manichaeism Servetism Citations [ edit ] ^ Olson, Roger E; Hall, Christopher Alan (2002).

The Trinity . Wm. B. Eerdmans.

ISBN 978-0-8028-4827-7 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ a b c Kelly, Joseph F. (2006).

An Introduction to the New Testament for Catholics . Liturgical Press. p. 5.

ISBN 978-0-8146-5216-9 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ Olson, Roger E (1999).

The Story of Christian Theology . InterVarsity Press. p.

173 .

ISBN 978-0-8308-1505-0 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ Lohse, Bernhard (1966).

A Short History of Christian Doctrine . Fortress Press.

ISBN 978-1-4514-0423-4 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ Geanakoplos, Deno John (1989).

Constantinople and the West . Univ of Wisconsin Press.

ISBN 978-0-299-11884-6 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ Halsey, A. (1988).

British Social Trends since 1900: A Guide to the Changing Social Structure of Britain . Palgrave Macmillan UK. p. 518.

ISBN 978-1-349-19466-7 .

his so called 'non-Trinitarian' group includes the Jehovah's Witnesses, Mormons, Christadelphians, Apostolics, Christian Scientists, Theosophists, Church of Scientology, Unification Church (Moonies), the Worldwide Church of God and so on.

^ von Harnack, Adolf (1894-03-01).

"History of Dogma" . Retrieved 2007-06-15 .

[In the 2nd century,] Jesus was either regarded as the man whom God hath chosen, in whom the Deity or the Spirit of God dwelt, and who, after being tested, was adopted by God and invested with dominion, (Adoptionist Christology); or Jesus was regarded as a heavenly spiritual being (the highest after God) who took flesh, and again returned to heaven after the completion of his work on earth (pneumatic Christology) ^ Justo L. González, The Story of Christianity: The Early Church to the Present Day, Prince Press, 1984, Vol. 1, pp. 159–161
• Jaroslav Pelikan, The Christian Tradition: A History of the Development of Doctrine, The University of Chicago Press, 1971, Vol. 1, pp. 181–199 ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Christianity" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 285.

^ "History of Arianism" . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ "Second Creed of Sirmium or "The Blasphemy of Sirmium" " .

www.fourthcentury.com . Retrieved 2017-03-09 .

^ Stephen Goranson, "Ebionites," ed. David Noel Freedman, The Anchor Yale Bible Dictionary (New York: Doubleday, 1992), 261.

^ "American Unitarian Conference" . Archived from the original on 2019-05-21 . Retrieved 2015-06-30 .

^ a b David K. Bernard, Oneness and Trinity A.D. 100–300 – The Doctrine of God and Ancient Christian Writings – Word Aflame Press, Hazelwood Montana, 1991, p. 156.

^ St. Athanasius (1911), "In Controversy With the Arians", Select Treatises , Newman, John Henry Cardinal trans, Longmans, Green, & Co, p. 124, footn .

^ John Philoponus – Tritheism – Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 10 July 2019.

^ Chapman, John (1912).

"Tritheists" Archived 2012-06-15 at the Wayback Machine . The Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company (public domain). Retrieved October 16, 2019.

^ Flint, James; Deb Flint.

One God or a Trinity?

. Hyderabad: Printland Publishers.

ISBN 978-81-87409-61-8 .

^ Pearce, Fred.

Jesus: God the Son or Son of God? Does the Bible Teach the Trinity?

. Birmingham: The Christadelphian Magazine and Publishing Association Ltd (UK). p. 8.

^ Tennant, Harry.

The Holy Spirit: Bible Understanding of God's Power . Birmingham: The Christadelphian Magazine and Publishing Association Ltd (UK).

^ a b Broughton, James H.; Peter J Southgate.

The Trinity: True or False?

. UK: The Dawn Book Supply. Archived from the original on 2011-11-18.

^ Nelson's guide to denominations J. Gordon Melton – 2007 "Later in the century, various leaders also began to express doubts about the Trinity, and a spectrum of opinion emerged. ... Still others, such as the Church of God General Conference (Abrahamic Faith) specifically denied the Trinity ..." ^ Manalo, Eraño G., Fundamental Beliefs of the Iglesia ni Cristo (Church of Christ) (Iglesia ni Cristo; Manila 1989) ^ Encyclopedia of Protestantism , p. 474, J. Gordon Melton, 2005: "... for his many departures from traditional Christian and Protestant affirmations including the Trinity and the deity of Christ. ... 1 (1886; reprint, Rutherford, NJ: Dawn Bible Students Association, nd)" ^ Watch Tower , October 1881, Watch Tower Reprints p. 290 As Retrieved 2009-09-23 Archived 2011-10-02 at the Wayback Machine , p. 4, ""He gave his only begotten Son." This phraseology brings us into conflict with an old Babylonian theory, viz.: Trinitarianism. If that doctrine is true, how could there be any Son to give? A begotten Son, too?

Impossible.

If these three are one, did God send himself? And how could Jesus say: "My Father is greater than I." John 14:28. [emphasis retained from original]" ^ "Z1882 July" . Archived from the original on 2009-01-22 . Retrieved 2012-03-05 .

^ The Watchtower . January 15, 1992. p. 23.

{{ cite magazine }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ Insight on the Scriptures . Vol. 2. Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania. 1988. pp.

393– 394.

^ Chapter 138 – Christ at God's Right Hand , JW.org. Retrieved October 18, 2019.

^ Should You Believe in the Trinity?

. Watch Tower Society. p. 20.

^ Holland, Jeffrey R.

"The Only True God and Jesus Christ Whom He Hath Sent" . Retrieved 29 November 2013 .

^ a b Giles, Jerry C. (1992).

"Jesus Christ: Firstborn in the Spirit" . In Ludlow, Daniel H (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Mormonism . New York: Macmillan Publishing . p.

728 .

ISBN 978-0-02-879602-4 .

OCLC 24502140 .

^ a b Millet, Robert L.

(1992).

"Jesus Christ: Overview" . In Ludlow, Daniel H (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Mormonism . New York: Macmillan Publishing . pp.

724–726 .

ISBN 978-0-02-879602-4 .

OCLC 24502140 .

^ a b "Arianism" . Christian Apologetics and Research Ministry. 2008-12-13 . Retrieved 29 November 2013 .

^ Robinson, Stephen E.

(1992).

"God the Father: Overview" . In Ludlow, Daniel H (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Mormonism . New York: Macmillan Publishing . pp.

548–550 .

ISBN 978-0-02-879602-4 .

OCLC 24502140 .

^ Backman, Milton V.

(1992).

"First Vision" . In Ludlow, Daniel H (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Mormonism . New York: Macmillan Publishing . pp.

515–516 .

ISBN 978-0-02-879602-4 .

OCLC 24502140 .

^ "What is Arianism?" . The Arian Catholic Church. Archived from the original on 9 April 2006 . Retrieved 29 November 2013 .

^ "Gospel Principles – Chapter 1: Our Father in Heaven" . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints . Retrieved 4 June 2017 .

The Nature of God ^ " 'The Glory of God Is Intelligence' Lesson 37: Section 93" , Doctrine and Covenants Instructor's Guide: Religion 324–325 (PDF) , Institutes of Religion , Church Educational System , 1981, pp.

73– 74 ^ "The Oneness of God" . Archived from the original on 16 February 2008 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ Patterson, Eric; Rybarczyk, Edmund (2007).

The Future of Pentecostalism in the United States . New York: Lexington Books. pp.

123– 124.

ISBN 978-0-7391-2102-3 .

^ McCardle, Elaine and Kenny Wiley (2017-06-28).

"Bryan Stevenson weaves story, policy in 2017 Ware Lecture" .

UU World . Retrieved 2019-09-17 .

Stevenson referred to the UU faith's members repeatedly as "Universalists," which caught the attention of several social media users. Unitarian Universalists are more commonly referred to colloquially as "Unitarians." ^ Buursma, Bruce (1986-03-30).

"Unitarians Making Peace with Easter" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved 2019-09-17 .

^ Unitarian Universalist Association (9 February 2015).

"Beliefs & Principles" .

uua.org . Retrieved 2019-09-17 .

^ Unitarian Universalist Association (25 November 2014).

"Christian Unitarian Universalists" .

uua.org . Retrieved 2019-09-17 .

Some of our UU congregations are Christian in orientation, worshipping regularly with the New Testament, offering Communion, and celebrating Christian holidays throughout the year. All of our congregations welcome people with Christian backgrounds and beliefs.

^ Edict by Emperor Constantine against the Arians ^ "In addition, if any writing composed by Arius should be found, it should be handed over to the flames, so that not only will the wickedness of his teaching be obliterated, but nothing will be left even to remind anyone of him. And I hereby make a public order, that if someone should be discovered to have hidden a writing composed by Arius, and not to have immediately brought it forward and destroyed it by fire, his penalty shall be death. As soon as he is discovered in this offense, he shall be submitted for capital punishment." – Edict by Emperor Constantine against the Arians.

Athanasius (23 January 2010).

"Edict by Emperor Constantine against the Arians" .

Fourth Century Christianity . Wisconsin Lutheran College . Retrieved 2 May 2012 .

^ Litfin, Bryan M (2007).

Getting to Know the Church Fathers . Brazos Press.

ISBN 978-1-4412-0074-7 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ Frassetto, Michael (2003).

Encyclopedia of Barbarian Europe . Bloomsbury Academic.

ISBN 978-1-57607-263-9 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ Kaatz, Kevin (2012).

Early Controversies and the Growth of Christianity . ABC-CLIO. p.

113 .

ISBN 978-0-313-38359-5 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

into the Arian version.

^ "NPNF2-04. Athanasius: Select Works and Letters" . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ Elaine Pagels, Beyond Belief: The Secret Gospel of Thomas (Random House, 2003), n.p.

^ "NPNF2-04. Athanasius: Select Works and Letters" . Ccel.org. 13 July 2005 . Retrieved 21 January 2012 .

^ David Bernard's The Oneness of God , Word Aflame Press, 1983, ISBN 0-912315-12-1 . pp. 264–274.

^ Wells, H. G.

(n.d.).

The Outline of History: being a plain history of life and mankind . Forgotten Books. Vol. 2. London: The Waverley Book Company. p. 284.

ISBN 978-1-4400-8226-9 .

^ W. Fulton, "Trinity", Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics, T. & T. Clark, 1921, Vol. 12, p. 459.

^ "Lettres Newtonianism" .

Voltaire Foundation . Retrieved 2025-01-19 .

^ Unitarians face a new age: the report of the Commission of Appraisal.

American Unitarian Association. ed. Frederick May Eliot, Harlan Paul Douglass – 1936 "Chapter III Church Growth and Decline During the Last Decade. Year Book data permit the calculation of growth or decline in membership for 297 Unitarian churches which existed throughout the last decade and ..." ^ Charles Lippy (2006), Faith in America: Changes, Challenges , New Directions, p.2. Quote: "However, when the national interest in novel religious forms waned by the mid- nineteenth century, Unitarianism and Universalism began to decline. For the vast majority of religious bodies in America, growth continued unabated." ^ a b Barclay, William (1998).

The Apostles' Creed . Westminster John Knox Press.

ISBN 978-0-664-25826-9 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ " [title not cited] ".

New Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. XIV. 1967. p. 299.

^ MacQuarrie, John (2005). "Trinity".

Encyclopedia Encarta . Microsoft Encarta Reference Library. Microsoft Corporation.

^ "Trinity".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Ultimate Reference Suite DVD. 2004.

^ Bassler, J.M.

(1992). "God in the NT".

The Anchor Bible Dictionary . Vol. 2. New York: Doubleday. p. 1055.

^ a b c d Brown, Raymond E. (1 December 1965). "Does the New Testament Call Jesus God?".

Theological Studies .

26 (4): 545– 573.

doi : 10.1177/004056396502600401 .

S2CID 53007327 .

^ Loewen, Jacob A. (1 April 1984). "The Names of God in the New Testament".

The Bible Translator .

35 (2): 208– 211.

doi : 10.1177/026009438403500202 .

S2CID 172043076 .

^ Confraternity of Christian Doctrine (2011). "Bible Dictionary".

New American Bible (St. Joseph ed.). Catholic Book Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-89942-617-4 .

^ "Against Dalcour II" .

Apostolic Academics . Oneness Pentecostal Apologetics. February 2017 . Retrieved 10 July 2019 .

^ Reasoning from the Scriptures . Philadelphia: Watchtower Bible and Tract Society . 2015 [1986]. pp. 405, 415– 416.

^ Hertz, J.H. (1960).

The Pentateuch and the Haftorahs . Vol. 1. Soncino Press. p. 215.

ISBN 978-0-900689-21-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Kruse, Colin G. (2004).

The Gospel According to John . Wm. B. Eerdmans.

ISBN 978-0-8028-2771-5 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 – via Google Books.

^ Ramsey Michaels, J. (2011).

John . Understanding the Bible – Commentary.

ISBN 978-1-4412-3659-3 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 – via Google Books.

^ Radmacher, Earl (1999).

Nelson's New Illustrated Bible Commentary . Thomas Nelson.

ISBN 978-1-4185-8734-5 – via Google Books.

^ Gundry, Robert H. (2011).

Commentary on John . Commentary on the New Testament. Vol. 4.

ISBN 978-1-4412-3761-3 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 – via Google Books.

^ "John 1:1c: "God", "divine", or "a god"?" .

OnlyTruGod.org . Retrieved 24 November 2014 .

^ Kaiser, Christopher B. (1982).

The Doctrine of God: A historical survey . Foundations for Faith. Westchester: Crossway Books. p. 31.

^ a b "Should you believe in the trinity?" .

Jehovah's Witness (wol.jw.org) .

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania . 2006. p. 24.

^ Stay Biblical - All Jesus is God Bible passages and claims debunked ^ a b Kemp, Steve (c. 2009) [22 May 2000]. Myers, Jim (ed.).

"Elohiym" .

Biblical Heritage Center . Archived from the original on 2009-10-29 . Retrieved 2009-04-02 .

^ "אֱלֹהִים ( elohim ) – God, god" .

Strong's Hebrew . 430 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ "Old Testament Hebrew Lexicon" .

Bible Study Tools .

^ "2 Corinthians 13:14 – Trinity?" .

The Son of Jehovah (blog). 2010-10-09 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 – via wordpress.com.

^ Philippians 2:5–6 ^ Philippians 2:5–6 ^ Philippians 2:6–8 biblicalunitarian.com. Retrieved 8 July 2019.

^ "The trinity delusion – Philippians 2:6" . Retrieved 8 July 2019 – via angelfire.com.

^ Moen, Skip (October 2014).

"The assumed trinity: A look at Philippians 2:6" .

skipmoen.com . Hebrew Word Study . Retrieved 8 July 2019 .

^ Kemball-Cook, David (2007).

Is God a Trinity?

(self-published). Lulu.com.

ISBN 978-0-9542211-1-9 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 – via Google Books.

^ Stephen T. Davis; Daniel Kendall; Gerald O'Collins, eds. (2002).

The Trinity: An Interdisciplinary Symposium on the Trinity . Oxford University Press. p. 357.

ISBN 978-0-19-924612-0 .

^ Roberts, Nancy (January 2011).

"Trinity vs. Monotheism: A False Dichotomy?" .

The Muslim World .

101 (1): 73– 93.

doi : 10.1111/j.1478-1913.2010.01340.x .

ISSN 0027-4909 .

^ Heb 1:3 ^ "Father, Son, and Holy Spirit : The One God" , Reconsidering the Doctrine of God , Bloomsbury T & T Clark, pp.

63– 64, 2005, doi : 10.5040/9780567660749.ch-005 , ISBN 978-0-567-66074-9 , retrieved 2025-04-03 ^ "The Chalcedonian Definition" . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ The Word "Homoousios" from Hellenism to Christianity , by P.F. Beatrice, Church History, Cambridge University Press on behalf of the American Society of Church History, Vol. 71, No. 2, (Jun., 2002), pp. 243–272. (retrieved @ noemon.net) Archived July 23, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ "The word Trinity is not found in the Bible" .

CARM – The Christian Apologetics & Research Ministry . 2008-11-24 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ McQuick, Oneil (2005).

The Voice.

L.I.M.

ISBN 978-1-4196-1730-0 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ "Institute for Religious Research – The Biblical Basis of the Doctrine of the Trinity – Introduction" .

Institute for Religious Research . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ The Unitarian: a monthly magazine of liberal Christianity ed. Jabez Thomas Sunderland, Brooke Herford, Frederick B. Mott – 1893 "We believe in the Holy Spirit, man's sole reliance for guidance, safety, or salvation, not as a separate person, entity, reality, or consciousness, existent apart from man or God, but as the recognizing sympathetic inter-communication in love between God and the human soul, the direct converse or communion of man's consciousness with Deity." ^ "Is the Holy Spirit a Person?".

Awake!

: 14– 15. July 2006.

In the Bible, God's Holy Spirit is identified as God's power in action. Hence, an accurate translation of the Bible's Hebrew text refers to God's spirit as "God's active force".

^ Who and What Is God?

– Mystery of the Ages – Herbert W. Armstrong. Retrieved 19 May 2012.

^ Peter Althouse Spirit of the last days: Pentecostal eschatology in conversation p. 12. 2003. "The Oneness Pentecostal stream follows in the steps of the Reformed stream, but has a modalistic view of the Godhead" ^ See under heading "The Father is the Holy Ghost" in David Bernard, The Oneness of God, Chapter 6.

^ See also David Bernard, A Handbook of Basic Doctrines , Word Aflame Press, 1988.

^ See under "The Lord God and His Spirit," in Chapter 7 of David Bernard, The Oneness of God Archived 2008-02-16 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Wilson, Jerry A. (1992).

"Holy Spirit" . In Ludlow, Daniel H (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Mormonism . New York: Macmillan Publishing . p.

651 .

ISBN 978-0-02-879602-4 .

OCLC 24502140 .

The Holy Spirit is a term often used to refer to the Holy Ghost. In such cases the Holy Spirit is a personage." ^ McConkie, Joseph Fielding (1992).

"Holy Ghost" . In Ludlow, Daniel H (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Mormonism . New York: Macmillan Publishing . pp.

649–651 .

ISBN 978-0-02-879602-4 .

OCLC 24502140 .

^ D&C 131:7–8 ("There is no such thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure, and can only be discerned by purer eyes; We cannot see it; but when our bodies are purified we shall see that it is all matter.") ^ a b D&C 130:22 .

^ Romney, Marion G.

(May 1974), "The Holy Ghost" , Ensign ^ a b Millennial Star . Vol. XII. October 15, 1850. pp.

305– 309 . Retrieved March 30, 2011 .

^ "Basic Beliefs Articles of Faith and Practice" . Church of Christ. Archived from the original on 21 January 2015 . Retrieved 21 January 2015 .

^ "Unity Palo Alto Community Church – Beliefs | Twenty Questions and Answers" .

www.unitypaloalto.org . Archived from the original on October 7, 2007.

^ Seitz, Christopher R. (2001).

Nicene Christianity: The Future for a New Ecumenism . Brazos Press.

ISBN 978-1-84227-154-4 .

Archived from the original on 14 January 2023 . Retrieved 21 May 2022 .

^ a b Cleaver, Ken (2012).

"The Practical and Ethical Considerations in Labeling a Religious Group as a Cult" .

Journal for the Study of Religions and Ideologies .

11 (33): 164– 181. Archived from the original on 2021-08-29.

^ a b Ladouceur, Paul (2020).

"Christian Ecumenism and Interreligious Dialogue: Convergences and Divergences" (PDF) .

Journal of Ecumenical Studies .

55 (2): 167– 189.

doi : 10.1353/ecu.2020.0018 .

^ a b Solveig Nilson.

"Is Mormonism Christian?" . Retrieved 27 August 2024 .

^ Clifton, Shane (Fall 2012). "Ecumenism From the Bottom Up: A Pentecostal Perspective".

Journal of Ecumenical Studies .

47 (4).

^ "Ecumenical and Interfaith Ministries" .

Community of Christ .

^ Montefiore, C. G. (2016-06-18) [January 1897]. "Unitarianism and Judaism in Their Relations to Each Other".

The Jewish Quarterly Review .

9 (2): 240– 253.

doi : 10.2307/1450588 .

JSTOR 1450588 .

You [Unitarian Christians] have relations and points of connexion with Judaism on the one side, and with orthodox Christianity on the other. You are in a position of vantage to absorb the permanent elements of truth and value lying at your right hand and at your left. For, looked at from one point of view, though you might yourselves deny it, you constitute a phase of Judaism; looked at from another, though many Christians deny it, you are a phase of Christianity. The paradox of the one assertion to some of yourselves is no greater than the paradox of the other to many beyond your pale ^ The Holy Qur'an . 4:171.

^ Cleland, Bilal.

"Islam and Unitarians" . Tell me about Islam . Retrieved 16 June 2016 .

^ 'At times he forms one of a trinity in unity, with Ra and Osiris, as in Fig. 87, a god with the two sceptres of Osiris, the hawk's head of Horus, and the sun of Ra. This is the god described to Eusebius, who tells us that when the oracle was consulted about the divine nature, by those who wished to understand this complicated mythology, it had answered, "I am Apollo and Lord and Bacchus," or, to use the Egyptian names, "I am Ra and Horus and Osiris." Another god, in the form of a porcelain idol to be worn as a charm, shows us Horus as one of a trinity in unity, in name, at least, agreeing with that afterwards adopted by the Christians—namely, the Great God, the Son God, and the Spirit God.'— Samuel Sharpe , Egyptian Mythology and Egyptian Christianity , 1863, pp. 89–90.

^ "How Ancient Trinitarian Gods Influenced Adoption of the Trinity" .

United Church of God . 2011-07-22 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ Michael Barber – Should Christianity Abandon the Doctrine of the Trinity?

– Universal-Publishers, Nov 1, 2006 – Part Three, p. 78.

^ "Περί Ουρανού/1" . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ "Aristote: Traité du Ciel (livre I – texte grec)" . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ "Bekker edition of Aristotle's works, volume II, p. 211" . Archived from the original on 2014-08-27 . Retrieved 2017-09-10 .

^ McKirahan, Richard D. (1999). "Review".

The Philosophical Review .

108 (2): 285– 287.

doi : 10.2307/2998305 .

JSTOR 2998305 .

^ Phaedo 104e.

^ Course of Ideas, pp. 387–388.

^ Stuart George Hall (1992).

Doctrine and Practice in the Early Church . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 50.

ISBN 0-8028-0629-5 ^ Select Treatises of St. Athanasius – In Controversy With the Arians – Freely Translated by John Henry Cardinal Newmann – Longmans, Green, and Co., 1911 ^ A. Hilary Armstrong, Henry J. Blumenthal, Platonism.

Encyclopædia Britannica.

Retrieved May 13, 2008, from Encyclopædia Britannica 2006 Ultimate Reference Suite DVD.

^ Logan A. Marcellus of Ancyra (Pseudo-Anthimus), 'On the Holy Church': Text, Translation and Commentary. Verses 8–9. Journal of Theological Studies, NS, Volume 51, Pt. 1, April 2000, p. 95.

^ Aurelius, Marcus (1964).

Meditations . London: Penguin Books . p. 25.

ISBN 978-0-14-044140-6 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania , Should You Believe in the Trinity?

(2006) ^ Neusner, Jacob, ed. 2009.

World Religions in America: An Introduction , Fourth Ed. Louisville, Kentucky: Westminster John Knox Press, p. 257.

ISBN 978-0-664-23320-4 ^ Beit-Hallahmi, Benjamin. 1998.

The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Active New Religions, Sects and Cults , Revised Ed. New York: Rosen Publishing Group, p. 73.

ISBN 0-8239-2586-2 ^ Walker, James K. (2007).

The Concise Guide to Today's Religions and Spirituality . Eugene, Oregon: Harvest House Publishers. pp. 117–118.

ISBN 978-0-7369-2011-7 ^ Avery Cardinal Dulles.

The Deist Minimum . 2005.

Further reading [ edit ] Morgan, Caesar An investigation of the trinity of Plato and of Philo Judaeus, and of the effects which an attachment to their writings had upon the principles and reasonings of the father of the Christian church , Cambridge University Press, 1853.

Tuggy, Dale (2016).

"History of Trinitarian Doctrines" .

Trinity .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Tuggy, Dale (March 18, 2016).

"Trinity" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Wallace, Robert , Antitrinitarian Biography; or, Sketches of the lives and writings of distinguished antitrinitarians, exhibiting a view of the state of the Unitarian doctrine and worship in the principal nations of Europe, from the reformation to the close of the seventeenth century, to which is prefixed a history of Unitarianism in England during the same period , 1850.

v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nontrinitarianism&oldid=1305680238 " Categories : Nontrinitarianism Christian terminology Schisms in Christianity Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: missing title CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Tagalog-language text Articles needing additional references from November 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2017 Articles to be expanded from August 2016 All articles to be expanded Wikipedia articles with style issues from January 2025 All articles with style issues Articles that may contain original research from January 2025 All articles that may contain original research Articles lacking reliable references from January 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Wikipedia articles with style issues from August 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 Articles lacking reliable references from May 2017 Articles needing additional references from July 2010 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2017 Articles needing additional references from November 2010 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2017 Articles needing additional references from December 2011 Articles needing additional references from August 2011 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 13:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nontrinitarianism 44 languages Add topic

