Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and translation 2 Hegelianism 3 Weltgeist 4 Volksgeist 5 Zeitgeist 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Geist 4 languages 한국어 עברית Shqip Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Volksgeist ) Philosophical concept of "spirit" This article is about the German word. For other uses, see Geist (disambiguation) .

Geist ( German pronunciation: [ˈɡaɪst] ⓘ ) is a German noun with a significant degree of importance in German philosophy .

Geist can be roughly translated into three English meanings: ghost (as in the supernatural entity), spirit (as in the Holy Spirit), and mind or intellect . Some English translators resort to using "spirit/mind" or "spirit (mind)" to help convey the meaning of the term.

[ 1 ] Geist is also a central concept in Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel 's 1807 The Phenomenology of Spirit ( Phänomenologie des Geistes ). Notable compounds, all associated with Hegel's view of world history of the late 18th century, include Weltgeist ( German: [ˈvɛltˌɡaɪ̯st] ⓘ , "world-spirit"), Volksgeist ("national spirit") and Zeitgeist ("spirit of the age").

Etymology and translation [ edit ] Further information: Spirit (animating force) , Pneuma , Psyche (psychology) , and Soul German Geist (masculine gender: der Geist ) continues Old High German geist , attested as the translation of Latin spiritus .
It is the direct cognate of English ghost , from a West Germanic gaistaz . Its derivation from a PIE root g̑heis- "to be agitated, frightened" suggests [ citation needed ] that the Germanic word originally referred to frightening (cf. English ghastly ) apparitions or ghosts , and may also have carried the connotation of "ecstatic agitation, furor " related to the cult of Germanic Mercury .
As the translation of biblical Latin spiritus (Greek πνεῦμα) " spirit, breath " the Germanic word acquires a Christian meaning from an early time, notably in reference to the Holy Spirit (Old English sē hālga gāst "the Holy Ghost", OHG ther heilago geist , Modern German der Heilige Geist ). Poltergeist (Noisy/Disruptive Geist) is a common interchangeable term.
The English word is in competition with Latinate spirit from the Middle English period, but its broader meaning is preserved well into the early modern period.

[ 2 ] The German noun much like English spirit could refer to spooks or ghostly apparitions of the dead, to the religious concept, as in the Holy Spirit, as well as to the "spirit of wine", i.e., ethanol .
However, its special meaning of " mind , intellect " never shared by English ghost is acquired only in the 18th century, under the influence of French esprit .
In this sense it became extremely productive in the German language of the 18th century in general as well as in 18th-century German philosophy.

Geist could now refer to the quality of intellectual brilliance, to wit, innovation, erudition, etc.
It is also in this time that the adjectival distinction of geistlich "spiritual, pertaining to religion" vs.

geistig "intellectual, pertaining to the mind" begins to be made. Reference to spooks or ghosts is made by the adjective geisterhaft "ghostly, spectral".

[ 3 ] Numerous compounds are formed in the 18th to 19th centuries, some of them loan translations of French expressions, such as Geistesgegenwart = présence d'esprit ("mental presence, acuity"), Geistesabwesenheit = absence d’esprit ("mental absence, distraction"), geisteskrank "mentally ill", geistreich "witty, intellectually brilliant", geistlos "unintelligent, unimaginative, vacuous" etc.
It is from these developments that certain German compounds containing -geist have been loaned into English, such as Zeitgeist .

[ 4 ] German Geist in this particular sense of "mind, wit, erudition; intangible essence, spirit" has no precise English-language equivalent, for which reason translators sometimes retain Geist as a German loanword.

There is a second word for ghost in German: das Gespenst (neutral gender).

Der Geist is used slightly more often to refer to a ghost (in the sense of flying white creature) than das Gespenst . The corresponding adjectives are gespenstisch ("ghostly", "spooky") and gespensterhaft ("ghost-like"). A Gespenst is described in German as spukender Totengeist , a "spooking ghost of the dead". The adjectives geistig and geistlich on the other hand, can not be used to describe something spooky, as geistig means "mental", and geistlich means either "spiritual" or refers to employees of the church.

Geisterhaft would also mean, like gespensterhaft , "ghost-like". While "spook" means der Spuk (male gender), the adjective of this word is only used in its English form, spooky . The more common German adjective would be gruselig , deriving from der Grusel ( das ist gruselig , colloquially: das ist spooky , meaning "that is spooky").

Hegelianism [ edit ] Geist is a central concept in Hegel 's philosophy. According to most interpretations, the Weltgeist ("world spirit") is not an actual object or a transcendent, godlike thing, but a means of philosophizing about history.

[ citation needed ] Weltgeist is effected in history through the mediation of various Volksgeister ("national spirits"), the great men of history, such as Napoleon , are the " concrete universal ".

[ citation needed ] This has led some to claim that Hegel favored the great man theory , although his philosophy of history , in particular concerning the role of the " universal state" ( Universalstaat , which means a universal "order" or "statute" rather than " state "), and of an "End of History" is much more complex.

For Hegel, the great hero is unwittingly utilized by Geist or absolute spirit , by a "ruse of reason" as he puts it, and is irrelevant to history once his historic mission is accomplished; he is thus subjected to the teleological principle of history, a principle which allows Hegel to reread the history of philosophy as culminating in his philosophy of history.

Weltgeist [ edit ] Further information: Anima mundi Weltgeist ("world-spirit") is older than the 18th century, at first (16th century) in the sense of "secularism, impiety, irreligiosity" ( spiritus mundi ), in the 17th century also personalised in the sense of "man of the world", "mundane or secular person".
Also from the 17th century, Weltgeist acquired a philosophical or spiritual sense of "world-spirit" or "world-soul" ( anima mundi, spiritus universi ) in the sense of Panentheism , a spiritual essence permeating all of nature, or the active principle animating the universe, including the physical sense, such as the attraction between magnet and iron or between Moon and tide .

[ 5 ] This idea of Weltgeist in the sense of anima mundi became very influential in 18th-century German philosophy. In philosophical contexts, der Geist on its own could refer to this concept, as in Christian Thomasius , Versuch vom Wesen des Geistes (1709).

[ 6 ] Belief in a Weltgeist as animating principle immanent to the universe became dominant in German thought due to the influence of Goethe , in the later part of the 18th century.

[ 7 ] Already in the poetical language of Johann Ulrich von König (d. 1745), the Weltgeist appears as the active, masculine principle opposite the feminine principle of Nature .

[ 8 ] Weltgeist in the sense of Goethe comes close to being a synonym of God and can be attributed agency and will.

Herder , who tended to prefer the form Weltengeist (as it were "spirit of worlds"), pushes this to the point of composing prayers addressed to this world-spirit: O Weltengeist, Bist du so gütig, wie du mächtig bist, Enthülle mir, den du mitfühlend zwar, Und doch so grausam schufst, erkläre mir Das Loos der Fühlenden, die durch mich leiden.

"O World-spirit, be as benevolent as you are powerful and reveal to me, whom you have created with compassion and yet cruelly, explain to me the lot of the sentient, who suffer through me" [ 9 ] "Hegel and Napoleon in Jena" (illustration from Harper's Magazine , 1895) The term was notably embraced by Hegel and his followers in the early 19th century.
For the 19th century, the term as used by Hegel (1807) became prevalent, less in the sense of an animating principle of nature or the universe but as the invisible force advancing world history : "In the course of history one relevant factor is the preservation of a nation [...] while the other factor is that the continued existence of a national spirit [ Volksgeist ] is interrupted because it has exhausted and spent itself, so that world history, the world spirit [ Weltgeist ], proceeds." [ 10 ] Hegel's description of Napoleon as "the world-soul on horseback" ( die Weltseele zu Pferde ) became proverbial.
The phrase is a shortened paraphrase of Hegel's words in a letter written on 13 October 1806, the day before the Battle of Jena , to his friend Friedrich Immanuel Niethammer : I saw the Emperor – this world-soul – riding out of the city on reconnaissance. It is indeed a wonderful sensation to see such an individual, who, concentrated here at a single point, astride a horse, reaches out over the world and masters it.

[ 11 ] The letter was not published in Hegel's time, but the expression was attributed to Hegel anecdotally, appearing in print from 1859.

[ 12 ] It is used without attribution by Meyer Kayserling in his Sephardim (1859:103), and is apparently not recognized as a reference to Hegel by the reviewer in Göttingische gelehrte Anzeigen , who notes it disapprovingly, as one of Kayserling's "bad jokes" ( schlechte Witze ).

[ 13 ] The phrase became widely associated with Hegel later in the 19th century.

[ 14 ] Weiltgeist is distinct from Weltseele ("World Soul ") .

Volksgeist [ edit ] "National spirit" redirects here. For the racehorse, see National Spirit (horse) . For the horse race, see National Spirit Hurdle .

Further information: National character , National consciousness , and Ethnic essentialism This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Germany Ideologies Agrarian Christian democracy Liberal Ordo Ritter School Monarchism Nationalist Neue Rechte Völkisch Paternalistic Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Romanticism Right-Hegelianism Historical School Value Principles Authority Christian values Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Federalism Gemeinschaft Geopolitik Germanisation Heimat Imperialism In Treue fest Kultur Medievalism Monarchism Organicism Patriotism Political theology Prussian virtues Sittlichkeit Social market economy Sonderweg Subsidiarity Volk Volksgeist History Holy Roman Empire The Junkers German Confederation Carlsbad Decrees Anti-Socialist Laws German Reich German Empire State Socialism Völkisch movement George-Kreis Leipzig school Freikorps Monarchism in Bavaria after 1918 Perceived Weimar decadence Conservative Revolution Oster conspiracy 20 July plot Historikerstreit Heidelberg Manifesto German reunification Erklärung 2018 Intellectuals Fichte Freyer Gadamer von Galen George Gehlen Gogarten Görres Hamann Hartmann Heidegger Hegel Herder Hielscher von Hildebrand Hoppe Jünger (Ernst) Jünger (Friedrich) Kantorowicz Klages Kommerell Koselleck Langbehn von Lilienfeld Lorenz Löwith Lübbe Mann (early) Maschke Moeller van den Bruck Müller Nolte Novalis Otto Pieper Plessner von Ranke Reck-Malleczewen Ritter (Gerhard) Ritter (Joachim) Röpke Rüstow von Salomon Scheler Schelsky Schlegel Schmitt Sieferle Sloterdijk Sombart Spaemann Spengler Steinbuch von Treitschke Voegelin Weber Literature Addresses to the German Nation (1806) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) The National System (1837) Degeneration (1892) Ressentiment (1912) Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man (1918) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) Ideology and Utopia (1929) Man and Technics (1931) The Concept of the Political (1932) On the Marble Cliffs (1939) Man (1940) Diary of a Man in Despair (1947) Man in the Age of Technology (1949) The Questionnaire (1951) Fascism in Its Epoch (1963) Envy (1966) Moral und Hypermoral (1969) Germany Abolishes Itself (2010) Finis Germania (2017) Commentators Anrich Aust Bolz Broder Deschner Thomas Fasbender Herman Höhler Hoven Joffe Krause Landt Kuby Hermann Löns Löwenthal Mann (Golo) Maurer Nagel Nebel Noelle-Neumann Otte Pirinçci Röhl Safranski Sarrazin von Schrenck-Notzing Schwilk Stein Strauss (Botho) Stürmer Tichy Weißmann Zehrer Zitelmann Politicians Adenauer Ancillon Barschel von Bismarck von Bose Brüning Fehrenbach Filbinger von Gerlach Goerdeler Held von Hindenburg Hugenberg Jongen Jung Kapp Kohl Krah Lengsfeld Maaßen von Merkatz Merz Michaelis von Papen Petry von Radowitz Rauschning Ritter von Kahr von Roon Schäffer Schäffler von Schleicher Stresemann vom Stein Stoecker von Storch Strauss Wagener Weidel von Westarp Wilhelm II Winnig Jurists Böckenförde von Gierke Möser Quabbe von Savigny Schmitt Stahl Wackenroder Wagener Activists Kohlmann Kubitschek Seibt Billy Six von Stauffenberg Stürzenberger von Thurn und Taxis (Elisabeth) von Thurn und Taxis (Gloria) Parties Active Alternative for Germany (AfD) Bavaria Party (BP) Bündnis Deutschland (BD) Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) Centre Party Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP) Family Party of Germany The Republicans (REP) Values Union (WU) We Citizens (WB) Defunct Bavarian People's Party (BVP) Conservative Party Free Conservative Party (FKP) German Conservative Party (DkP) German Freedom Party German National People's Party (DNVP) German Party (DP) German People's Party (DVP) Organizations Aufbau Vereinigung Bibliothek des Konservatismus Desiderius-Erasmus-Stiftung Die Deutschen Konservativen Forum of German Catholics Gerhard Löwenthal Prize German Burschenschaft German Taxpayers Federation Citizens' Movement Pax Europa Hanns Seidel Foundation Hans Filbinger Foundation Identitäre Aktion Institut für Staatspolitik Konrad Adenauer Foundation PEGIDA Studienzentrum Weikersheim Tradition und Leben Defunct Der Stahlhelm, Bund der Frontsoldaten Germany Foundation Queen Louise League Media Die Achse des Guten Antaios (Defunct) Bild Cato Cicero COMPACT Deutsche Rundschau Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Junge Freiheit Kreuzzeitung (Defunct) Politically Incorrect Preußische Allgemeine Zeitung Süddeutsche Monatshefte Der Türmer Verlag Antaios Die Welt Welt am Sonntag Related topics Alternative Mitte Bavarian nationalism Böckenförde dilemma European New Right Conservatism in Austria Conservatism in Switzerland Criticism of multiculturalism Cultural pessimism Freischwebende Intelligenz Immigration to Germany Criminality Remigration Metapolitics Politics of Germany Liberalism Stahlhelm-Fraktion Conservatism portal Germany portal v t e Volksgeist or Nationalgeist refers to a "spirit" of an individual people ( Volk ) , its "national spirit" or "national character".

[ 15 ] The term Nationalgeist is used in the 1760s by Justus Möser and by Johann Gottfried Herder . The term Nation at this time is used in the sense of natio "nation, ethnic group, race", mostly replaced by the term Volk after 1800.

[ 16 ] In the early 19th century, the term Volksgeist was used by Friedrich Carl von Savigny in order to express the "popular" sense of justice .
Savigniy explicitly referred to the concept of an esprit des nations used by Voltaire .

[ 17 ] and of the esprit général invoked by Montesquieu .

[ 18 ] Hegel uses the term in his Lectures on the Philosophy of History .
Based on the Hegelian use of the term, Wilhelm Wundt , Moritz Lazarus and Heymann Steinthal in the mid-19th-century established the field of Völkerpsychologie ("psychology of nations").

In Germany the concept of Volksgeist has developed and changed its meaning through eras and fields. The most important examples are: In the literary field, Schlegel and the Brothers Grimm ; in the history of cultures, Herder ; in the history of the State or political history, Hegel ; in the field of law, Savigny ; and in the field of psychology Wundt .

[ 19 ] This means that the concept is ambiguous. Furthermore it is not limited to Romanticism as it is commonly known.

[ 20 ] The concept of was also influential in American cultural anthropology. According to the historian of anthropology George W. Stocking, Jr.

, "… one may trace the later American anthropological idea of culture back through Bastian's Volkergedanken and the folk psychologist's Volksgeister to Wilhelm von Humboldt's Nationalcharakter – and behind that, although not without a paradoxical and portentous residue of conceptual and ideological ambiguity, to the Herderian ideal of Volksgeist." [ clarification needed ] [ year needed ] [ page needed ] Zeitgeist [ edit ] Main article: Zeitgeist See also: Multiple discovery and Epochalism The compound Zeitgeist ( / ˈ z aɪ t ɡ aɪ s t / ; [ 21 ] "spirit of the age" or "spirit of the times") similarly to Weltgeist describes
an invisible agent or force dominating the characteristics of a given epoch in world history .
The term is now mostly associated with Hegel , contrasting with Hegel's use of Volksgeist "national spirit" and Weltgeist "world-spirit",
but its coinage and popularization precedes Hegel, and is mostly due to Herder and Goethe .

[ 4 ] Hegel in Phenomenology of the Spirit (1807) uses both Weltgeist and Volksgeist but prefers the phrase Geist der Zeiten "spirit of the times" over the compound Zeitgeist .

[ 22 ] Hegel believed that culture and art reflected its time. Thus, he argued [ year needed ] [ page needed ] that it would be impossible to produce classical art in the modern world, as modernity is essentially a "free and ethical culture".

[ clarification needed ] [ 23 ] The term has also been used more widely in the sense of an intellectual or aesthetic fashion or fad .
For example, Charles Darwin 's 1859 proposition that evolution occurs by natural selection has been cited as a case of the zeitgeist of the epoch, an idea "whose time had come", seeing that his contemporary, Alfred Russel Wallace , was outlining similar models during the same period.

[ 24 ] Similarly, intellectual fashions such as the emergence of logical positivism in the 1920s, leading to a focus on behaviorism and blank-slatism over the following decades, and later, during the 1950s to 1960s, the shift from behaviorism to post-modernism and critical theory can be argued to be an expression of the intellectual or academic "zeitgeist".

[ 24 ] Zeitgeist in more recent usage has been used by Forsyth (2009) in reference to his "theory of leadership " [ 25 ] and in other publications describing models of business or industry.
Canadian journalist Malcolm Gladwell argued in his book Outliers that entrepreneurs who succeeded in the early stages of a nascent industry often share similar characteristics.

The term as used contemporarily may more pragmatically refer to a fashion or fad which prescribes what is acceptable or tasteful, e.g. in the field of architecture .

[ 26 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Max Stirner – German philosopher (1806–1856) Hauntology References [ edit ] ^ C. Marvin Pate.

From Plato to Jesus: What Does Philosophy Have to Do with Theology?

. 2011, page 69. Rosenkranz, Karl.

Hegel, as the national philosopher of Germany . 1874, page 85 ^ As observed by Alexander Gil , The sacred philosophy of the holy scripture: laid down... in... the apostles (1635): "The word Ghost in English [...] is as much as athem, or breath; in our new Latin language, a Spirit." Spenser in 1590 could still say No knight so rude, I weene, As to doen outrage to a sleeping ghost ( Faerie Queene II. viii. 26), by "sleeping ghost" referring to the sleeping mind of a living person, not the ghost of a deceased one.

^ Geist in Wolfgang Pfeifer, Etymologisches Wörterbuch ([1989] 2010).

^ a b Zeitgeist "spirit of the epoch" and Nationalgeist "spirit of a nation" in L. Meister, Eine kurze Geschichte der Menschenrechte (1789).

der frivole Welt- und Zeitgeist ("the frivolous spirit of the world and the time") in Lavater , Handbibliothek für Freunde 5 (1791), p. 57.

Zeitgeist is popularized by Herder and Goethe .

Zeitgeist in Grimm, Deutsches Wörterbuch .

^ Weltgeist in Grimm, Deutsches Wörterbuch .

^ Rudolf Eisler Wörterbuch der philosophischen Begriffe (1904),  406ff., 1760f.

^ Korff, Geist der Göthezeit (1923).

^ J. U. von König, Gedichte (1745) p. 253 ^ Herder, "Die Gärten der Hesperiden", Ausgewählte Werke 1, ed. Kurz (1871), p. 223.

^ Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Weltgeschichte (ed. 1944), 96f.

^ den Kaiser – diese Weltseele – sah ich durch die Stadt zum Rekognoszieren hinausreiten; es ist in der Tat eine wunderbare Empfindung, ein solches Individuum zu sehen, das hier auf einen Punkt konzentriert, auf einem Pferde sitzend, über die Welt übergreift und sie beherrscht.

Hegel, letter of  13 October 1806  to F. I. Niethammer,  no. 74 (p. 119) in Briefe von und an Hegel ed. Hoffmeister, vol. 1 (1970), cited after H. Schnädelbach in Wolfgang Welsch, Klaus Vieweg (eds.), Das Interesse des Denkens: Hegel aus heutiger Sicht ,
Wilhelm Fink Verlag (2003), p. 223 ; trans. Pinkard (2000:228).

^ L. Noack, Schelling und die Philosophie der Romantik , 1859, p. 153 ^ Göttingische gelehrte Anzeigen 2 (1861) p. 770 , ^ e.g. G. Baur in Reden gehalten in der Aula der Universität Leipzig beim Rectoratswechsel am 31. October 1874 (1874), p. 36 .

^ "Volksgeist – Encyclopedia.com" . Encyclopedia.com. 2019-11-26 . Retrieved 2019-12-17 .

^ Christoph Mährlein, Volksgeist und Recht. Hegels Philosophie der Einheit und ihre Bedeutung in der Rechtswissenschaft , Königshausen & Neumann, Würzburg (2000), 17f.

^ Essai sur les mœurs et l’esprit des nations , 1756.

^ Vom Geist der Gesetze , 1748.

^ Azurmendi, Joxe : Volksgeist-Herri Gogoa. Ilustraziotik nazismora , p. 65 ^ Azurmendi, Joxe : Volksgeist-Herri Gogoa. Ilustraziotik nazismora , p. 285 ^ "zeitgeist noun – Definition, pictures, pronunciation and usage notes | Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary at OxfordLearnersDictionaries.com" .

^ cf. use of the phrase der Geist seiner Zeit ("the spirit of his time") in Lectures on the Philosophy of History , for example, "no man can surpass his own time, for the spirit of his time is also his own spirit." Glenn Alexander Magee (2010), "Zeitgeist (p. 262)" , The Hegel Dictionary , London: A & C Black , ISBN 978-1-847-06591-9 ^ Hendrix, John Shannon.

Aesthetics & The Philosophy Of Spirit . New York: Peter Lang. (2005). 4, 11.

^ a b Hothersall, D., "History of Psychology", 2004, [ page needed ] ^ Forsyth, D. R. (2009). Group dynamics: New York: Wadsworth. [Chapter 9] ^ Eero Saarinen (2006), Shaping the Future , Yale University Press , p.

15 , ISBN 978-0-972-48812-9 Sources [ edit ] Of Spirit: Heidegger and the Question , by Jacques Derrida . Translation by Geoffrey Bennington & Rachel Bowlby, Chicago University Press, 1989 ( ISBN 0-226-14317-1 ) and 1991 ( ISBN 0-226-14319-8 ) Berlin, Isaiah : Vico and Herder. Two Studies in the History of Ideas , London, 1976.

Stocking, George W.

1996.

Volksgeist as Method and Ethic: Essays on Boasian Ethnography and the German Anthropological Tradition .

ISBN 0-299-14554-9 External links [ edit ] Look up Zeitgeist or zeitgeist in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Look up Volksgeist in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Look up Weltgeist , spiritus mundi , or anima mundi in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Look up Geist in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Hegel's Spirit/Mind from Hegel.net (Hegel's various uses of the term Geist based on the entry from Encyclopædia Britannica 11th Edition ) Christian Adolph Klotz Christian Adolf Klotz in: Meyers Konversations-Lexikon, 4. Aufl., 1888, Vol. 9, Page 859 Dirk Goettsche.

"Zeitgeist" .

Words of the World .

Brady Haran ( University of Nottingham ). Archived from the original on 2019-08-06 . Retrieved 2018-03-20 .

v t e Ghosts and ghostlore List of ghosts Manifestations Ancestral spirits Ghost lights Haunted locations Haunted highways Haunted house Haunted trains Haunted ships Hungry ghost Poltergeist Residual haunting Vengeful ghost Procession of the dead By continent and culture African Madam Koi Koi South Africa ( locations ) Asian Burmese Chinese locations Tibetan Filipino locations Ghost Festival Indian locations Bengali Japanese locations Onryō Korean Malay Thai locations Vietnamese Europe English locations in Scotland locations in United Kingdom France locations Slavic religion Romania North America Canada Caribbean Duppy Navajo Chindi Ghost sickness Mexican locations Day of the Dead United States California District of Columbia Indiana Oregon Pennsylvania San Francisco South America Colombia Oceania Polynesian Maori History Mesopotamian Ancient Egyptian culture Classical antiquity Parapsychology Apparitional experience Electronic voice phenomenon Ghost hunting Séance Mediumship Spirit photography Popular culture Films about ghosts India Indonesia Stories about ghosts Kaidan Halloween Samhain Paranormal television Court cases Booty v Barnaby Hammersmith Ghost murder case Related Fear of ghosts Spectrophilia Spiritualism Kardecist spiritism The Ghost Club Geist Soul Spirit Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐zs98t
Cached time: 20250814233111
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.753 seconds
Real time usage: 0.910 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5520/1000000
Revision size: 22796/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 139402/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11659/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 67531/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.473/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15565391/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  767.561      1 -total
 22.40%  171.924      1 Template:Conservatism_in_Germany
 18.25%  140.090      1 Template:Reflist
 14.50%  111.330      2 Template:IPA
 10.28%   78.903      8 Template:Fix
  9.44%   72.473      3 Template:Cite_web
  7.15%   54.902      1 Template:Short_description
  6.39%   49.075     35 Template:Lang
  6.22%   47.709     13 Template:Delink
  5.72%   43.923      3 Template:Page_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1865924:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814233111 and revision id 1299434356. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geist&oldid=1299434356#Volksgeist " Categories : Concepts in the philosophy of mind Enlightenment philosophy German words and phrases Concepts in metaphysics German philosophy German idealism Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Hegelianism Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles containing German-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2018 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2007 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2018 Articles needing the year an event occurred from March 2018 This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 10:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geist 4 languages Add topic

