Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Finnish-Soviet relations and politics 1.2 Justification 1.3 Negotiations 1.4 Shelling of Mainila and Soviet intentions 1.4.1 Soviet intentions 2 Opposing forces Toggle Opposing forces subsection 2.1 Soviet military plan 2.2 Soviet order of battle 2.3 Finnish order of battle 3 Soviet invasion Toggle Soviet invasion subsection 3.1 Start of invasion and political operations 3.2 First battles and Soviet advance to Mannerheim Line 4 Operations from December to January Toggle Operations from December to January subsection 4.1 Weather conditions 4.2 Finnish guerrilla tactics 4.3 Battles of the Mannerheim Line 4.4 Battles in Ladoga Karelia and North Karelia 4.5 Battles in Kainuu 4.6 Battles in Finnish Lapland 5 Aerial warfare Toggle Aerial warfare subsection 5.1 Soviet Air Force 5.2 Finnish Air Force 6 Naval warfare Toggle Naval warfare subsection 6.1 Naval activity 6.2 Coastal artillery 7 Soviet breakthrough in February Toggle Soviet breakthrough in February subsection 7.1 Red Army reforms and offensive preparations 7.2 Soviet offensive on the Karelian Isthmus 7.3 Peace negotiations 7.4 End of war in March 7.5 Moscow Peace Treaty 8 Foreign support Toggle Foreign support subsection 8.1 Foreign volunteers 8.1.1 White émigrés and Russian prisoners-of-war 8.2 Franco-British intervention plans 9 Aftermath and casualties Toggle Aftermath and casualties subsection 9.1 Result 9.2 Finland 9.3 Soviet Union 9.4 Germany 9.5 Allies 10 See also 11 Explanatory notes 12 Citations 13 General and cited references Toggle General and cited references subsection 13.1 English 13.2 Finnish, Russian and other languages 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Winter War 85 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Livvinkarjala Magyar Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Võro 吴语 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1939–1940 war between the Soviet Union and Finland This article is about the 1939–1940 war between the Soviet Union and Finland. For other uses, see Winter War (disambiguation) .

Winter War Part of the European theatre of World War II A Finnish Maxim M/09-21 machine gun crew during the Winter War Date 30 November 1939 – 13 March 1940 (3 months, 1 week and 6 days) Location Eastern Finland Result Moscow Peace Treaty Territorial changes Cession of the Gulf of Finland islands, Karelian Isthmus , Ladoga Karelia , Salla , Rybachy Peninsula and lease of Hanko to the Soviet Union Belligerents Finland Foreign volunteers Soviet Union Finnish Democratic Republic Commanders and leaders Kyösti Kallio C.G.E. Mannerheim Hugo Österman Harald Öhquist Erik Heinrichs Woldemar Hägglund Wiljo Tuompo Joseph Stalin Kliment Voroshilov Semyon Timoshenko Kirill Meretskov Vladimir Grendal Grigori Shtern Mikhail Dukhanov Valerian Frolov Strength 300,000–340,000 soldiers [ F 1 ] 32 tanks [ F 2 ] 114 aircraft [ F 3 ] 425,000–760,000 soldiers [ F 4 ] 2,514–6,541 tanks [ F 5 ] 3,880 aircraft [ 10 ] Casualties and losses 25,904 dead or missing [ 11 ] 43,557 wounded [ 12 ] 800–1,100 captured [ 13 ] 20–30 tanks 62 aircraft [ 14 ] 1 armed icebreaker damaged Finnish Ladoga Naval Detachment ceded to the Soviet Union 70,000 total casualties 126,875–167,976 dead or missing [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] 188,671–207,538 wounded or sick [ 15 ] [ 16 ] (including at least 61,506 sick or frostbitten [ 19 ] ) 5,572 captured [ 20 ] 1,200–3,543 tanks [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] 261–515 aircraft [ 23 ] [ 24 ] 321,000–381,000 total casualties v t e Winter War battles Karelian Isthmus 1st Summa Taipale Kelja 2nd Summa Honkaniemi Vyborg Bay Ladoga Karelia Tolvajärvi Varolampi Kollaa North Karelia Ilomantsi Kainuu Suomussalmi Raate Road Kuhmo Lapland Petsamo Salla v t e Campaigns of World War II Europe Poland Soviet invasion Phoney War Saar Offensive Finland Winter War Karelia Lapland Weserübung Denmark Norway Finnmark Western Front 1940 Luxembourg Netherlands Belgium France Alps 1940 1944–1945 Britain Eastern Front Barbarossa Leningrad Crimea Rzhev Case Blue Stalingrad Kursk Dnieper–Carpaths Bagration Romania Hungary Vistula–Oder Berlin Western Front 1944–1945 Overlord Dragoon Siegfried Line Market Garden Bulge Western Germany Asia-Pacific China Winter Offensive Hundred Regiments Offensive Northern Burma and Western Yunnan Ichi-Go Burma 1941–1942 1942–1943 1944 1944–1945 South-East Asia Indochina Franco-Thai War Thailand Malaya and Singapore South West Pacific Philippines 1941–1942 1944–1945 Dutch East Indies Borneo 1945 Solomon Islands Guadalcanal New Georgia Bougainville New Guinea Kokoda Track Salamaua–Lae Markham, Ramu and Finisterre Huon Peninsula New Britain Admiralty Islands Western New Guinea Pacific Ocean Gilberts and Marshalls Mariana and Palau Volcano and Ryukyu Soviet–Japanese War Manchuria and Northern Korea pre-war border conflicts Japan South Sakhalin Kurils Mediterranean and Middle East Balkans Greco-Italian War Greece Crete Albania Yugoslavia Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Malta Dodecanese East Africa Guerrilla war Middle East Iraq Syria–Lebanon Iran North Africa Libya-Egypt Morocco-Algeria Tunisia Italy Sicily Mainland Italy Winter Line Gothic Line Spring Offensive Other campaigns Air Warfare Strategic bombing Americas Aleuts Antarctica Atlantic Australia Arctic French West Africa Indian Ocean 1940–1945 Madagascar Coups Uruguay Norway Baltic Nations Yugoslavia Romania 1941 Iraq Italy Argentina Germany Croatia Romania 1944 Bulgaria Hungary French Indochina Japan Matsue Slovak National Uprising Resistance movements Albanian resistance Baltic states Belgian Resistance Czechoslovak Resistance Danish resistance Dutch resistance French Resistance Greek resistance Italian Resistance Norwegian resistance Polish resistance Romanian resistance Slovak partisans Soviet partisans Yugoslav Partisans v t e Nordic states, 1939–1945 Denmark Weserübung Denmark Norway Valentine (Faroe Islands) Safari Isefjord Bornholm Finland Winter War Continuation War Silver Fox Orator Lapland War Tanne Ost Iceland Fork Norway Altmark incident Weserübung Denmark Norway Alphabet Heavy water sabotage Claymore Kirkenes and Petsamo Gauntlet Fritham Gearbox Gearbox II Leader Zitronella Attacks on Tirpitz Petsamo–Kirkenes Finnmark v t e Finland (1939–1945) Winter War Interim Peace Continuation War Moscow Armistice Lapland War Winter War Articles Background Timeline Foreign support Aerial warfare Naval warfare Aftermath Related topics Popular culture Finnish evacuation Mannerheim Line Plans for Franco-British intervention v t e The Winter War [ F 6 ] was a war between the Soviet Union and Finland . It began with a Soviet invasion of Finland on 30 November 1939, three months after the outbreak of World War II , and ended three and a half months later with the Moscow Peace Treaty on 13 March 1940. Despite superior military strength, especially in tanks and aircraft, the Soviet Union suffered severe losses and initially made little headway. The League of Nations deemed the attack illegal and expelled the Soviet Union from its organization.

The Soviets made several demands, including that Finland cede substantial border territories in exchange for land elsewhere, claiming security reasons – primarily the protection of Leningrad , 32 km (20 mi) from the Finnish border. When Finland refused, the Soviets invaded.  Most sources conclude that the Soviet Union had intended to conquer all of Finland, and cite the establishment of the puppet Finnish Communist government and the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact 's secret protocols as evidence of this, [ F 7 ] while other sources argue against the idea of a full Soviet conquest.

[ F 8 ] Finland repelled Soviet attacks for more than two months and inflicted substantial losses on the invaders in temperatures as low as −43 °C (−45 °F). The battles focused mainly on Taipale along the Karelian Isthmus , on Kollaa in Ladoga Karelia and on Raate Road in Kainuu , but there were also battles in Lapland and North Karelia .

Following the initial setbacks, the Soviets reduced their strategic objectives and put an end to the puppet Finnish communist government in late January 1940, and informed the legitimate Finnish government that they were willing to negotiate peace.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] After the Soviet military reorganized and adopted different tactics, they renewed their offensive in February 1940 and overcame the Finnish defences on the Karelian Isthmus. This left the Finnish army in the main theatre of war near the breaking point, with a retreat seeming inevitable. Consequently, Finnish commander-in-chief Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim urged a peace deal with the Soviets, while the Finns still retained bargaining power.

[ 40 ] Hostilities ceased in March 1940 with the signing of the Moscow Peace Treaty in which Finland ceded 9% of its territory to the Soviet Union. Soviet losses were heavy, and the country's international reputation suffered.

[ 41 ] Their gains exceeded their pre-war demands, and the Soviets received substantial territories along Lake Ladoga and further north. Finland retained its sovereignty and enhanced its international reputation. The poor performance of the Red Army encouraged German Chancellor Adolf Hitler to believe that an attack on the Soviet Union would be successful and confirmed negative Western opinions of the Soviet military. After 15 months of Interim Peace , in June 1941, Germany commenced Operation Barbarossa , and the Continuation War between Finland and the Soviets began.

Background [ edit ] Main article: Background of the Winter War See also: Timeline of the Winter War and Treaty of Tartu (Finland–Russia) Finnish-Soviet relations and politics [ edit ] Main articles: East Karelian uprising and Soviet–Finnish Non-Aggression Pact See also: Independence of Finland Geopolitical status in Northern Europe in November 1939 [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Neutral countries Germany and annexed countries Soviet Union and annexed countries Neutral countries with military bases established by Soviet Union in October 1939 Until the early nineteenth century, Finland was the eastern part of the Kingdom of Sweden . From 21 February 1808 to 17 September 1809, the Russian Empire waged the Finnish War against the Kingdom of Sweden, ostensibly to protect the Russian capital, Saint Petersburg . Eventually Russia conquered and annexed Finland, and converted it into an autonomous buffer state .

[ 44 ] The resulting Grand Duchy of Finland enjoyed wide autonomy within Russia until the end of the nineteenth century, when Russia began attempts to assimilate Finland as part of a general policy to strengthen the central government and unify the Empire by Russification . Those attempts were aborted because of Russia's internal strife, but they ruined Russia's relationship with Finland. In addition, support increased in Finland for self-determination movements.

[ 45 ] World War I led to the collapse of the Russian Empire during the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the Russian Civil War . On 15 November 1917, the Bolshevik Russian government declared that national minorities possessed the right of self-determination , including the right to secede and form a separate state, which gave Finland a window of opportunity. On 6 December 1917, the Senate of Finland declared the nation's independence .

Soviet Russia , later the Soviet Union , recognised the new Finnish government just three weeks after the declaration.

[ 45 ] Finland achieved full sovereignty in May 1918 after a four-month civil war in which the conservative Whites defeated the socialist Reds with the help of the Imperial German Army , pro-German Jägers , and some Swedish troops, in addition to the expulsion of Bolshevik troops.

[ 46 ] Finland joined the League of Nations in 1920 and sought security guarantees, but Finland's primary goal was co-operation with the Scandinavian countries , mainly Sweden, and it focused on the exchange of information and on defence planning (the joint defence of Åland , for example), rather than on military exercises or on the stockpiling and the deployment of materiel . Nevertheless, Sweden carefully avoided committing itself to Finnish foreign policy.

[ 47 ] Finland's military policy included clandestine defence co-operation with Estonia .

[ 48 ] The period after the Finnish Civil War to the early 1930s was a politically unstable time in Finland because of the continued rivalry between the conservatives and the socialists. The Communist Party of Finland was declared illegal in 1931, and the nationalist Lapua Movement organised anticommunist violence, which culminated in a failed coup attempt in 1932. The successor of the Lapua Movement, the Patriotic People's Movement , had a minor presence in national politics and never had more than 14 seats of the 200 in the Finnish Parliament .

[ 49 ] By the late 1930s, the export-oriented Finnish economy was growing and the nation's extreme political movements had diminished.

[ 50 ] The Soviet–Finnish Non-Aggression Pact was signed by Aarno Yrjö-Koskinen and Maxim Litvinov in Moscow 1932.

After Soviet involvement in the Finnish Civil War in 1918, no formal peace treaty was signed. In 1918 and 1919, Finnish volunteers conducted two unsuccessful military incursions across the Soviet border, the Viena and Aunus expeditions , to annex areas in Karelia that according to the Greater Finland ideology would combine all Baltic Finnic peoples into a single state. In 1920, Finnish communists based in Soviet Russia attempted to assassinate the former Finnish White Guard Commander-in-Chief, Marshal Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim . On 14 October 1920, Finland and Soviet Russia signed the Treaty of Tartu , confirming the old border between the autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland and Imperial Russia proper as the new Finnish–Soviet border. Finland also received Petsamo Province , with its ice-free harbour on the Arctic Ocean.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Despite the signing of the treaty, relations between the two countries remained strained. The Finnish government allowed volunteers to cross the border to support the East Karelian uprising in Russia in 1921, and Finnish communists in the Soviet Union continued to prepare for revenge and staged a cross-border raid into Finland, the Pork Mutiny , in 1922.

[ 53 ] In 1932, the Soviet–Finnish Non-Aggression Pact was signed between both countries, and it was reaffirmed for ten years in 1934.

[ 53 ] Foreign trade in Finland was booming, but less than 1% of it was with the Soviet Union.

[ 54 ] In 1934, the Soviet Union also joined the League of Nations.

[ 53 ] Justification [ edit ] Soviet General Secretary Joseph Stalin regarded it a disappointment that the Soviet Union could not halt the Finnish Revolution.

[ 55 ] He thought that the pro-Finland movement in Karelia posed a direct threat to Leningrad and that the area and defences of Finland could be used to invade the Soviet Union or restrict fleet movements.

[ 56 ] Soviet propaganda then painted Finland's leadership as a "vicious and reactionary fascist clique". Field Marshal Mannerheim and Väinö Tanner , the leader of the Finnish Social Democratic Party , were targeted for particular scorn.

[ 57 ] When Stalin gained absolute power through the Great Purge of 1938, the Soviets changed their foreign policy toward Finland and began to pursue the reconquest of the provinces of Tsarist Russia that had been lost during the chaos of the October Revolution of 1917 and the Russian Civil War almost two decades earlier.

[ 58 ] Soviet leaders believed that the old empire's extended borders provided territorial security and wanted Leningrad, only 32 km (20 mi) from the Finnish border, to enjoy a similar level of security against the rising power of Nazi Germany .

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Negotiations [ edit ] Main article: Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Finnish soldiers gather breakfast from a field kitchen during "additional refresher training " at the Karelian Isthmus, on 10 October 1939.

In April 1938, NKVD agent Boris Yartsev contacted Finnish Foreign Minister Rudolf Holsti and Finnish Prime Minister Aimo Cajander , stating that the Soviets did not trust Germany and that war was considered possible between the two countries. The Red Army would not wait passively behind the border but would rather "advance to meet the enemy". Finnish representatives assured Yartsev that Finland was committed to a policy of neutrality and that the country would resist any armed incursion. Yartsev suggested that Finland cede or lease some islands in the Gulf of Finland along the seaward approaches to Leningrad, but Finland refused.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Negotiations continued throughout 1938 without results. The Finnish reception of Soviet entreaties was decidedly cool, as the violent collectivisation and purges in Stalin's Soviet Union resulted in a poor opinion of the country. Most of the Finnish communist elite in the Soviet Union had been executed during the Great Purge, further tarnishing the Soviets' image in Finland. Meanwhile, Finland was attempting to negotiate a military co-operation plan with Sweden and hoping to jointly defend Åland.

[ 63 ] The Soviet Union and Nazi Germany signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact in August 1939. It was publicly a non-aggression treaty , but it included a secret protocol in which Central and Eastern European countries were divided into spheres of influence . Finland fell into the Soviet sphere. On 1 September 1939, Germany began its invasion of Poland , and two days later, the United Kingdom and France declared war on Germany. On 17 September, the Soviet invasion of Poland began. After the fall of Poland, Germany and the Soviet Union exchanged occupied Polish lands to establish a new border in accordance with the provisions of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact. Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania were soon forced to accept treaties that allowed the Soviets to establish military bases on their soil.

[ 64 ] Estonia accepted the ultimatum by signing the agreement on 28 September. Latvia and Lithuania followed in October. Unlike the three Baltic countries, Finland started a gradual mobilisation under the guise of "additional refresher training ".

[ 65 ] The Soviets had already started intensive mobilisation near the Finnish border in 1938–39.

[ 58 ] Assault troops thought to be necessary for the invasion did not begin deployment until October 1939. Operational plans made in September called for the invasion to start in November.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] On 5 October 1939, the Soviets invited a Finnish delegation to Moscow for negotiations.

Juho Kusti Paasikivi , the Finnish envoy to Sweden, was sent to Moscow to represent the Finnish government [ 65 ] Furthermore, the negotiations were attended by Stalin in person, signalling the seriousness of the effort.

[ 68 ] Paasikivi would later recount his surprise over the friendly atmosphere in which the delegation was received, and mentioned the pleasant manners of Stalin towards them.

[ 69 ] The meetings began on 12 October, with Molotov's offer of a mutual assistance pact, which the Finns immediately refused. To the Finns' surprise, Molotov dropped the offer and instead proposed an exchange of territory.

[ 68 ] The offer stipulated that the Finnish-Soviet border on the Karelian Isthmus be moved westward to a point only 30 km (19 mi) east of Viipuri ( Russian : Vyborg ) and that Finland destroy all existing fortifications on the Karelian Isthmus. Likewise, the delegation demanded the cession of islands in the Gulf of Finland as well as Rybachy Peninsula ( Finnish : Kalastajasaarento ). The Finns would also have to lease the Hanko Peninsula for 30 years and to permit the Soviets to establish a military base there. In exchange, the Soviet Union would cede Repola and Porajärvi from Eastern Karelia (2120 square miles), an area twice the size as that of the territory demanded from Finland (1000 square miles).

[ 65 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] The Soviet offer divided the Finnish government: Gustaf Mannerheim had argued for an agreement, being pessimistic of the Finnish prospects in a war against the Soviet Union.

[ 72 ] But the Finnish government was reticent in reaching an agreement out of mistrust for Stalin: there was a fear of repeated follow-up demands, which would have put the future of Finnish sovereignty in danger. There were also those, such as Foreign Minister Eljas Erkko and Prime Minister Aimo Cajander , and the Finnish intelligence in general, who mistook the demands and the Soviet military build-up as a mere bluff on the part of Stalin, and were thus disinclined to reach an agreement.

[ 72 ] The Finns made two counteroffers that would cede the Terijoki area to the Soviet Union. This would have doubled the distance between Leningrad and the Finnish border, but was far less than the Soviets had demanded.

[ 73 ] The Finns would also cede the islands in the Gulf of Finland, but they would not agree to lease any territory to the USSR for military purposes.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] On the next meeting on 23 October, Stalin lessened his demands: a reduction in the amount of land demanded in Karelia; a reduction of the Hanko garrison from 5000 to 4000 men; and reducing the length of lease from 30 years to whatever date the ongoing (second world) war in Europe would end.

[ 76 ] However, this sudden change, contrary to previous statements that Soviet demands were minimalist and thus unalterable, had surprised the Finnish government, and lead them to believe more concession may be forthcoming. Thus, Paasikivi's idea of reaching some sort of compromise by offering the Soviets the island of Jussarö and the fort of Ino were refused by Helsinki.

[ 77 ] On 31 October, Molotov publicly announced the Soviet demands to the Supreme Soviet . This surprised the Finns, and lent credibility to Soviet claims that their demands were minimalist and thus unalterable, as it would have been impossible to reduce them without a loss of prestige after having made them public.

[ 78 ] However, the Soviet offer was eventually rejected with respect to the opinion of the public and Parliament.

[ 73 ] At the meeting on 9 November, Paasikivi announced to the attending Stalin and Molotov the Finnish refusal to accept even their reduced demands. The Soviets were visibly surprised. Finnish Foreign Minister Vaino Tanner later wrote that "the eyes of our opposite numbers opened wide". Stalin had asked "You don't even offer Ino?" [ 79 ] This would become the final meeting: the Soviets stopped responding to further Finnish letters and on 13 November, when the Finnish delegation was recalled from Moscow, no Soviet officials came to see them off.

[ 80 ] The Finns had left under the expectation that the negotiations would continue.

[ 81 ] Instead, the Soviet Union ramped up its military preparations.

[ 82 ] The negotiations had failed, as neither side was willing to substantially reduce their demands, nor was either side able to fully trust the other. The Finns were fearful of an encroachment on their sovereignty, while the Soviets were (claiming to be) fearful of a springboard for international enemies in Finland, in close proximity to Leningrad. No promises to the contrary managed to persuade the other.

[ 83 ] Additionally, both sides had misunderstood the others position: the Finns had assumed that the Soviets had opened up on a maximalist demand, ready to be traded down smaller. The Soviets instead had stressed the minimalist nature of their demands, and were incredulous over Finnish reluctance to agree.

[ 75 ] Finally, there was also Stalin's unwillingness or inability to accept that any territorial concessions on the part of Finland would have only been possible by a 4/5th majority in the Finnish parliament. He had mocked such a requirement, proposing that they count his and Molotov's votes, too.

[ 84 ] Shelling of Mainila and Soviet intentions [ edit ] Main article: Shelling of Mainila On 26 November 1939, an incident was reported near the Soviet village of Mainila , near the border with Finland. A Soviet border guard post had been shelled by an unknown party resulting, according to Soviet reports, in the deaths of four and injuries of nine border guards. Research conducted by several Finnish and Russian historians later concluded that the shelling was a false flag operation since there were no artillery units there, and it was carried out from the Soviet side of the border by an NKVD unit with the purpose of providing the Soviets with a casus belli and a pretext to withdraw from the non-aggression pact.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ F 9 ] Soviet war games held in March 1938 and 1939 had been based on a scenario in which border incidents taking place at the village of Mainila would spark the war.

[ 89 ] 29 November 1939, foreign journalists at Mainila, where a border incident between Finland and the Soviet Union escalated into the Winter War.

Molotov claimed that the incident was a Finnish artillery attack. He demanded that Finland apologise for the incident and to move its forces beyond a line 20–25 km (12–16 mi) from the border.

[ 90 ] Finland denied responsibility for the attack, rejected the demands and called for a joint Finnish–Soviet commission to examine the incident. In turn, the Soviet Union claimed that the Finnish response was hostile, renounced the non-aggression pact and severed diplomatic relations with Finland on 28 November. In the following years, Soviet historiography described the incident as Finnish provocation. Doubt on the official Soviet version was cast only in the late 1980s, during the policy of glasnost . The issue has continued to divide Russian historiography even after the end of the Soviet Union in 1991.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] Soviet intentions [ edit ] In 2013, Russian President Vladimir Putin stated at a meeting with military historians that the Soviets had launched the Winter War to "correct mistakes" made in determining the border with Finland after 1917.

[ 93 ] Opinion on the scale of the initial Soviet invasion decision is divided. The puppet Finnish communist government and the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact's secret protocol is used as proof that the Soviet Union had intended to conquer all of Finland.

[ F 10 ] On 1 December 1939, the Soviet Union formed a puppet government , named the Finnish Democratic Republic , to govern Finland after Soviet conquest.

[ F 11 ] A declaration delivered via TASS stated: The People's Government in its present composition regards itself as a provisional government. Immediately upon arrival in Helsinki, capital of the country, it will be reorganised and its composition enlarged by the inclusion of representatives of the various parties and groups participating in the people's front of toilers.

[ 98 ] Soviet leaflets dropped over Helsinki on the first day of the war stated: "Finnish Comrades! We come to you not as conquerors, but as liberators of the Finnish people from the oppression of the capitalists and the landlords".

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] In 1939, Soviet military leadership had formulated a realistic and comprehensive plan for the occupation of Finland.

[ 101 ] However, Joseph Stalin was not pleased with the conservative pace that the operation required and demanded new plans be drawn up. With the new plans, the key deadline for Finland's capitulation was to be Stalin's 60th birthday on 21 December.

[ 102 ] Convinced of the invasion's forthcoming success, Andrei Zhdanov , chairman of the highest legislative body in the Soviet Union, commissioned a celebratory piece of music from Dmitri Shostakovich , Suite on Finnish Themes , intended to be performed as the marching bands of the Red Army paraded through Helsinki.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] The Soviets were confident that the Western powers would not come to Finland's aid. Ivan Maisky, the Soviet ambassador to the UK, said: "Who would help? The Swedes? The British? The Americans? There's no way in hell. There will be a fuss in the press, moral support, moaning and whining. But troops, aircraft, cannons, and machine guns – no." [ 105 ] Hungarian historian István Ravasz wrote that the Soviet Central Committee had set out in 1939 that the former borders of the Tsarist Empire were to be restored, including Finland.

[ 30 ] American political scientist Dan Reiter stated that the Soviets "sought to impose a regime change " and thus "achieve absolute victory". He quoted Molotov, who had commented in November 1939 on the regime change plan to a Soviet ambassador that the new government "will not be Soviet, but one of a democratic republic. Nobody is going to set up Soviets over there, but we hope it will be a government we can come to terms with as to ensure the security of Leningrad".

[ 33 ] According to Russian historian Yuri Kilin , the Soviet terms encompassed the strongest fortified approaches of the Finnish defences for a reason. He claimed that Stalin had little hope for such a deal but would play for time for the ongoing mobilisation. He stated the objective as being to secure Finland from being used as a staging ground by means of regime change.

[ 106 ] Others argue against the idea of a complete Soviet conquest. American historian William R. Trotter asserted that Stalin's objective was to secure Leningrad's flank from a possible German invasion through Finland. He stated that "the strongest argument" against a Soviet intention of full conquest is that it did not happen in either 1939 or during the Continuation War in 1944 even though Stalin "could have done so with comparative ease".

[ 35 ] Bradley Lightbody wrote that the "entire Soviet aim had been to make the Soviet border more secure".

[ 36 ] In 2002, Russian historian A. Chubaryan stated that no documents had been found in Russian archives that support a Soviet plan to annex Finland. Rather, the objective was to gain Finnish territory and to reinforce Soviet influence in the region.

[ 34 ] Another American historian Stephen Kotkin also shares the position that the Soviet Union did not aim for annexation. He points out the different treatment Finland was given, compared to the Baltics: unlike the pacts of mutual assistance that the Baltics were pressured into, resulting in their total Sovietization, the Soviets demanded limited territorial concessions from Finland, and even offered land in return, which would not have made sense if full Sovietization was intended.

[ 107 ] And according to Kotkin, Stalin seemed to be genuinely interested in reaching an agreement during the negotiations: he had personally attended six of the seven meetings with the Finns, and had multiple times reduced his demands.

[ 108 ] However, mutual mistrust and misunderstandings would mar the negotiations, producing an impasse.

[ 83 ] Opposing forces [ edit ] Soviet military plan [ edit ] Before the war, Soviet leadership had expected total victory within a few weeks. The Red Army had just completed the invasion of eastern Poland at a cost of fewer than 4,000 casualties after Germany attacked Poland from the west. Stalin's expectations of a quick Soviet triumph were backed up by politician Andrei Zhdanov and military strategist Kliment Voroshilov , but other generals were more reserved. Red Army Chief of Staff Boris Shaposhnikov advocated a narrow-front assault right on the Karelian isthmus.

[ 109 ] Additionally, Shaposhnikov argued for a fuller build-up, extensive fire support and logistical preparations, a rational order of battle and the deployment of the army's best units. Zhdanov's military commander, Kirill Meretskov , reported, "The terrain of coming operations is split by lakes, rivers, swamps, and is almost entirely covered by forests.... The proper use of our forces will be difficult". These doubts were not reflected in Meretskov's troop deployments, and he publicly announced that the Finnish campaign would take two weeks at most. Soviet soldiers had even been warned not to cross the border mistakenly into Sweden.

[ 110 ] Stalin's purges in the 1930s had devastated the officer corps of the Red Army; those purged included three of its five marshals, 220 of its 264 division or higher-level commanders and 36,761 officers of all ranks. Fewer than half of all the officers remained.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] They were commonly replaced by soldiers who were less competent but more loyal to their superiors. Unit commanders were overseen by political commissars , whose approval was needed to approve and ratify military decisions, which they evaluated based on their political merits. The dual system further complicated the Soviet chain of command [ 113 ] [ 114 ] and annulled the independence of commanding officers.

[ 115 ] After the Soviet success at the Battles of Khalkhin Gol against Japan, on the USSR's eastern border, Soviet High Command had divided into two factions. One side was represented by the Spanish Civil War veterans General Pavel Rychagov from the Soviet Air Forces ; the tank expert General Dmitry Pavlov and Stalin's favourite general, Marshal Grigory Kulik , the chief of artillery.

[ 116 ] The other faction was led by Khalkhin Gol veterans General Georgy Zhukov of the Red Army and General Grigory Kravchenko of the Soviet Air Forces.

[ 117 ] Under this divided command structure, the lessons of the Soviet Union's "first real war on a massive scale using tanks, artillery, and aircraft" at Khalkin Gol went unheeded.

[ 118 ] As a result, Russian BT tanks were less successful during the Winter War, and it took the Soviet Union three months and over a million men to accomplish what Zhukov had managed at Khalkhin Gol in ten days (albeit in completely different circumstances).

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Soviet order of battle [ edit ] See also: Red Army Dense forests of Ladoga Karelia at Kollaa . A Soviet tank on the road in the background according to the photographer.

Soviet generals were impressed by the success of German Blitzkrieg tactics , but they had been tailored to conditions in Central Europe , with its dense well-mapped network of paved roads. Armies fighting there had recognised supply and communications centres, which could be easily targeted by armoured vehicle regiments. Finnish Army centres, in contrast, were deep inside the country. There were no paved roads, and even gravel or dirt roads were scarce. Most of the terrain consisted of trackless forests and swamps. The war correspondent John Langdon-Davies observed the landscape: "Every acre of its surface was created to be the despair of an attacking military force".

[ 120 ] Waging Blitzkrieg in Finland was a highly-difficult proposition, and according to Trotter, the Red Army failed to meet the level of tactical co-ordination and local initiative that would be required to execute such tactics in Finland.

[ 121 ] Commander of the Leningrad Military District Kiril Meretskov initially ran the overall operation against the Finns.

[ 122 ] The command was passed on 9 December 1939 to the General Staff Supreme Command (later known as Stavka ), directly under Kliment Voroshilov (chairman), Nikolai Kuznetsov , Stalin and Boris Shaposhnikov.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] On 28 December, when Stalin asked for volunteers to take over military command, Semyon Timoshenko offered himself on the condition that he be allowed to implement Shaposhnikov's initial plan of a focused attack on the Karelian Isthmus to break the Mannerheim Line; it was accepted.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] In January 1940, the Leningrad Military District was reformed and renamed "North-Western Front".

[ 126 ] The Soviet forces were organised as follows: [ 127 ] The 7th Army , comprising nine divisions, a tank corps and three tank brigades, was located on the Karelian Isthmus. Its objective was to quickly overrun the Finnish defenses on the Karelian Isthmus and conquer Viipuri. From there, the 7th Army was to continue towards Lappeenranta, then turn west towards Lahti, before the final push to the capital Helsinki. The force was later divided into the 7th and 13th Armies .

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] The 8th Army , comprising six divisions and a tank brigade, was north of Lake Ladoga. Its mission was to execute a flanking manoeuvre around the northern shore of Lake Ladoga to strike at the rear of the Mannerheim Line .

[ 128 ] The 9th Army was positioned to strike into Central Finland through the Kainuu region. It was composed of three divisions with one more on its way. Its mission was to thrust westward to cut Finland in half.

[ 128 ] The 14th Army , comprising three divisions, was based in Murmansk . Its objectives were to capture the Arctic port of Petsamo and then advance to the town of Rovaniemi .

[ 128 ] Finnish order of battle [ edit ] See also: Finnish Army Offensives of the four Soviet armies from 30 November to 22 December 1939 displayed in red [ 130 ] [ 131 ] The Finnish strategy was dictated by geography. The 1,340 km (830 mi) [ F 12 ] border with the Soviet Union was mostly impassable except along a handful of unpaved roads . In prewar calculations, the Finnish Defence Command , which had established its wartime headquarters at Mikkeli , [ 127 ] had estimated seven Soviet divisions on the Karelian Isthmus and no more than five along the whole border north of Lake Ladoga. In the estimation, the manpower ratio would have favoured the attacker by three to one. The true ratio was much higher, however, since for example, 12 Soviet divisions were deployed north of Lake Ladoga.

[ 132 ] Finland had a large force of reservists, which was trained in regular maneuvers, some of which had experience from the recent Finnish Civil War. The soldiers were also almost universally trained in basic survival techniques, such as skiing. The Finnish Army was not able to equip all its soldiers with proper uniforms at the outbreak of war, but its reservists were equipped with warm civilian clothing. However, the sparsely populated, highly agrarian Finland had to draft so many of its working men that the Finnish economy was massively strained because of a lack of workers. An even greater problem than lack of soldiers was the lack of materiel since foreign shipments of anti-tank weapons and aircraft were arriving only in small quantities. The ammunition situation was alarming, as stockpiles had cartridges, shells and fuel to last only 19 to 60 days. The ammunition shortage meant the Finns could seldom afford counter-battery or saturation fire . Finnish tank forces were operationally nonexistent.

[ 132 ] The ammunition situation was alleviated somewhat since Finns were largely armed with Mosin–Nagant rifles dating from the Finnish Civil War, which used the same 7.62×54mmR cartridge that was used by Soviet forces. The situation was so severe that Finnish soldiers sometimes had to maintain their ammunition supply by looting the bodies of dead Soviet soldiers.

[ 133 ] The Finnish forces were positioned as follows: [ 134 ] The Army of the Isthmus was composed of six divisions under the command of Hugo Österman . The II Army Corps was positioned on its right flank and the III Army Corps , on its left flank.

The IV Army Corps was located north of Lake Ladoga. It was composed of two divisions under Juho Heiskanen , who was soon replaced by Woldemar Hägglund .

The North Finland Group was a collection of White Guards, border guards and drafted reservist units under Wiljo Tuompo .

Soviet invasion [ edit ] Start of invasion and political operations [ edit ] On 30 November 1939, Soviet forces invaded Finland with 21 divisions, totalling 450,000 men, and bombed Helsinki , [ 128 ] [ 135 ] killing about 100 citizens and destroying more than 50 buildings. In response to international criticism, Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov stated that the Soviet Air Force was not bombing Finnish cities but rather dropping humanitarian aid to the starving Finnish population; the bombs were sarcastically dubbed Molotov bread baskets by Finns.

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] The Finnish statesman J. K. Paasikivi commented that the Soviet attack without a declaration of war violated three separate non-aggression pacts: the Treaty of Tartu, which was signed in 1920, the non-aggression pact between Finland and the Soviet Union, which was signed in 1932 and again in 1934; and also the Covenant of the League of Nations , which the Soviet Union signed in 1934.

[ 88 ] Field Marshal C.G.E. Mannerheim was appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Finnish Defence Forces after the Soviet attack. In a further reshuffling, Aimo Cajander's caretaker cabinet was replaced by Risto Ryti and his cabinet , with Väinö Tanner as foreign minister because of opposition to Cajander's prewar politics.

[ 138 ] Finland brought the matter of the Soviet invasion before the League of Nations. The League expelled the Soviet Union on 14 December 1939 and exhorted its members to aid Finland.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] Headed by Otto Wille Kuusinen , the Finnish Democratic Republic puppet government operated in the parts of Finnish Karelia occupied by the Soviets, and was also referred to as the "Terijoki Government", after the village of Terijoki , the first settlement captured by the advancing Red Army.

[ 141 ] After the war, the puppet government was reabsorbed into the Soviet Union. From the very outset of the war, working-class Finns stood behind the legitimate government in Helsinki.

[ 139 ] Finnish national unity against the Soviet invasion was later called the spirit of the Winter War .

[ 142 ] First battles and Soviet advance to Mannerheim Line [ edit ] The situation on 7 December: Soviets have reached the Mannerheim Line on the Karelian Isthmus .

Finnish division (XX) or corps (XXX) Soviet division (XX), corps (XXX) or army (XXXX) The array of Finnish defence structures that during the war started to be called the Mannerheim Line was located on the Karelian Isthmus approximately 30 to 75 km (19 to 47 mi) from the Soviet border. The Red Army soldiers on the Isthmus numbered 250,000, facing 130,000 Finns.

[ 143 ] The Finnish command deployed a defence in depth of about 21,000 men in the area in front of the Mannerheim Line to delay and damage the Red Army before it reached the line.

[ 144 ] In combat, the most severe cause of confusion among Finnish soldiers was Soviet tanks. The Finns had few anti-tank weapons and insufficient training in modern anti-tank tactics . According to Trotter, the favoured Soviet armoured tactic was a simple frontal charge, the weaknesses of which could be exploited. The Finns learned that at close range, tanks could be dealt with in many ways; for example, logs and crowbars jammed into the bogie wheels would often immobilise a tank. Soon, Finns fielded a better ad hoc weapon, the Molotov cocktail , a glass bottle filled with flammable liquids and with a simple hand-lit fuse . Molotov cocktails were eventually mass-produced by the Finnish Alko alcoholic-beverage corporation and bundled with matches with which to light them. 80 Soviet tanks were destroyed in the border zone engagements.

[ 145 ] By 6 December, all of the Finnish covering forces had withdrawn to the Mannerheim Line. The Red Army began its first major attack against the Line in Taipale – the area between the shore of Lake Ladoga, the Taipale river and the Suvanto waterway. Along the Suvanto sector, the Finns had a slight advantage of elevation and dry ground to dig into. The Finnish artillery had scouted the area and made fire plans in advance, anticipating a Soviet assault. The Battle of Taipale began with a forty-hour Soviet artillery preparation. After the barrage , Soviet infantry attacked across open ground but was repulsed with heavy casualties. From 6 to 12 December, the Red Army continued to try to engage using only a single division. Next, the Red Army strengthened its artillery and deployed tanks and the 150th Rifle Division forward to the Taipale front. On 14 December, the bolstered Soviet forces launched a new attack but were pushed back again. A third Soviet division entered the fight but performed poorly and panicked under shell fire. The assaults continued without success, and the Red Army suffered heavy losses. One typical Soviet attack during the battle lasted just an hour but left 1,000 dead and 27 tanks strewn on the ice.

[ 146 ] North of Lake Ladoga on the Ladoga Karelia front, the defending Finnish units relied on the terrain. Ladoga Karelia, a large forest wilderness, did not have road networks for the modern Red Army.

[ 147 ] The Soviet 8th Army had extended a new railroad line to the border, which could double the supply capability on the front. On 12 December, the advancing Soviet 139th Rifle Division , supported by the 56th Rifle Division , was defeated by a much smaller Finnish force under Paavo Talvela in Tolvajärvi , the first Finnish victory of the war.

[ 148 ] In Central and Northern Finland, roads were few and the terrain hostile. The Finns did not expect large-scale Soviet attacks, but the Soviets sent eight divisions, heavily supported by armour and artillery. The 155th Rifle Division attacked at Ilomantsi and Lieksa , and further north the 44th attacked at Kuhmo . The 163rd Rifle Division was deployed at Suomussalmi and ordered to cut Finland in half by advancing on Raate road. In Finnish Lapland , the Soviet 88th and 122nd Rifle Divisions attacked at Salla . The Arctic port of Petsamo was attacked by the 104th Mountain Rifle Division by sea and land, supported by naval gunfire .

[ 149 ] Operations from December to January [ edit ] Weather conditions [ edit ] See also: Climate of Finland and Cold-weather warfare Swedish volunteer with a Carl Gustaf M/96 rifle wearing a face wool mask.

[ 150 ] The winter of 1939–40 was exceptionally cold with the Karelian Isthmus experiencing a record low temperature of −43 °C (−45 °F) on 16 January 1940.

[ 151 ] At the beginning of the war, only those Finnish soldiers who were in active service had uniforms and weapons . The rest had to make do with their own clothing, which for many soldiers was their normal winter clothing with a semblance of insignia added. Finnish soldiers were skilled in cross-country skiing .

[ 152 ] The cold, snow, forest, and long hours of darkness were factors that the Finns could use to their advantage. The Finns dressed in layers, and the ski troopers wore a lightweight white snow cape. This snow-camouflage made the ski troopers almost invisible so that they could more easily execute guerrilla attacks against Soviet columns. At the beginning of the war, Soviet tanks were painted in standard olive drab and men dressed in regular khaki uniforms. Not until late January 1940 did the Soviets paint their equipment white and issue snowsuits to their infantry.

[ 153 ] Most Soviet soldiers had proper winter clothes, but this was not the case with every unit. In the Battle of Suomussalmi , thousands of Soviet soldiers died of frostbite . The Soviet troops also lacked skill in skiing, so soldiers were restricted to movement by road and were forced to move in long columns. The Red Army lacked proper winter tents, and troops had to sleep in improvised shelters.

[ 154 ] Some Soviet units incurred frostbite casualties as high as ten per cent even before crossing the Finnish border.

[ 153 ] However, the cold weather did give an advantage to Soviet tanks, as they could move over frozen terrain and bodies of water, rather than being immobilised in swamps and mud.

[ 154 ] According to Krivosheev, at least 61,506 Soviet troops were sick or frostbitten during the war.

[ 19 ] Finnish guerrilla tactics [ edit ] See also: Sissi (Finnish light infantry) Soviet tracks at Kianta Lake , Suomussalmi during a Finnish pursuit in December 1939. Nordic combined skier Timo Murama is pictured.

In battles from Ladoga Karelia to the Arctic port of Petsamo , the Finns used guerrilla tactics . The Red Army was superior in numbers and material, but Finns used the advantages of speed, manoeuvre warfare and economy of force . Particularly on the Ladoga Karelia front and during the Battle of Raate Road , the Finns isolated smaller portions of numerically superior Soviet forces. With Soviet forces divided into smaller groups, the Finns dealt with them individually and attacked from all sides.

[ 155 ] For many of the encircled Soviet troops in a pocket (called a motti in Finnish, originally meaning 1 m 3 (35 cu ft) of firewood), staying alive was an ordeal comparable to combat. The men were freezing and starving and endured poor sanitary conditions. Historian William R. Trotter described these conditions as follows: "The Soviet soldier had no choice. If he refused to fight, he would be shot. If he tried to sneak through the forest, he would freeze to death. And surrender was no option for him; Soviet propaganda had told him how the Finns would torture prisoners to death." [ 156 ] The problem however was that the Finns were mostly too weak to fully exploit their success. Some of the pockets of encircled Soviet soldiers held out for weeks and even months, binding a huge number of Finnish forces.

Battles of the Mannerheim Line [ edit ] The terrain on the Karelian Isthmus did not allow guerrilla tactics, so the Finns were forced to resort to the more conventional Mannerheim Line, with its flanks protected by large bodies of water. Soviet propaganda claimed that it was as strong as or even stronger than the Maginot Line . Finnish historians, for their part, have belittled the line's strength, insisting that it was mostly conventional trenches and log-covered dugouts .

[ 157 ] The Finns had built 221 strong-points along the Karelian Isthmus, mostly in the early 1920s. Many were extended in the late 1930s. Despite these defensive preparations, even the most fortified section of the Mannerheim Line had only one reinforced-concrete bunker per kilometre. Overall, the line was weaker than similar lines in mainland Europe.

[ 158 ] According to the Finns, the real strength of the line was the "stubborn defenders with a lot of sisu " – a Finnish idiom roughly translated as " guts, fighting spirit ".

[ 157 ] On the eastern side of the Isthmus, the Red Army attempted to break through the Mannerheim Line at the battle of Taipale. On the western side, Soviet units faced the Finnish line at Summa, near the city of Viipuri, on 16 December. The Finns had built 41 reinforced-concrete bunkers in the Summa area, making the defensive line in this area stronger than anywhere else on the Karelian Isthmus. Because of a mistake in planning, the nearby Munasuo swamp had a 1-kilometre (0.62 mi)-wide gap in the line.

[ 159 ] During the First Battle of Summa , a number of Soviet tanks broke through the thin line on 19 December, but the Soviets could not benefit from the situation because of insufficient co-operation between branches of service. The Finns remained in their trenches, allowing the Soviet tanks to move freely behind the Finnish line, as the Finns had no proper anti-tank weapons. The Finns succeeded in repelling the main Soviet assault. The tanks, stranded behind enemy lines, attacked the strongpoints at random until they were eventually destroyed, 20 in all. By 22 December, the battle ended in a Finnish victory.

[ 160 ] The Soviet advance was stopped at the Mannerheim Line. Red Army troops suffered from poor morale and a shortage of supplies, eventually refusing to participate in more suicidal frontal attacks . The Finns, led by General Harald Öhquist , decided to launch a counter-attack and encircle three Soviet divisions into a motti near Viipuri on 23 December. Öhquist's plan was bold; however it failed. The Finns lost 1,300 men, and the Soviets were later estimated to have lost a similar number.

[ 161 ] Battles in Ladoga Karelia and North Karelia [ edit ] Simo Häyhä , the legendary Finnish sniper, known as "the White Death" in Finnish wartime propaganda.

[ 162 ] The strength of the Red Army north of Lake Ladoga in Ladoga Karelia surprised the Finnish Headquarters. Two Finnish divisions were deployed there, the 12th Division led by Lauri Tiainen and the 13th Division led by Hannu Hannuksela . They also had a support group of three brigades , bringing their total strength to over 30,000. The Soviets deployed a division for almost every road leading west to the Finnish border. The 8th Army was led by Ivan Khabarov , who was replaced by Grigory Shtern on 13 December.

[ 163 ] The Soviets' mission was to destroy the Finnish troops in the area of Ladoga Karelia and advance into the area between Sortavala and Joensuu within 10 days. The Soviets had a 3:1 advantage in manpower and a 5:1 advantage in artillery, as well as air supremacy .

[ 164 ] Finnish forces panicked and retreated in front of the overwhelming Red Army. The commander of the Finnish IV Army Corps Juho Heiskanen was replaced by Woldemar Hägglund on 4 December.

[ 165 ] On 7 December, in the middle of the Ladoga Karelian front, Finnish units retreated near the small stream of Kollaa. The waterway itself did not offer protection, but alongside it, there were ridges up to 10 m (33 ft) high. The ensuing Battle of Kollaa lasted until the end of the war. A memorable quote, "Kollaa holds" ( Finnish : Kollaa kestää ) became a legendary motto among Finns.

[ 166 ] Further contributing to the legend of Kollaa was the sniper Simo Häyhä , dubbed "the White Death" in Finnish media, [ 167 ] credited with over 500 kills in the war.

[ 168 ] Captain Aarne Juutilainen , dubbed "the Terror of Morocco", also became a living legend in the Battle of Kollaa.

[ 169 ] To the north, the Finns retreated from Ägläjärvi to Tolvajärvi on 5 December and then repelled a Soviet offensive in the battle of Tolvajärvi on 11 December.

[ 170 ] In the south, two Soviet divisions were united on the northern side of the Lake Ladoga coastal road. As before, these divisions were trapped as the more mobile Finnish units counterattacked from the north to flank the Soviet columns. On 19 December, the Finns temporarily ceased their assaults due to exhaustion.

[ 171 ] It was not until the period of 6–16 January 1940 that the Finns resumed their offensive, dividing Soviet divisions into smaller mottis.

[ 172 ] Contrary to Finnish expectations, the encircled Soviet divisions did not try to break through to the east but instead entrenched. They were expecting reinforcements and supplies to arrive by air . As the Finns lacked the necessary heavy artillery equipment and were short of men, they often did not directly attack the mottis they had created; instead, they worked to eliminate only the most dangerous threats. Often the motti tactic was not applied as a strategy, but as a Finnish adaptation to the behaviour of Soviet troops under fire.

[ 173 ] In spite of the cold and hunger, the Soviet troops did not surrender easily but fought bravely, often entrenching their tanks to be used as pillboxes and building timber dugouts. Some specialist Finnish soldiers were called in to attack the mottis ; the most famous of them was Major Matti Aarnio , or "Motti-Matti" as he became known.

[ 174 ] In North Karelia , Soviet forces were outmanoeuvred at Ilomantsi and Lieksa. The Finns used effective guerrilla tactics, taking special advantage of their superior skiing skills and snow-white layered clothing and executing surprise ambushes and raids. By the end of December, the Soviets decided to retreat and transfer resources to more critical fronts.

[ 175 ] Battles in Kainuu [ edit ] Dead Soviet soldiers and their equipment at Raate Road, Suomussalmi, after being ambushed and encircled at the Battle of Raate Road The Suomussalmi–Raate engagement was a double operation [ 176 ] which would later be used by military academics as a classic example of what well-led troops and innovative tactics can do against a much larger adversary. In 1939, Suomussalmi was a municipality of 4,000 inhabitants, with long lakes, wild forests and few roads. The Finnish command believed that the Soviets would not attack there, but the Red Army committed two divisions to the Kainuu area with orders to cross the wilderness, capture the city of Oulu and effectively cut Finland in two. There were two roads leading to Suomussalmi from the frontier: the northern Juntusranta road and the southern Raate road.

[ 177 ] The Battle of Raate Road , which occurred during the month-long Battle of Suomussalmi , resulted in one of the largest Soviet losses in the Winter War. The Soviet 44th and parts of the 163rd Rifle Division, comprising about 14,000 troops, [ 178 ] were almost completely destroyed by a Finnish ambush as they marched along the forest road. A small unit blocked the Soviet advance while Finnish Colonel Hjalmar Siilasvuo and his 9th Division cut off the retreat route, split the enemy force into smaller mottis , and then proceeded to destroy the remnants in detail as they retreated. The Soviets suffered 7,000–9,000 casualties; [ 179 ] the Finnish units, 400.

[ 180 ] The Finnish troops captured dozens of tanks, artillery pieces, anti-tank guns, hundreds of trucks, almost 2,000 horses, thousands of rifles, and much-needed ammunition and medical supplies.

[ 181 ] So sure of their victory had the Soviets been that a military band, complete with instruments, banners and notes, was traveling with the 44th Division to perform in a victory parade. The Finns found their instruments among the captured materiel.

[ 182 ] Battles in Finnish Lapland [ edit ] A Finnish soldier on guard near Kemijärvi in February 1940.

The Finnish area of Lapland , bestriding the Arctic Circle , is sparsely developed, with little daylight and persistent snow-cover during winter; the Finns expected nothing more than raiding parties and reconnaissance patrols. Instead, the Soviets sent full divisions.

[ 183 ] On 11 December, the Finns rearranged the defence of Lapland and detached the Lapland Group from the North Finland Group. The group was placed under the command of Kurt Wallenius .

[ 184 ] In southern Lapland, near the village of Salla, the Soviet 88th and 122nd Divisions, totaling 35,000 men, advanced. In the Battle of Salla , the Soviets proceeded easily to Salla, where the road split. Further ahead was Kemijärvi , while the fork to Pelkosenniemi led northwest. On 17 December, the Soviet northern group, comprising an infantry regiment, a battalion , and a company of tanks, was outflanked by a Finnish battalion. The 122nd retreated, abandoning much of its heavy equipment and vehicles. Following this success, the Finns shuttled reinforcements to the defensive line in front of Kemijärvi. The Soviets hammered the defensive line without success. The Finns counter-attacked, and the Soviets retreated to a new defensive line where they stayed for the rest of the war.

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] To the north was Finland's only ice-free port in the Arctic, Petsamo. The Finns lacked the manpower to defend it fully, as the main front was distant at the Karelian Isthmus. In the Battle of Petsamo , the Soviet 104th Division attacked the Finnish 104th Independent Cover Company. The Finns abandoned Petsamo and concentrated on delaying actions. The area was treeless, windy, and relatively low, offering little defensible terrain. The almost constant darkness and extreme temperatures of the Lapland winter benefited the Finns, who executed guerrilla attacks against Soviet supply lines and patrols. As a result, the Soviet movements were halted by the efforts of one-fifth as many Finns.

[ 183 ] Aerial warfare [ edit ] Main article: Aerial warfare in the Winter War Soviet Air Force [ edit ] The USSR enjoyed air superiority throughout the war. The Soviet Air Force , supporting the Red Army's invasion with about 2,500 aircraft (the most common type being Tupolev SB ), was not as effective as the Soviets might have hoped. The material damage by the bomb raids was slight as Finland offered few valuable targets for strategic bombing . For example, the city of Tampere was one of the most important targets because it was an important railway junction, and also housed State Aircraft Factory and the Tampere Linen and Iron Industry premises, which manufactured munitions and weapons, including grenade launchers .

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] Often, targets were village depots with little value. The country had few modern highways in the interior, therefore making the railways the main targets for bombers.

Rail tracks were cut thousands of times but the Finns hastily repaired them and service resumed within a matter of hours.

[ 10 ] The Soviet Air Force learned from its early mistakes, and by late February instituted more effective tactics.

[ 189 ] The largest bombing raid against the capital of Finland, Helsinki , occurred on the first day of the war. The capital was bombed only a few times thereafter. All in all, Soviet bombings cost Finland five per cent of its total man-hour production. Nevertheless, Soviet air attacks affected thousands of civilians, killing 957.

[ 11 ] The Soviets recorded 2,075 bombing attacks in 516 localities. The city of Viipuri, a major Soviet objective close to the Karelian Isthmus front, was almost levelled by nearly 12,000 bombs.

[ 190 ] No attacks on civilian targets were mentioned in Soviet radio or newspaper reports. In January 1940, the Soviet Pravda newspaper continued to lie that no civilian targets in Finland had been struck, even accidentally.

[ 191 ] It is estimated that the Soviet air force lost about 400 aircraft because of inclement weather, lack of fuel and tools, and during transport to the front. The Soviet Air Force flew approximately 44,000 sorties during the war.

[ 189 ] Finnish Air Force [ edit ] March 1940, a Finnish Bristol Blenheim Mk. IV bomber of the No. 44 Squadron refuelling at its air base on a frozen lake in Tikkakoski . On the fuselage is the swastika, which the Finnish Air Force had adopted as their symbol in 1918. Despite the similarity, it was not a Nazi design but was based on the personal owner; Eric von Rosen had donated the first aircraft to the Air Force.

At the beginning of the war, Finland had a small air force, with only 114 combat planes fit for duty. Missions were limited, and fighter aircraft were mainly used to repel Soviet bombers. Strategic bombings doubled as opportunities for military reconnaissance . Old-fashioned and few in number, aircraft offered little support for Finnish ground troops. In spite of losses, the number of planes in the Finnish Air Force rose by over 50 per cent by the end of the war.

[ 192 ] The Finns received shipments of British, French, Italian, Swedish and American aircraft.

[ 193 ] Finnish fighter pilots often flew their motley collection of planes into Soviet formations that outnumbered them 10 or even 20 times. Finnish fighters shot down 200 Soviet aircraft, while losing 62 of their own on all causes.

[ 14 ] Finnish anti-aircraft guns downed more than 300 enemy aircraft.

[ 14 ] Often, a Finnish forward air base consisted of a frozen lake, a windsock , a telephone set and some tents. Air-raid warnings were given by Finnish women organised by the Lotta Svärd .

[ 194 ] The top scoring fighter ace was Jorma Sarvanto , with 12.83 victories. He would increase his tally during the Continuation War.

Naval warfare [ edit ] Main article: Naval warfare in the Winter War Naval activity [ edit ] There was little naval activity during the Winter War. The Baltic Sea began to freeze over by the end of December, impeding the movement of warships ; by mid-winter, only ice breakers and submarines could still move. The other reason for low naval activity was the nature of Soviet Navy forces in the area. The Baltic Fleet was a coastal defence force which did not have the training, logistical structure, or landing craft to undertake large-scale operations. The Baltic Fleet possessed two battleships , one heavy cruiser , almost 20 destroyers , 50 motor torpedo boats , 52 submarines, and other miscellaneous vessels. The Soviets used naval bases in Paldiski , Tallinn and Liepāja for their operations.

[ 195 ] The Finnish Navy was a coastal defence force with two coastal defence ships , five submarines, four gunboats , seven motor torpedo boats, one minelayer and six minesweepers and at least 5 icebreakers . The two coastal defence ships, Ilmarinen and Väinämöinen , were moved to harbour in Turku where they were used to bolster the air defence. Their anti-aircraft guns shot down one or two planes over the city, and the ships remained there for the rest of the war.

[ 138 ] At 18 January, Finnish armed icebreaker Tarmo was severely damaged at Kotka , received 2 bombs from a Soviet bomber with 39 Finnish troops killed in action. As well as coastal defence, the Finnish Navy protected the Ålandish and Finnish merchant vessels in the Baltic Sea.

[ 196 ] Soviet aircraft bombed Finnish vessels and harbours and dropped mines into Finnish seaways . Still, only five merchant ships were lost to Soviet action. World War II, which had started before the Winter War, proved more costly for the Finnish merchant vessels, with 26 lost due to hostile action in 1939 and 1940.

[ 197 ] Coastal artillery [ edit ] Finnish coastal artillery batteries defended important harbours and naval bases. Most batteries were left over from the Imperial Russian period, with 152 mm (6.0 in) guns being the most numerous. Finland attempted to modernise its old guns and installed a number of new batteries, the largest of which featured a 305 mm (12.0 in) gun battery on the island of Kuivasaari in front of Helsinki, originally intended to block the Gulf of Finland to Soviet ships with the help of batteries on the Estonian side.

[ 198 ] The first naval battle occurred in the Gulf of Finland on 1 December, near the island of Russarö , 5 km (3.1 mi) south of Hanko . That day, the weather was fair and visibility was excellent. The Finns spotted the Soviet cruiser Kirov and two destroyers. When the ships were at a range of 24 km (13 nmi; 15 mi), the Finns opened fire with four 234 mm (9.2 in) coastal guns. After five minutes of firing by the coastal guns, the cruiser had been damaged by near misses and retreated. The destroyers remained undamaged, but the Kirov suffered 17 dead and 30 wounded. The Soviets already knew the locations of the Finnish coastal batteries, but were surprised by their range.

[ 199 ] Coastal artillery had a greater effect on land by reinforcing defence in conjunction with army artillery. Two sets of fortress artillery made significant contributions to the early battles on the Karelian Isthmus and in Ladoga Karelia. These were located at Kaarnajoki on the Eastern Isthmus and at Mantsi on the northeastern shore of Lake Ladoga. The fortress of Koivisto provided similar support from the southwestern coast of the Isthmus.

[ 200 ] Soviet breakthrough in February [ edit ] Red Army reforms and offensive preparations [ edit ] Finnish officers inspecting Soviet skiing manuals gained as loot from the Battle of Suomussalmi Joseph Stalin was not pleased with the results of December 1939 in the Finnish campaign. The Red Army had been humiliated in defeats by smaller Finnish forces. By the third week of the war, Soviet propaganda was already working to explain the failures of the Soviet military to the populace: blaming bad terrain and harsh climate, and falsely claiming that the Mannerheim Line was stronger than the Maginot Line, and that the Americans had sent 1,000 of their best pilots to Finland. However, the Soviets were confronted with the unavoidable reality of the poor performance of their troops against the Finns. Stalin in particular was concerned about the effects of the war on Soviet reputation.

[ 201 ] In late December, the Soviets decided to reduce their strategic objectives and focused on bringing the war to an end.

[ 202 ] Chief of Staff Boris Shaposhnikov was given full authority over operations in the Finnish theatre, and he ordered the suspension of frontal assaults in late December. Kliment Voroshilov was replaced with Semyon Timoshenko as the commander of the Soviet forces in the war on 7 January 1940.

[ 203 ] The main focus of the Soviet attack was switched to the Karelian Isthmus. Timoshenko and Zhdanov reorganised and tightened control between different branches of service in the Red Army. They also changed tactical doctrines to meet the realities of the situation.

[ 204 ] The Soviet forces on the Karelian Isthmus were divided into two armies: the 7th and the 13th Army. The 7th Army, now under Kirill Meretskov, would concentrate 75 per cent of its strength against the 16 km (9.9 mi) stretch of the Mannerheim Line between Taipale and the Munasuo swamp. Tactics would be basic: an armoured wedge for the initial breakthrough, followed by the main infantry and vehicle assault force. The Red Army would prepare by pinpointing the Finnish frontline fortifications. The 123rd Rifle Division then rehearsed the assault on life-size mock-ups . The Soviets shipped large numbers of new tanks and artillery pieces to the theatre. Troops were increased from ten divisions to 25–26 divisions with six or seven tank brigades and several independent tank platoons as support, totalling 600,000 soldiers.

[ 204 ] On 1 February, the Red Army began a large offensive, firing 300,000 shells into the Finnish line in the first 24 hours of the bombardment .

[ 205 ] Soviet offensive on the Karelian Isthmus [ edit ] Although the Karelian Isthmus front was less active in January than in December, the Soviets increased bombardments, wearing down the defenders and softening their fortifications. During daylight hours, the Finns took shelter inside their fortifications from the bombardments and repaired damage during the night. The situation led quickly to war exhaustion among the Finns, who lost over 3,000 soldiers in trench warfare . The Soviets also made occasional small infantry assaults with one or two companies.

[ 206 ] Because of the shortage of ammunition, Finnish artillery emplacements were under orders to fire only against directly threatening ground attacks. On 1 February, the Soviets further escalated their artillery and air bombardments.

[ 205 ] Even though the Soviets refined their tactics and morale improved, the generals were still willing to accept massive losses to reach their objectives. Soviet attacks were now being screened by smoke, heavy artillery, and armour support, but the infantry charged in the open and in dense formations.

[ 205 ] Unlike their tactics in December, Soviet tanks advanced in smaller numbers. The Finns could not easily eliminate tanks if infantry troops protected them.

[ 207 ] After 10 days of constant artillery barrage, the Soviets achieved a breakthrough on the Western Karelian Isthmus in the Second Battle of Summa.

[ 208 ] By 11 February, the Soviets had approximately 460,000 soldiers, 3,350 artillery pieces, 3,000 tanks and 1,300 aircraft deployed on the Karelian Isthmus. The Red Army was constantly receiving new recruits after the breakthrough.

[ 209 ] Opposing them, the Finns had eight divisions, totalling about 150,000 soldiers. One by one, the defenders' strongholds crumbled under the Soviet attacks and the Finns were forced to retreat. On 15 February, Mannerheim authorised a general retreat of the II Corps to a fallback line of defence.

[ 210 ] On the eastern side of the isthmus, the Finns continued to resist Soviet assaults, achieving a stalemate in the battle of Taipale.

[ 211 ] Peace negotiations [ edit ] While the Finns attempted to re-open negotiations with Moscow by every means during the war, the Soviets did not respond. In early January, Finnish communist Hella Wuolijoki contacted the Finnish Government. She offered to contact Moscow through the Soviet Union's ambassador to Sweden, Alexandra Kollontai . Wuolijoki departed for Stockholm and met Kollontai secretly at a hotel. On 29 January, Molotov put an end to the puppet Terijoki Government and recognized the Ryti–Tanner government as the legal government of Finland, informing it that the USSR was willing to negotiate peace.

[ 39 ] [ 212 ] By mid-February, it became clear that the Finnish forces were rapidly approaching exhaustion. For the Soviets, casualties were high, the situation was a source of political embarrassment to the Soviet regime, and there was a risk of Franco-British intervention (which was overestimated by Soviet intelligence in February and March 1940 [ 213 ] ). With the spring thaw approaching, the Soviet forces risked becoming bogged down in the forests. Finnish Foreign Minister Väinö Tanner arrived in Stockholm on 12 February and negotiated the peace terms with the Soviets through the Swedes. German representatives, not aware that the negotiations were underway, suggested on 17 February that Finland negotiate with the Soviet Union.

[ 214 ] Both Germany and Sweden were keen to see an end to the Winter War. The Germans feared losing the iron ore fields in Northern Sweden and threatened to attack at once if the Swedes granted the Allied forces right of passage . The German invasion plan, named Studie Nord , was later implemented as Operation Weserübung .

[ 215 ] Leon Trotsky opined after the war that Hitler would view a Soviet occupation of Finland as a threat to this plan. Any potential German plans for bases in Finland would also be thwarted if the Soviets occupied Finland, though Trotsky himself believed that Hitler was not interested in occupying Finland, but rather its role as a buffer between Germany and the USSR.

[ 216 ] As the Finnish Cabinet hesitated in the face of harsh Soviet conditions, Sweden's King Gustav V made a public statement on 19 February in which he confirmed having declined Finnish pleas for support from Swedish troops. On 25 February, the Soviet peace terms were spelt out in detail. On 29 February, the Finnish Government accepted the Soviet terms in principle and was willing to enter into negotiations.

[ 217 ] Red Army commanders wished to continue the war as their forces were starting to make progress against the Finns, whereas the Communist Party pointed out that the war was becoming too costly and called for the signing of a peace treaty. The party believed that Finland could be taken over later by means of a revolution. The heated discussion that ensued failed to yield any clear result and the matter went to a vote, in which the party's opinion prevailed and the decision was taken to bring hostilities to an end.

[ 216 ] End of war in March [ edit ] Situation on the Karelian Isthmus on 13 March 1940, the last day of the war [ 218 ] Finnish corps (XXX) or Oesch 's coast group Soviet corps (XXX) or army (XXXX) On 5 March, the Red Army advanced 10 to 15 km (6.2 to 9.3 mi) past the Mannerheim Line and entered the suburbs of Viipuri . The same day, the Red Army established a beachhead on the Western Gulf of Viipuri . The Finns proposed an armistice on 6 March, but the Soviets, wanting to keep the pressure on the Finnish government, declined the offer. The Finnish peace delegation travelled to Moscow via Stockholm and arrived on 7 March. They were disappointed to find that Stalin was not present during peace negotiations, likely due to the Red Army's humiliation by the Finns.

[ 216 ] The Soviets had further demands, as their military position was strong and improving. On 9 March, the Finnish military situation on the Karelian Isthmus was dire, as troops were experiencing heavy casualties. Artillery ammunition was exhausted and weapons were wearing out. The Finnish government, realizing that the hoped-for Franco-British military expedition would not arrive in time, as Norway and Sweden had not given the Allies right of passage, had little choice but to accept the Soviet terms.

[ 219 ] Finnish President Kyösti Kallio resisted the idea of giving up any territory to the Soviet Union, but eventually agreed to sign the Moscow Peace Treaty. When he signed the document, the tormented president uttered the well-known words: "Let the hand wither that signs this monstrous treaty!" [ 220 ] Moscow Peace Treaty [ edit ] Main article: Moscow Peace Treaty Finland's territorial concessions to the Soviet Union displayed in red The Moscow Peace Treaty was signed in Moscow on 12 March 1940. A cease-fire took effect the next day at noon Leningrad time, 11 a.m. Helsinki time.

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] With it, Finland ceded the Karelian Isthmus and most of Ladoga Karelia. The area included Viipuri (Finland's second-largest city [Population Register] or fourth-largest city [Church and Civil Register], depending on the census data [ 223 ] ), much of Finland's industrialised territory, and significant land still held by Finland's military – all in all, nine per cent of Finnish territory. The ceded territory included 13 per cent of Finland's economic assets.

[ 224 ] 12 per cent of Finland's population, 422,000 to 450,000 Karelians, were evacuated and lost their homes .

[ 225 ] [ 226 ] [ 227 ] Finland also ceded a part of the region of Salla, the Rybachy Peninsula in the Barents Sea , and four islands in the Gulf of Finland. The Hanko peninsula was leased to the Soviet Union as a military base for 30 years. The region of Petsamo, captured by the Red Army during the war, was returned to Finland according to the treaty.

[ 228 ] Finnish concessions and territorial losses exceeded Soviet pre-war demands . Before the war, the Soviet Union demanded for the frontier with Finland on the Karelian Isthmus to be moved westward to a point 30 kilometres (19 mi) east of Viipuri to the line between Koivisto and Lipola ; for existing fortifications on the Karelian Isthmus to be demolished and for the islands of Suursaari , Tytärsaari , and Koivisto in the Gulf of Finland and Rybachy Peninsula to be ceded. In exchange, the Soviet Union proposed to cede Repola and Porajärvi from Eastern Karelia, an area twice as large as the territories that were originally demanded from the Finns.

[ 229 ] [ 65 ] [ 230 ] Foreign support [ edit ] Main article: Foreign support of Finland in the Winter War Foreign volunteers [ edit ] Norwegian volunteers somewhere in Northern Finland World opinion largely supported the Finnish cause, and the Soviet aggression was generally deemed unjustified. World War II had not yet directly affected France, the United Kingdom or the United States; the Winter War was practically the only conflict in Europe at that time and thus held major world interest. Several foreign organisations sent material aid, and many countries granted credit and military materiel to Finland. Nazi Germany allowed arms to pass through its territory to Finland, but after a Swedish newspaper made this public, Adolf Hitler initiated a policy of silence towards Finland, as part of improved German–Soviet relations following the signing of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact.

[ 231 ] The largest foreign contingent came from neighboring Sweden, which provided nearly 8,760 volunteers during the war. The Volunteer Corps was formed of predominantly Swedes, as well as 1,010 Danes and 727 Norwegians. They fought on the northern front at Salla during the last days of the war. A Swedish unit of Gloster Gladiator fighters, named "the Flight Regiment 19" also participated. Swedish anti-air batteries with Bofors 40 mm (1.6 in) guns were responsible for air defence in northern Finland and the city of Turku.

[ 232 ] Volunteers arrived from Hungary , Italy and Estonia. 350 American nationals of Finnish background volunteered, and 210 volunteers of other nationalities arrived in Finland before the war ended.

[ 232 ] Max Manus , a Norwegian , fought in the Winter War before returning to Norway and later achieved fame as a resistance fighter during the German occupation of Norway . In total, Finland received 12,000 volunteers, 50 of whom died during the war.

[ 233 ] The British actor Christopher Lee volunteered in the war for two weeks, but did not face combat.

[ 234 ] White émigrés and Russian prisoners-of-war [ edit ] Finland officially refused overtures from the anti-Soviet Russian All-Military Union (ROVS) for aid. Nevertheless, Mannerheim eventually agreed to establish a small Russian detachment ( Russkaya narodnaya armiya , RNA) of 200 men after being introduced to Boris Bazhanov , a high-ranking ROVS member, in person in January 1940. The project was deemed top secret, and was under the auspices of the intelligence division of the Finnish army headquarters.

[ 235 ] The ranks of RNA were to be filled by prisoners-of-war, but it would be commanded by White émigrés instead of captured Soviet Army officers, who were deemed unreliable. Bazhanov's Finnish assistant Feodor Schulgin chose Captain Vladimir Kiseleff, Lieutenant Vladimir Lugovskoy, Anatoly Budyansky and brothers Nikolay and Vladimir Bastamov as officers for the unit. Of the five, the Bastamovs were not Finnish citizens, but had Nansen passports . The prisoners-of-war were trained in Huittinen , although it is possible that some were also trained in Lempäälä .

[ 235 ] RNA never participated in battle, despite Boris Bazhanov's later claims to the contrary in his memoirs. About 35 to 40 members of it were present during a battle in Ruskeala in early March 1940, where they spread flyers and broadcast propaganda to encircled Soviet troops, but did not carry weapons. The men were subsequently detained by Finnish forces, who mistook them for Soviet infiltrators. After the war's end, Bazhanov was immediately asked to leave Finland, which he did. Finnish military historian Carl Geust presumes that most members of the RNA were executed after they were returned to the Soviet Union after the war. Additionally, Vladimir Bastamov was later extradited into the Soviet Union as one of the Leino prisoners in 1945, and was sentenced to 20 years of hard labour. He was released after Stalin's death and returned to Finland in 1956.

[ 235 ] Franco-British intervention plans [ edit ] Main article: Franco-British plans for intervention in the Winter War Franco-British support was offered on the condition their forces could pass freely from Narvik through neutral Norway and Sweden instead of the difficult passage through Soviet-occupied Petsamo .

France had been one of the earliest supporters of Finland during the Winter War. The French saw an opportunity to weaken Germany's resource imports via a Finnish counteroffensive, as both Sweden and the Soviet Union were strategic trading partners to Germany. France had another motive, preferring to have a major war in a remote part of Europe rather than on French soil. France planned to re‑arm the Polish exile units and transport them to the Finnish Arctic port of Petsamo. Another proposal was a massive air strike with Turkish co-operation against the Caucasus oil fields .

[ 236 ] The British, for their part, wanted to block the flow of iron ore from Swedish mines to Germany as the Swedes supplied up to 40 per cent of Germany's iron demand.

[ 236 ] The matter was raised by British Admiral Reginald Plunkett on 18 September 1939, and the next day Winston Churchill brought up the subject in the Chamberlain War Cabinet .

[ 237 ] On 11 December, Churchill opined that the British should gain a foothold in Scandinavia with the objective to help the Finns, but without a war with the Soviet Union.

[ 238 ] Because of the heavy German reliance on Northern Sweden's iron ore, Hitler had made it clear to the Swedish government in December that any Allied troops on Swedish soil would immediately provoke a German invasion.

[ 239 ] On 19 December, French Prime Minister Édouard Daladier introduced his plan to the General Staff and the War Cabinet. In his plan, Daladier created linkage between the war in Finland and the iron ore in Sweden.

[ 238 ] There was a danger of Finland's possible fall under Soviet hegemony. In turn, Nazi Germany could occupy both Norway and Sweden. These two powers could divide Scandinavia between them, as they had already done with Poland. The main motivation of the French and the British was to reduce German war-making ability.

[ 240 ] The Military Co-ordination Committee met on 20 December in London, and two days later the French plan was put forward.

[ 240 ] The Anglo-French Supreme War Council elected to send notes to Norway and Sweden on 27 December, urging the Norwegians and Swedes to help Finland and offer the Allies their support. Norway and Sweden rejected the offer on 5 January 1940.

[ 239 ] The Allies came up with a new plan, in which they would demand that Norway and Sweden give them right of passage by citing a League of Nations resolution as justification. The expedition troops would disembark at the Norwegian port of Narvik and proceed by rail toward Finland, passing through the Swedish ore fields on the way. This demand was sent to Norway and Sweden on 6 January, but it was likewise rejected six days later.

[ 241 ] Stymied but not yet dissuaded from the possibility of action, the Allies formulated a final plan on 29 January. First, the Finns would make a formal request for assistance. Then, the Allies would ask Norway and Sweden for permission to move the "volunteers" across their territory. Finally, to protect the supply line from German actions, the Allies would send units ashore at Namsos , Bergen , and Trondheim . The operation would have required 100,000 British and 35,000 French soldiers with naval and air support. The supply convoys would sail on 12 March and the landings would begin on 20 March.

[ 242 ] The end of the war on 13 March cancelled Franco-British plans to send troops to Finland through Northern Scandinavia .

[ 243 ] Aftermath and casualties [ edit ] Main articles: Aftermath of the Winter War , Continuation War , and Lapland War See also: Cross of Sorrow Result [ edit ] The outcome of the Winter War is viewed differently among historians. Some view it as a Soviet victory and Finnish defeat.

[ 244 ] [ 245 ] However, others view the war as a Soviet failure for failing to absorb Finland.

[ 246 ] Historically, the Soviet invasion of Finland has been deemed one of the most embarrassing periods in Russian history and a severe failure [ 247 ] or a "less than convincing" victory, [ 248 ] while also being considered a "botched campaign" and the outcome hurting Soviet prestige.

[ 249 ] Finland [ edit ] Heroes' Memorial Day in Joensuu 19 May 1940.

The 105-day war had a profound and depressing effect in Finland. Meaningful international support was minimal and arrived late, and the German blockade had prevented most armament shipments.

[ 250 ] The 15-month period between the Winter War and Operation Barbarossa , part of which was the Continuation War, was later called the Interim Peace .

[ 228 ] After the end of the war, the situation of the Finnish Army on the Karelian Isthmus became a subject of debate in Finland. Orders had already been issued to prepare a retreat to the next line of defence in the Taipale sector. Estimates of how long the Red Army could have been delayed by retreat-and-stand operations varied from a few days to a few weeks, [ 251 ] [ 252 ] or to a couple of months at most.

[ 253 ] Immediately after the war, Helsinki officially announced 19,576 dead.

[ 254 ] According to revised estimates in 2005 by Finnish historians, 25,904 people died or went missing and 43,557 were wounded on the Finnish side during the war.

[ F 13 ] Finnish and Russian researchers have estimated that there were 800–1,100 Finnish prisoners of war , of whom between 10 and 20 per cent died. The Soviet Union repatriated 847 Finns after the War.

[ 13 ] Air raids killed 957 civilians.

[ 11 ] Between 20 and 30 tanks were destroyed and 62 aircraft were lost.

[ 14 ] Also, Finland had to cede all ships of the Finnish Ladoga Naval Detachment to the Soviet Union by virtue of the Moscow Peace Treaty .

During the Interim Peace, Finland aimed to improve its defensive capabilities and conducted negotiations with Sweden on a military alliance, but negotiations ended once it became clear that both Germany and the Soviet Union opposed such an alliance.

[ 255 ] On 31 July 1940, German Chancellor Adolf Hitler gave the order to plan an assault on the Soviet Union and so Germany had to reassess its position regarding Finland. Until then, Germany had rejected Finnish appeals to purchase arms. However, the prospect of an invasion of the Soviet Union reversed the policy. In August, the secret sale of weapons to Finland was permitted.

[ 256 ] Karelian evacuees established an interest group, the Finnish Karelian League , to defend Karelian rights and interests and to find a way to return ceded regions of Karelia to Finland.

[ 227 ] [ 257 ] Finland wished to re-enter the war mainly because of the Soviet invasion of Finland during the Winter War, which had taken place after Finland had failed by relying on the League of Nations and on Nordic neutrality.

[ 258 ] Finland aimed primarily to reverse its territorial losses from the Moscow Peace Treaty and, depending on the success of the German invasion of the Soviet Union, possibly to expand its borders, especially into East Karelia . Some right-wing groups, such as the Academic Karelia Society , supported a Greater Finland ideology.

[ 259 ] The Continuation War began in June 1941 and led to Finnish participation in the Siege of Leningrad as well as the Finnish occupation of East Karelia .

[ 260 ] [ 261 ] Soviet Union [ edit ] Monument devoted to the victims of the Winter War in St. Petersburg The Soviet General Staff Supreme Command ( Stavka ) met in April 1940, reviewed the lessons of the Finnish campaign and recommended reforms. The role of frontline political commissars was reduced, and old-fashioned ranks and forms of discipline were reintroduced. Clothing, equipment and tactics for winter operations were improved. Not all of the reforms had been completed when Germans initiated Operation Barbarossa 14 months later.

[ 262 ] Between the Winter War and perestroika in the late 1980s, Soviet historiography relied solely on Molotov's speeches on the Winter War. In his radio speech of 29 November 1939, Molotov argued that the Soviet Union had tried to negotiate guarantees of security for Leningrad for two months. The Finns had taken a hostile stance to "please foreign imperialists". Finland had undertaken military provocation, and the Soviet Union could no longer abide by the non-aggression pacts. According to Molotov, the Soviet Union did not want to occupy or annex Finland, but the goal was purely to secure Leningrad.

[ 263 ] The official Soviet figure, with reference to the command of the Leningrad Military District, was published at a session of the Supreme Soviet on 26 March 1940, with 48,475 dead and 158,863 sick and wounded.

[ 18 ] More recent Russian estimates vary: in 1990, Mikhail Semiryaga claimed 53,522 dead, and N. I. Baryshnikov , 53,500. In 1997, Grigoriy Krivosheyev claimed 126,875 dead and missing and total casualties of 391,783, with 188,671 wounded.

[ 15 ] In 1991, Yuri Kilin claimed 63,990 dead and total casualties of 271,528. In 2007, he revised the estimate of dead to 134,000 [ 16 ] and in 2012, he updated the estimate to 138,533.

[ 264 ] In 2013, Pavel Petrov stated that the Russian State Military Archive has a database confirming 167,976 killed or missing along with the soldiers' names, dates of birth and ranks.

[ 17 ] Nikita Khrushchev stated in his memoirs that over one million Soviet soldiers were killed.

[ 265 ] [ 266 ] There were 5,572 Soviet prisoners of war in Finland .

[ 20 ] [ 267 ] [ 268 ] After the Winter War, the Soviet prisoners were returned to the USSR in accordance with the Moscow Peace Treaty. Of these, 450 were released, 4,354 were sentenced to imprisonment in labour camps ranging from 3 to 10 years and 414 were exposed to be "active in traitorous activities while in captivity", with 334 criminal cases being transferred to the Supreme Court of the Soviet Union ; 232 of those cases ended in a death penalty.

[ 269 ] Between 1,200 and 3,543 Soviet tanks were destroyed. The official figure was 611 tank casualties, but Yuri Kilin found a note received by the head of the Soviet General Staff, Boris Shaposhnikov, reporting 3,543 tank casualties and 316 tanks destroyed. According to Finnish historian Ohto Manninen , the 7th Soviet Army lost 1,244 tanks during the breakthrough battles of the Mannerheim Line in mid-winter. In the immediate aftermath of the war, the Finnish estimate of the number of lost Soviet tanks was 1,000 to 1,200.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] The Soviet Air Forces lost around 1,000 aircraft, but fewer than half of them were combat casualties.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] According to Carl Fredrik Geust, based on the studies of Soviet air force units, Finnish anti-aircraft units shot down 119 and Finnish fighter pilots 131 Soviet aircraft, though all Soviet aircraft losses had been more than 900.

Germany [ edit ] The Winter War was a political success for the Germans. Both the Red Army and the League of Nations were humiliated, and the Anglo-French Supreme War Council had been revealed to be chaotic and powerless. The German policy of neutrality was unpopular in the homeland, and relations with Italy had suffered. After the Moscow Peace Treaty, Germany improved its ties with Finland, and within two weeks, Finnish-German relations were at the top of the agenda.

[ 270 ] [ 36 ] More importantly, the very poor performance of the Red Army convinced Hitler that an invasion of the Soviet Union would be successful. In June 1941, Hitler declared, "we have only to kick in the door and the whole rotten structure will come crashing down".

[ 271 ] Allies [ edit ] The Winter War laid bare the disorganisation and ineffectiveness of the Red Army and that of the Allies. The Anglo-French Supreme War Council was unable to formulate a workable plan, revealing its unsuitability to make effective war in either Britain or France. This failure led to the collapse of the Third Daladier Government in France and the nomination of Paul Reynaud as the new Prime Minister of France .

[ 272 ] See also [ edit ] Finland portal Soviet Union portal List of Finnish military equipment of World War II List of Soviet Union military equipment of World War II List of Finnish corps in the Winter War List of Finnish divisions in the Winter War Military history of Finland during World War II Winter War in popular culture Explanatory notes [ edit ] ^ At the beginning of the war, the Finns had 300,000 soldiers. The Finnish Army had only 250,028 rifles (total 281,594 firearms), but White Guards brought their own rifles (over 114,000 rifles, total 116,800 firearms) to the war. The Finnish Army reached its maximum strength at the beginning of March 1940 with 346,000 soldiers in uniform.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] ^ From 1919 onwards, the Finns possessed 32 French Renault FT tanks and a few lighter tanks. These were unsuitable for the war and they were subsequently used as fixed pillboxes . The Finns bought 32 British Vickers 6-Ton tanks during 1936–39, but without weapons. Weapons were intended to be manufactured and installed in Finland. Only 10 tanks were fit for combat at the beginning of the conflict.

[ 3 ] ^ On 1 December 1939 the Finns had 114 combat aeroplanes fit for duty and seven aeroplanes for communication and observation purposes. Almost 100 aeroplanes were used for flight training purposes, unsuitable for combat or under repair. In total, the Finns had 173 aircraft and 43 reserve aircraft.

[ 4 ] ^ [ 5 ] 550,757 soldiers on 1 January 1940 and 760,578 soldiers by the beginning of March.

[ 6 ] In the Leningrad Military District, 1,000,000 soldiers [ 7 ] and 20 divisions one month before the war and 58 divisions two weeks before its end.

[ 8 ] ^ At the beginning of the war, the Soviets had 2,514 tanks and 718 armoured cars. The main battlefield was the Karelian Isthmus where the Soviets deployed 1,450 tanks. At the end of the war the Soviets had 6,541 tanks and 1,691 armoured cars. The most common tank type was T-26 , but also BT type was very common.

[ 9 ] ^ This name is translated as follows: Finnish : talvisota , Swedish : Vinterkriget , Russian : Зи́мняя война́ , romanized : Zimnyaya voyna . The names Soviet–Finnish War 1939–1940 (Russian: Сове́тско-финская война́ 1939–1940 ) and Soviet–Finland War 1939–1940 (Russian: Сове́тско-финляндская война́ 1939–1940 ) are often used in Russian historiography ; [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Russo–Finnish War 1939–1940 or Finno-Russian War 1939–1940 are used by the U.S.

Library of Congress ' catalogue (see authority control).

^ See the relevant section and the following sources: [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] ^ See the relevant section and the following sources: [ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] ^ The Soviet role is confirmed in Nikita Khrushchev 's memoirs, which states that Artillery Marshal Grigory Kulik had personally supervised the bombardment of the Soviet village.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] ^ See the following sources: [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] ^ See the following sources: [ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] ^ This is the border length currently, not before the Winter War.

^ A detailed classification of dead and missing is as follows: [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Dead, buried 16,766; Wounded, died of wounds 3,089; Dead, not buried, later declared as dead 3,503; Missing, declared as dead 1,712; Died as a prisoner of war 20; Other reasons (diseases, accidents, suicides) 677; Unknown 137; Died during the additional refresher training (diseases, accidents, suicides) 34.

Citations [ edit ] ^ Palokangas (1999) , pp. 299–300 ^ Juutilainen & Koskimaa (2005) , p. 83 ^ Palokangas (1999) , p. 318 ^ Peltonen (1999) ^ Meltiukhov (2000) : ch. 4, Table 10 ^ Krivosheyev (1997) , p. 63 ^ Kilin (1999) , p. 383 ^ Manninen (1994) , p. 43 ^ Kantakoski (1998) , p. 260 ^ a b Trotter (2002) , p. 187 ^ a b c d Kurenmaa and Lentilä (2005) , p. 1152 ^ a b Lentilä and Juutilainen (1999) , p. 821 ^ a b Malmi (1999) , p. 792 ^ a b c d Tillotson (1993) , p. 160 ^ a b c Krivosheyev (1997) , pp. 77–78 ^ a b c Kilin (2007b) , p. 91 ^ a b Petrov (2013) ^ a b Sokolov (2000) , p. 340 ^ a b "РОССИЯ И СССР В ВОЙНАХ XX ВЕКА. Глава III. ЛЮДСКИЕ ПОТЕРИ КРАСНОЙ АРМИИ ЗА ВРЕМЯ ГРАЖДАНСКОЙ ВОЙНЫ И ИНОСТРАННОЙ ВОЕННОЙ ИНТЕРВЕНЦИИ" .

rus-sky.com .

Archived from the original on 12 May 2021 . Retrieved 11 September 2018 .

^ a b Manninen (1999b) , p. 815 ^ a b Kilin (1999) p. 381 ^ a b Kantakoski (1998) , p. 286 ^ a b c d Manninen (1999b) , pp. 810–811 ^ a b Kilin (1999) , p. 381 ^ Baryshnikov (2005) ^ Kovalyov (2006) ^ Shirokorad (2001) ^ a b Manninen (2008) , pp. 37, 42, 43, 46, 49 ^ a b Rentola (2003) pp. 188–217 ^ a b c Ravasz (2003) p. 3 ^ a b Clemmesen and Faulkner (2013) p. 76 ^ a b Zeiler and DuBois (2012) p. 210 ^ a b Reiter (2009) , p. 124 ^ a b Chubaryan (2002) , p. xvi ^ a b Trotter (2002) , p. 17 ^ a b c Lightbody (2004) , p. 55 ^ Kotkin (2017) , pp. 966, 974, 1008 ^ Reiter (2009) , pp. 126, 127 ^ a b Trotter (2002) , pp. 234–235 ^ Mannerheim, Carl Gustaf Emil (1953).

Memoirs . E.P. Dutton & Company. pp.

364– 365.

^ Massari, Ivano (18 August 2015).

"The Winter War – When the Finns Humiliated the Russians" . War History Online.

Archived from the original on 19 December 2021 . Retrieved 19 December 2021 .

^ Kilin and Raunio (2007) , p. 10 ^ Hough (2019) .

^ Trotter 2002 , pp. 3–5 ^ a b Trotter (2002) , pp. 4–6 ^ Jowett & Snodgrass (2006) , p. 3 ^ Turtola (1999a) , pp. 21–24 ^ Turtola (1999a) , pp. 33–34 ^ Edwards (2006) , pp. 26–27 ^ Edwards (2006) , p. 18 ^ Polvinen (1987) , pp. 156–161, 237–238, 323, 454 ^ Engman (2007) , pp. 452–454 ^ a b c Turtola (1999a) , pp. 30–33 ^ Edwards (2006) , p. 31 ^ Edwards (2006) , pp. 43–46 ^ Van Dyke (1997) , p. 13 ^ Edwards (2006) , pp. 32–33 ^ a b Murphy (2021) , p. 7 ^ Lightbody (2004) , p. 52 ^ Trotter (2002) , p. 15 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 12–13 ^ Turtola (1999a) , pp. 32–33 ^ Turtola (1999a) , pp. 34–35 ^ Engle and Paananen (1985) , p. 6 ^ a b c d Turtola (1999a) , pp. 38–41 ^ Ries (1988) , pp. 55–56 ^ Manninen (1999a) , pp. 141–148 ^ a b Kotkin (2017) , pp. 960 ^ Kotkin (2017) , pp. 963 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 14–16 ^ Kotkin (2017) , pp. 962 ^ a b Kotkin (2017) , p. 970 ^ a b Turtola (1999a) , pp. 41–43 ^ Tanner (1950) ^ a b Kotkin (2017) , p. 964 ^ Kotkin (2017) , pp. 965 ^ Kotkin (2017) , pp. 963, 971 ^ Kotkin (2017) , p. 966 ^ Kotkin (2017) , p. 971 ^ Kotkin (2017) , p. 973 ^ Turtola, Martti (1999). "Kansainvälinen kehitys Euroopassa ja Suomessa 1930-luvulla". In Leskinen, Jari; Juutilainen, Antti (eds.).

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen . pp.

41– 43.

^ Kotkin (2017) , p. 975 ^ a b Kotkin (2017) , pp. 961, 974 ^ Kotkin (2017) , pp. 974 ^ Ries (1988) , pp. 77–78 ^ Murphy (2021) , p. 9 ^ Edwards (2006) , p. 105 ^ a b Turtola (1999a) , pp. 44–45 ^ Leskinen, Jari (1997). "Suomenlahden sulku ja Neuvostoliitto" [Blockade of the Gulf of Finland and the Soviet Union].

Vaiettu Suomen silta [ Hushed bridge of Finland ] (in Finnish). Helsinki: Hakapaino Oy. pp.

406– 407.

ISBN 951-710-050-7 .

^ Tanner (1950) , pp. 85–86 ^ Kilin (2007a) , pp. 99–100 ^ Aptekar (2009) ^ Yle News (2013) ^ Tanner (1950) , p. 114 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 58, 61 ^ Kokoshin (1998) , p. 93 ^ Killham (1993) , p. 78 ^ Coates (1940) ^ Elliston (1940) , p. 237 ^ Sander (2013) , pp. 38, 39 ^ Nenye (2015) , p. 50 ^ Nenye (2015) , pp. 50, 51 ^ Edwards (2006) , p. 98 ^ Nenye (2015) , p. 51 ^ Rentola K. (2016): Stalin ja Suomen kohtalo. Otava, Helsinki.

^ Iltasanomat (2019) ^ Kotkin (2017) , pp. 966, 974 ^ Kotkin (2017) , pp. 974-975 ^ Kotkin (2017) , pp. 981, 994 ^ Trotter (2002) , p. 34 ^ Conquest (2007) , p. 450 ^ Bullock (1993) , p. 489 ^ Glanz (1998) , p. 58 ^ Ries (1988) , p. 56 ^ Edwards (2006) , p. 189 ^ Coox (1985) , p. 996 ^ Coox (1985) , pp. 994–995 ^ a b Coox (1985) , p. 997 ^ Goldman (2012) , p. 167 ^ Langdon-Davies (1941) , p. 7 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 35–36 ^ Edwards (2006) , p. 93 ^ Edwards (2006) , p. 125 ^ Manninen (2008) , p. 14 ^ Kotkin (2017) , p. 994 ^ a b Trotter (2002) , p. 204 ^ a b Trotter (2002) , pp. 38–39 ^ a b c d e Kilin and Raunio (2007) , p. 13 ^ Nenye (2015) , p. 54 ^ Trotter (2002) ^ Leskinen and Juutilainen (1999) ^ a b Trotter (2002) , pp. 42–44 ^ Laemlein (2013) pp. 95–99 ^ Trotter (2002) , p. 47 ^ Jowett & Snodgrass (2006) , p. 6 ^ Paskhover (2015) ^ Russian State Military Archive F.34980 Op.14 D.108 ^ a b Trotter (2002) , pp. 48–51 ^ a b Trotter (2002) , p. 61 ^ League of Nations (1939) , pp. 506, 540 ^ Trotter (2002) , p. 58 ^ Soikkanen (1999) , p. 235 ^ Geust; Uitto (2006) , p. 54 ^ Trotter (2002) , p. 69 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 72–73 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 76–78 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 51–55 ^ Trotter (2002) , p. 121 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 53–54 ^ Redarmyman (29 April 2019).

"Swedish volunteer in position during the Soviet-Finnish War" .

Second World War the Military Photo Archive .

Archived from the original on 10 February 2023 . Retrieved 10 February 2023 .

^ Paulaharju (1999) , p. 292 ^ Paulaharju (1999) , pp. 289–290 ^ a b Trotter (2002) , pp. 145–146 ^ a b Paulaharju (1999) , pp. 297–298 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 131–132 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 148–149 ^ a b Trotter (2002) , pp. 62–63 ^ Vuorenmaa (1999) , pp. 494–495 ^ Laaksonen (1999) , p. 407 ^ Laaksonen (1999) , pp. 411–412 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 87–89 ^ Kinnunen, Annika (5 November 2019).

"Sotamuistoja – Simo Häyhän kuvaus talvisodasta" (PDF) (Candidate thesis) (in Finnish). University of Oulu. p. 13.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 June 2022 . Retrieved 20 August 2022 .

^ Kilin and Raunio (2007) , p. 113 ^ Juutilainen (1999a) , pp. 504–505 ^ Juutilainen (1999a) , p. 506 ^ Juutilainen (1999a) , p. 520 ^ Kinnunen, Annika (5 November 2019).

"Sotamuistoja – Simo Häyhän kuvaus talvisodasta" (PDF) (Candidate thesis) (in Finnish). University of Oulu. p. 13.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 June 2022 . Retrieved 20 August 2022 .

^ Kauppinen (2017) .

^ YLE: Marokon Kauhu nousi legendaksi Kollaalla Archived 3 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine (in Finnish) ^ Trotter (2002) , p. 110 ^ Juutilainen (1999a) , pp. 510–511 ^ Juutilainen (1999a) , p. 514 ^ Jowett & Snodgrass (2006) , p. 44 ^ Juutilainen (1999a) , pp. 516–517 ^ Vuorenmaa (1999) , pp. 559–561 ^ Vuorenmaa (1999) , p. 550 ^ Trotter (2002) , p. 150 ^ Kulju (2007) , p. 230 ^ Kulju (2007) , p. 229 ^ Kantakoski (1998) , p. 283 ^ Kulju (2007) , pp. 217–218 ^ Pöntinen, P.: Jäätynyt helvetti: Tällainen on Raatteen tie tänään Archived 3 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine .

Suomen Kuvalehti , 2015.

^ a b Trotter (2002) , pp. 171–174 ^ Leskinen and Juutilainen (1999) , p. 164 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 178–180 ^ Vuorenmaa (1999) , pp. 545–549 ^ Esko Lammi: Talvisodan Tampere . Vammala: Häijää Invest (Vammaspaino), 1990.

ISBN 9529017073 |. (in Finnish) ^ Jouko Juonala: Ilmahälytys!

Talvisota: Ilta-Sanomien erikoislehti 2019, pp. 62–66. Helsinki: Sanoma Media Finland Oy. (in Finland) ^ a b Trotter (2002) , p. 193 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 187–188 ^ Tillotson (1993) , p. 157 ^ Peltonen (1999) , pp. 607–608 ^ Trotter (2002) , p. 189 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 191–192 ^ Elfvegren (1999) , p. 681 ^ Elfvegren (1999) , p. 678 ^ Elfvegren (1999) , p. 692 ^ Leskinen (1999) , p. 130 ^ Silvast (1999) , pp. 694–696 ^ Tillotson (1993) , pp. 152–153 ^ Reiter (2009) , p. 126 ^ Reiter (2009) , pp. 126, 127 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 203–204 ^ a b Laaksonen (1999) , pp. 424–425 ^ a b c Trotter (2002) , pp. 214–215 ^ Laaksonen (1999) , pp. 426–427 ^ Laaksonen (1999) , p. 430 ^ Trotter (2002) , p. 218 ^ Geust; Uitto (2006) , p. 77 ^ Trotter (2002) , p. 233 ^ Laaksonen (1999) , p. 452 ^ Enkenberg (2020) , p.215 ^ Rentola, Kimmo (1 October 2013).

"Intelligence and Stalin's Two Crucial Decisions in the Winter War, 1939–40" .

The International History Review .

35 (5): 1089– 1112.

doi : 10.1080/07075332.2013.828637 .

ISSN 0707-5332 .

S2CID 155013785 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2022 . Retrieved 6 August 2022 .

^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 246–247 ^ Edwards (2006) , p. 261 ^ a b c Lähteenmäki, Maria (1 January 2014).

"Bad blood and humiliation: Finns' experiences of the Moscow peace negotiations in 1940" .

Nordia Geographical Publications .

43 (1): 101– 113.

ISSN 2736-9722 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2022 . Retrieved 6 August 2022 .

^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 247–248 ^ Kilin and Raunio (2007) , pp. 260–295 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 249–251 ^ Fadiman (1985) , p. 320.

^ Trotter (2002) , p. 254 ^ "70th Anniversary of the End of the Winter War" .

Yle News . 13 March 2010.

Archived from the original on 13 March 2022 . Retrieved 13 March 2022 .

^ Statistics Finland (1940) ^ Kirby (2006) , p. 215 ^ Gadolin (1952) , p. 7.

^ Engle and Paananen (1985) , pp. 142–143 ^ a b Ahtiainen (2000) ^ a b Jowett & Snodgrass (2006) , p. 10 ^ Van Dyke (1997) , pp. 189–190 ^ Trotter 2002 , pp. 14–16 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 194–202 ^ a b Jowett & Snodgrass (2006) , pp. 21–22 ^ Juutilainen (1999b) , p. 776 ^ Rigby (2003) , pp. 59–60.

^ a b c Jormanainen, Heli (15 March 2020).

"Venäläisemigranttien talvisota – Mannerheim hyväksyi huippusalaisen suunnitelman bolševikkien vastaisen sotavankiarmeijan perustamisesta" .

Yle .

Archived from the original on 17 February 2022 . Retrieved 8 June 2022 .

^ a b Trotter (2002) , pp. 235–236 ^ Edwards (2006) , p. 141 ^ a b Edwards (2006) , p. 145 ^ a b Trotter (2002) , p. 237 ^ a b Edwards (2006) , p. 146 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 237–238 ^ Trotter (2002) , pp. 238–239 ^ Trotter (2002) , p. 239 ^ Aini Rajanen (1992).

Of Finnish Ways . Collins. p. 45.

ISBN 0060923822 .

^ Karl G. Heinze (2003).

Baltic Sagas: Events and Personalities That Changed the World . Virtual Bookworm.Com Pub Inc. p. 303.

ISBN 1589394984 .

^ Roger R. Reese (2008).

"Lessons of the Winter War: A Study in the Military Efectiveness of the Red Army, 1939-1940" . Society for Military History.

The Soviet war against Finland (1939-40) is generally seen as a fiasco because the U.S.S.R. failed to conquer and absorb Finland, as Joseph Stalin had planned; and the Finns inflicted losses on the Red Army that were far out of proportion to the small size of their army and their own casualties.

^ Sprague, Martina (10 January 2014).

Swedish Volunteers in the Russo-Finnish Winter War, 1939-1940 . McFarland. pp.

189– 190.

ISBN 978-0-7864-5753-3 .

^ Sella, Amnon (19 August 2005).

The Value of Human Life in Soviet Warfare . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-134-97464-1 .

By the end of the Winter War, with the background of the German successes in Europe, the less than convincing victory over Finland and the crisis in the training year 1940, the Soviet Government decided to rebuild the morale of its High Command and to do so by means of harsher discipline.

^ Tuunainen, Pasi (25 June 2016).

Finnish Military Effectiveness in the Winter War, 1939-1940 .

Palgrave Macmillan . p. 207.

ISBN 978-1-137-44606-0 .

^ Edwards (2006) , pp. 272–273 ^ Laaksonen (2005) , p. 365 ^ Paasikivi (1958) . p. 177 ^ Halsti (1955) , p. 412 ^ Dallin (1942) , p. 191 ^ Turtola (1999b) , p. 863 ^ Reiter (2009) , p. 132 ^ Finnish Karelian League ^ Lunde (2011) , p. 9 ^ Jokipii (1999) , pp. 145–146 ^ Rutherford (2014) , p. 190 ^ Yarov (2009) , p. 7 ^ Trotter (2002) p. 264 ^ Vihavainen (1999) , pp. 893–896 ^ Kilin (2012) , pp. 21–24.

^ Reiter (2009) , pp. 128 ^ Nenye (2015) , p. 284 ^ Van Dyke (1997) , p. 191 ^ Trotter (2002) , p. 263 ^ Bichekhvost (2012) .

^ Edwards (2006) , pp. 277–279 ^ Sedlar (2007) , p. 8 ^ Edwards (2006) , pp. 13–14 General and cited references [ edit ] English [ edit ] Ahtiainen, Ilkka (16 July 2000).

"The Never-Ending Karelia Question" .

Helsinki Times . Archived from the original on 29 June 2011 . Retrieved 5 November 2009 .

Bullock, Alan (1993).

Hitler and Stalin: Parallel Lives . Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-0-679-72994-5 .

Chubaryan, A. (2002). "Foreword". In Kulkov, E.; Rzheshevskii, O.; Shukman, H. (eds.).

Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, 1939–1940 . Frank Cass.

ISBN 978-0-7146-5203-0 .

Clemmesen, Michael H.; Faulkner, Marcus, eds. (2013).

Northern European Overture to War, 1939–1941: From Memel to Barbarossa . Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-24908-0 .

Coates, William Peyton; Coates, Zelda Kahan (1940).

Russia, Finland and the Baltic . London: Lawrence & Wishart .

Conquest, Robert (2007) [1991].

The Great Terror: A Reassessment (40th Anniversary ed.). Oxford University Press, US.

ISBN 978-0-19-531700-8 .

Coox, Alvin D.

(1985).

Nomonhan: Japan against Russia, 1939 . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 0-8047-1160-7 .

Dallin, David (1942).

Soviet Russia's Foreign Policy, 1939–1942 . Translated by Leon Dennen. Yale University Press.

Edwards, Robert (2006).

White Death: Russia's War on Finland 1939–40 . Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

ISBN 978-0-297-84630-7 .

Elliston, H.B. (1940).

Finland Fights . London: G. Harrap.

Engle, Eloise; Paananen, Lauri (1985) [1973].

The Winter War: The Russo-Finnish Conflict, 1939–40 . Westview Press.

ISBN 0-8133-0149-1 .

Fadiman, Clifton (1985).

The Little, Brown book of anecdotes . Boston: Little, Brown.

ISBN 978-0-316-08472-7 .

OCLC 759509883 .

Gadolin, Axel (1952).

The Solution of the Karelian Refugee Problem in Finland . Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.

ISBN 978-9401179645 .

OCLC 9401179646 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Glanz, David (1998).

Stumbling Colossus: The Red Army on the Eve of World War . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0-7006-0879-9 .

Goldman, Stuart D. (2012).

Nomonhan 1939, The Red Army's Victory That Shaped World War II . Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-59114-329-1 .

Hough, William J.H. (10 September 2019).

"The Annexation of the Baltic States and Its Effect on the Development of Law Prohibiting Forcible Seizure of Territory" .

Nyls Journal of International and Comparative Law .

6 (2) . Retrieved 29 September 2020 .

Jowett, Philip; Snodgrass, Brent (2006).

Finland at War 1939–45 . Osprey.

ISBN 978-1-84176-969-1 .

"Karjalan Liitto – Briefly in English" . Finnish Karelian League. Archived from the original on 20 August 2009 . Retrieved 18 October 2009 .

Killham, EdwardL (1993).

The Nordic Way: A Path to Baltic Equilibrium . Howells House.

Kirby, David (2006).

A Concise History of Finland . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-53989-0 .

Kokoshin, Andrei (1998).

Soviet Strategic Thought, 1917-91 . MIT Press.

Kotkin, Stephen (2017).

Stalin: Waiting for Hitler, 1929–1941 . Penguin Press.

Krivosheyev, Grigoriy (1997b).

Soviet Casualties and Combat Losses in the Twentieth Century (1st ed.). Greenhill Books.

ISBN 1-85367-280-7 .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 October 2015 .

Laemlein, Tom (October 2013). "Where Will We Bury Them All?".

American Rifleman .

161 .

Langdon-Davies, John (1941).

Invasion in the Snow: A Study of Mechanized War . Houghton Mifflin Company.

OCLC 1535780 .

League of Nations (14 December 1939). "Expulsion of the U.S.S.R.".

League of Nations Official Journal .

Lightbody, Bradley (2004).

The Second World War: Ambitions to Nemesis . Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-22404-7 .

Lunde, Henrik O. (2011).

Finland's War of Choice: The Troubled German-Finnish Alliance in World War II . Newbury: Casemate Publishers.

ISBN 978-1612000374 .

Murphy, David (2021).

The Finnish-Soviet Winter War 1939–40 Stalin's Hollow Victory . Johnny Shumate. London: Bloomsbury Publishing Plc.

ISBN 978-1-4728-4394-4 .

OCLC 1261364794 .

Nenye, Vesa; Munter, Peter; Wirtanen, Toni; Birks, Chris, eds. (2015).

Finland at War: The Winter War 1939–1945 . Osprey.

ISBN 978-1-4728-2718-0 .

Reiter, Dan (2009).

How Wars End (Illustrated ed.). Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691140605 .

Archived from the original on 19 April 2023 . Retrieved 29 October 2010 .

Ries, Tomas (1988).

Cold Will: The Defense of Finland (1st ed.). Brassey's Defence Publishers.

ISBN 0-08-033592-6 .

Rigby, Jonathan (2003).

Christopher Lee: The Authorised Screen History . Reynolds & Hearn.

ISBN 978-1903111642 .

Rutherford, Jeff (2014).

Combat and Genocide on the Eastern Front: The German Infantry's War, 1941–1944 . Cambridge University Press. p. 190.

ISBN 978-1107055711 .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2018.

The ensnaring of Leningrad between the German and Finnish armies did not end the combat in the region as the Soviets launched repeated and desperate attempts to regain contact with the city.

Sander, Gordon F. (2013).

The Hundred Day Winter War: Finland's Gallant Stand against the Soviet Army . University Press of Kansas.

Sedlar, Jean W. (2007).

Hitler's Central European Empire 1938–1945 . BookLocker.

ISBN 978-1591139102 .

Tanner, Väinö (1957) [1950].

The Winter War: Finland against Russia 1939–1940 . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-0482-3 .

Archived from the original on 19 April 2023 . Retrieved 3 October 2020 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Tillotson, H.M. (1993).

Finland at Peace & War 1918–1993 . Michael Russell.

ISBN 0-85955-196-2 .

Trotter, William R.

(2002) [1991].

The Winter War: The Russo–Finnish War of 1939–40 (5th ed.). Aurum Press.

ISBN 1-85410-881-6 .

Van Dyke, Carl (1997).

The Soviet Invasion of Finland, 1939–40 . Routledge.

ISBN 0-7146-4314-9 .

Yarov, Sergey (2017).

Leningrad 1941–42: Morality in a City under Siege . Foreword by John Barber. John Wiley & Sons. p. 7.

ISBN 978-1509508020 .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2018.

While the exact number who died during the siege by the German and Finnish armies from 8 September 1941 to 27 January 1944 will never be known, available data point to 900,000 civilian deaths, over half a million of whom died in the winter of 1941–2 alone.

Yle News (15 March 2013).

"Putin: Winter War aimed at correcting border "mistakes" " .

Archived from the original on 14 December 2017 . Retrieved 14 December 2017 .

Iltasanomat (22 December 2019).

"Yuri Kilin interview" .

Archived from the original on 30 November 2021 . Retrieved 3 December 2021 .

Zeiler, Thomas W.; DuBois, Daniel M., eds. (2012).

A Companion to World War II . Wiley Blackwell Companions to World History. Vol. 11. Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-4051-9681-9 .

Finnish, Russian and other languages [ edit ] Aptekar, Pavel.

"Casus Belli: о Майнильском инциденте, послужившим поводом, для начала "Зимней войны" 1939–40 гг" [Casus Belli: about the Mainila incident, which served as a pretext for the beginning of the "Winter War" of 1939–40].

Raboche-Krest'yanskaya Krasnaya Armiya (website) (in Russian).

Archived from the original on 2 December 2022 . Retrieved 2 September 2009 .

Baryshnikov, N.; Salomaa, E. (2005).

Вовлечение Финляндии во Вторую Мировую войну [Finland's Entrance into World War II]. In Chernov, M. (ed.).

Крестовый поход на Россию [Crusade Against Russia] (in Russian). Yauza.

ISBN 5-87849-171-0 . Archived from the original on 6 November 2008 . Retrieved 1 July 2008 .

Bichekhvost, Alexander Fedorovich (2012).

"Репрессивная политика советского государства и судьбы военнопленных Красной армии участников советско-финской войны 1939-1940 годов" [The Repressive Policy of the Soviet State and the Fate of the Red Army Prisoners of War Participants in the Soviet-Finnish War 1939–1940].

Известия Саратовского Университета. Новая Серия. Серия История. Международные Отношения (in Russian).

12 (4): 99– 108.

Archived from the original on 8 July 2022 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 .

Elfvegren, Eero (1999). "Merisota talvisodassa" [Naval Warfare in the Winter War].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Engman, Max (2007).

Raja – Karjalankannas 1918–1920 [ Border – The Karelian Isthmus 1918–1920 ]. WSOY.

ISBN 978-951-0-32765-4 .

Enkenberg, Ilkka (2020).

Talvisota Väreissä (in Finnish). Readme.fi.

ISBN 978-952-373-053-3 .

Geust, Carl-Fredrik; Uitto, Antero (2006).

Mannerheim-linja: Talvisodan legenda [ The Mannerheim Line: Legend of the Winter War ] (in Finnish). Ajatus.

ISBN 951-20-7042-1 .

Hallberg, Torsten, ed. (2006).

Karelen: ett gränsland i Norden (in Swedish). Föreningen Norden.

ISBN 978-9185276806 .

Halsti, Wolfgang Hallstén (1955).

Talvisota 1939–1940 [ The Winter War 1939–1940 ] (in Finnish). Otava.

Jokipii, Mauno (1999).

Финляндия на пути к войне: Исследование о военном сотрудничестве Германии и Финляндии в 1940–1941 гг [ Birth of the Continuation War: Research of German–Finnish Military Collaboration 1940–1941 ] (in Russian). Petrozavodsk: Karelia.

ISBN 5754507356 .

Juutilainen, Antti; Koskimaa, Matti (2005). "Maavoimien joukkojen perustaminen" [Establishing the Army Forces].

Jatkosodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Juutilainen, Antti (1999a). "Laatokan Karjalan taistelut" [Battles in Ladoga Karelia].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Juutilainen, Antti (1999b). "Talvisodan ulkomaalaiset vapaaehtoiset" [Foreign Volunteers in the Winter War].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Kantakoski, Pekka (1998).

Punaiset panssarit: Puna-armeijan panssarijoukot 1918–1945 [ Red Armour: The Red Army's Tank Forces, 1918–1945 ] (in Finnish). PS-Elso.

ISBN 951-98057-0-2 .

Kauppinen, Kari (18 July 2017).

"Sotasankari Simo Häyhän ennennäkemätön päiväkirja löytyi – "Tässä on minun syntilistani" " .

Iltalehti (in Finnish). Helsinki.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 15 September 2020 .

Kilin, Juri (2007a). "Leningradin sotilaspiirin rajakahakka". In Jokisipilä, Markku (ed.).

Sodan totuudet. Yksi suomalainen vastaa 5,7 ryssää [ Truths of War. One Finn equals 5.7 Russians ] (in Finnish). Ajatus.

Kilin, Juri (2007b). "Rajakahakan hidas jäiden lähtö". In Jokisipilä, Markku (ed.).

Sodan totuudet. Yksi suomalainen vastaa 5,7 ryssää [ Truths of War. One Finn equals 5.7 Russians ] (in Finnish).

Kilin, Juri ; Raunio, Ari (2007).

Talvisodan taisteluja [ Winter War Battles ] (in Finnish). Karttakeskus.

ISBN 978-951-593-068-2 .

Kilin, Yuri (1999). "Puna-armeijan Stalinin tahdon toteuttajana" [The Red Army as an Executor of Stalin's Will].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Kilin, Yu. M. (2012).

"Soviet–Finish War 1939–1940 and Red Army's Losses" .

Proceedings of Petrozavodsk State University. Social Sciences & Humanities .

5 (126): 21– 24.

ISSN 1998-5053 .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2022 . Retrieved 27 June 2018 .

Kovalyov, E. (2006). "7: Зимняя война балтийских подводных лодок (1939–1940 гг.)" [Winter War and the Baltic Submarines (1939–1940)].

Короли подплава в море червонных валетов [ Submarine Kings of the Knave of Hearts Sea ] (in Russian). Tsentrpoligraf.

ISBN 5-9524-2324-8 .

Archived from the original on 1 November 2022 . Retrieved 1 July 2008 .

Kulju, Mika (2007).

Raatteen tie: Talvisodan pohjoinen sankaritarina [ The Raate Road: Tale of Northern Heroism during the Winter War ] (in Finnish). Ajatus.

ISBN 978-951-20-7218-7 .

Kurenmaa, Pekka; Lentilä, Riitta (2005). "Sodan tappiot" [Casualties of the War].

Jatkosodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Laaksonen, Lasse (2005) [1999].

Todellisuus ja harhat [ Reality and Illusions ] (in Finnish). Ajatus.

ISBN 951-20-6911-3 .

Laaksonen, Lasse (1999). "Kannaksen taistelut" [Battles in the Isthmus].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Lentilä, Riitta; Juutilainen, Antti (1999). "Talvisodan uhrit" [Victims of the Winter War].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen .

Leskinen, Jari; Juutilainen, Antti (2005).

Jatkosodan pikkujättiläinen [ Continuation War Guidebook ] (in Finnish) (1st ed.). WSOY.

ISBN 951-0-28690-7 .

Leskinen, Jari (1999). "Suomen ja Viron salainen sotilaallinen yhteistyö Neuvostoliiton hyökkäyksen varalta 1930-luvulla" [The Clandestine Finnish-Estonian Military Collaboration against a Possible Soviet Invasion in the 1930s]. In Leskinen, Jari; Juutilainen, Antti (eds.).

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Leskinen, Jari; Juutilainen, Antti (1999). "Suomen kunnian päivät" [Glory Days of Finland].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Malmi, Timo (1999). "Suomalaiset sotavangit" [Finnish Prisoners of War].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Manninen, Ohto (2008).

Miten Suomi valloitetaan: Puna-armeijan operaatiosuunnitelmat 1939–1944 [ How to Conquer Finland: Operational Plans of the Red Army 1939–1944 ] (in Finnish). Edita.

ISBN 978-951-37-5278-1 .

Manninen, Ohto (1999a). "Neuvostoliiton tavoitteet ennen talvisotaa ja sen aikana" [Soviet objectives before and during the Winter War].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Manninen, Ohto (1999b). "Venäläiset sotavangit ja tappiot" [Russian Prisoners of War and Casualties].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Manninen, Ohto (1994).

Talvisodan salatut taustat (Hidden background of the Winter War) (in Finnish). Kirjaneuvos.

ISBN 952-90-5251-0 .

Meltiukhov, Mikhail (2000).

Упущенный шанс Сталина. Советский Союз и борьба за Европу [ Stalin's Missed Chance ] (in Russian). Veche.

Archived from the original on 9 December 2020 . Retrieved 29 October 2010 .

Paasikivi, Juho Kusti (1958).

Toimintani Moskovassa ja Suomessa 1939–41 [ My Actions in Moscow and Finland 1939–1941 ] (in Finnish). WSOY.

Palokangas, Markku (1999). "Suomalaisjoukkojen aseistus ja varustus" [Armament and Equipment of the Finnish Forces].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Paulaharju, Jyri (1999). "Pakkastalven kourissa" [In the Grip of Winter].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Paskhover, A. (3 June 2015).

Красная Армия – самая миролюбивая, самая героическая...

[Red Army – the most peaceful, the most heroic...].

Ukrayinska Pravda (in Russian).

Archived from the original on 27 June 2022 . Retrieved 21 June 2015 .

Peltonen, Martti (1999). "Ilmasota talvisodassa" [Aerial Warfare in the Winter Wari].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Petrov, Pavel (2013).

Venäläinen talvisotakirjallisuus: Bibliografia 1939–1945 [ Russian Winter War Literature: Bibliography 1939–1945 ] (in Finnish). Docendo.

ISBN 978-952-5912-97-5 .

Polvinen, Tuomo (1987) [1971].

Venäjän vallankumous ja Suomi 1917–1920 II: toukokuu 1918–joulukuu 1920 [ Russian Revolution and Finland 1917–1920 II: May 1918 – December 1920 ]. WSOY.

ISBN 951-0-14299-9 .

Shirokorad, A. (2001). "IX: Зимняя война 1939–1940 гг. [Winter War 1939–1940]".

Северные войны России [ Russia's Northern Wars ] (in Russian). ACT.

ISBN 5-17-009849-9 .

Archived from the original on 7 December 2019 . Retrieved 1 July 2008 .

Ravasz, István (2003).

Finnország függetlenségi harca 1917–1945, Magyar önkéntesek Finnországban [ Finland's struggle for independence from 1917 to 1945, Hungarian volunteers in Finland ] (PDF) (in Hungarian). Wysocki Légió Hagyományőrző Egyesületnek. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 October 2017 . Retrieved 26 January 2015 .

Rentola, Kimmo (2003). Holtsmark, Sven G.; Pharo, Helge Ø.; Tamnes, Rolf (eds.).

Motstrøms: Olav Riste og norsk internasjonal historieskrivning [ Counter Currents: Olav Riste and Norwegian international historiography.

] (in Norwegian). Cappelen Akademisk Forlag.

ISBN 8202218284 .

Russian State Military Archive.

Российский государственный военный архив (РГВА) [ Russian State Military Archive ] (in Russian).

Silvast, Pekka (1999). "Merivoimien ensimmäinen voitto: Russarö" [The Navy's First Victory: Russarö].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Soikkanen, Timo (1999). "Talvisodan henki" [The Spirit of the Winter War].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Statistics Finland (1941).

Suomenmaan Tilastollinen Vuosikirja 1940 [ Finnish Statistics Yearbook 1940 ] (PDF) (in Finnish). pp.

14– 15.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 March 2022 . Retrieved 13 March 2022 .

Turtola, Martti (1999a). "Kansainvälinen kehitys Euroopassa ja Suomessa 1930-luvulla" [International Developments in Europe and Finland in the 1930s].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Turtola, Martti (1999b). "Katkera rauha ja Suomen ulkopoliittinen asema sodan jälkeen" [Bitter Peace and the Post-War Position of Finnish Foreign Policy].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Vihavainen, Timo (1999). "Talvisota neuvostohistoriakirjoituksessa" [The Winter War in Soviet historiography].

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

Sokolov, Boris (2000). "Путь к миру" [Secrets of the Russo-Finnish War].

Тайны финской войны (in Russian). Вече.

ISBN 5-7838-0583-1 .

Vuorenmaa, Anssi; Juutilainen, Antti (1999). "Myytti Mannerheim-linjasta".

Talvisodan pikkujättiläinen (in Finnish).

(Myth of the Mannerheim Line) Further reading [ edit ] Campbell, David (2016).

Finnish soldier versus Soviet soldier: Winter War 1939-40 . Combat. Oxford [England]: Osprey Publishing .

ISBN 978-1-4728-1324-4 .

Chew, Allen F. (1971).

The white death: the epic of the Soviet-Finnish Winter War . East Lansing: Michigan State University Press .

ISBN 978-0-87013-167-7 .

Cox, Geoffrey (1941).

The Red Army Moves . London: Victor Gollancz .

OCLC 502873 .

Engle, Eloise; Paananen, Lauri (1972).

The winter war; the Russo-Finnish conflict, 1939-40 . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons .

ISBN 978-0-684-13047-7 .

Hill, Alexander (2017).

The Red Army and the Second World War . Armies of the Second World War. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-02079-5 .

Kolomiec, Maksim V.; Kolomiec, Maksim V. (2008).

Tanks in the Winter War 1939-1940 . Operations Scandinavia. Translated by Dinan, Tim. Stockholm: Leandoer & Ekholm.

ISBN 978-91-975895-2-9 .

Nenye, Vesa; Munter, Peter; Wirtanen, Toni (2015).

Finland at War: The Winter War 1939–40 . Oxford: Osprey Publishing .

ISBN 978-1-4728-1358-9 .

OCLC 899228795 .

Rahikainen, Paavo; Vainio, Eino (1996).

Artillery barrage at Taipaleenjoki . Translated by Mayow, Nicholas. Helsinki: Finnish War Veterans Association.

ISBN 978-951-97557-0-0 .

OCLC 41278218 .

Reese, Roger R. (July 2008). "Lessons of the Winter War: A Study in the Military Effectiveness of the Red Army, 1939–1940".

The Journal of Military History .

72 (3): 825– 852.

doi : 10.1353/jmh.0.0004 .

ISSN 1543-7795 .

S2CID 110326295 .

Saarelainen, Tapio A. M. (2016).

The white sniper: Simo Häyhä . Philadelphia: Casemate Publishers .

ISBN 978-1-61200-429-7 .

Sander, Gordon F. (2013).

The Hundred Day Winter War: Finland's gallant stand against the Soviet Army . Modern war studies. Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas .

ISBN 978-0-7006-1910-8 .

Soviet Information Bureau (1948).

Falsifiers of History (Historical Survey) . Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House .

LCCN 48024356 .

OCLC 5180512 .

OL 6038495M .

Taylor, Alan (23 May 2013).

"Finland in World War II" .

The Atlantic .

Trotter, William R. (1991).

A Frozen Hell: The Russo-Finnish Winter War of 1939-1940 . Chapel Hill, N.C: Algonquin Books .

ISBN 978-0-945575-22-1 .

Tuunainen, Pasi (2016).

Finnish Military Effectiveness in the Winter War, 1939-1940 . London: Palgrave Macmillan .

doi : 10.1057/978-1-137-44606-0 .

ISBN 978-1-137-44604-6 .

OCLC 956625046 .

Tuuri, Antti ; Impola, Richard A.

(2003) [1984].

The Winter War . Aspasia classics in Finnish literature. Ontario: Aspasia Books.

ISBN 978-0-9731053-7-7 .

OCLC 53793184 .

Weeks, Jessica L. P. (2014).

Dictators at war and peace . Cornell studies in security affairs. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8014-7982-3 .

JSTOR 10.7591/j.ctt1287f18 .

Woody, Christopher (1 December 2017).

"These 17 photos show Finland's brutally cold World War II battle with the Soviet Union" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on 19 February 2023 . Retrieved 11 January 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Winter War .

Look up motti in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Военный альбом (photographs of the Soviet–Finnish War 1939–1940) Finna (search service for information from Finnish archives, libraries and museums) Finnish Wartime Photograph Archive (under CC BY 4.0 ) Fire and Ice: The Winter War of Finland and Russia (Winter War history from a documentary film's website) National Archives of the United Kingdom v t e World War II Outline Battles Operations Leaders Allied Axis Commanders Casualties Conferences General Topics Air warfare of World War II In Europe Blitzkrieg Comparative military ranks Cryptography Declarations of war Diplomacy Governments in exile Home front Australian United Kingdom United States Lend-Lease Manhattan Project British contribution Military awards Military equipment Military production Naval history Nazi plunder Opposition Technology Allied cooperation Mulberry harbour Total war Strategic bombing Puppet states Women Art and World War II Music in World War II Weather events during World War II Theaters Asia and Pacific China South-East Asia Pacific North and Central Pacific South-West Pacific Indian Ocean Europe Western Front Eastern Front Mediterranean and Middle East North Africa East Africa Italy West Africa Atlantic timeline Americas Aftermath Chinese Civil War Cold War Decolonization Division of Korea First Indochina War Expulsion of Germans Greek Civil War Indonesian National Revolution Keelhaul Marshall Plan Occupation of Germany Occupation of Japan Osoaviakhim Paperclip Soviet occupations Baltic Hungary Poland Romania Territorial changes of Germany Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany United Nations War crimes Allied war crimes Soviet war crimes Atrocities against prisoners of war British war crimes United States war crimes German war crimes forced labour Wehrmacht war crimes The Holocaust Aftermath Response Nuremberg trials Italian war crimes Japanese war crimes Nanjing Massacre Unit 731 Prosecution Croatian war crimes Genocide of Serbs Persecution of Jews Romanian war crimes Sexual violence German military brothels Camp brothels Rape during the occupation of Germany / Japan / Poland / Manchuria Rape during the liberation of France / Serbia Sook Ching Comfort women Rape of Manila Marocchinate Participants Allies Algeria Australia Belgium Brazil Bulgaria ( from September 1944 ) Canada China Cuba Czechoslovakia Denmark Ethiopia Eswatini (formerly Swaziland) Finland ( from September 1944 ) France Free France Greece India ( Indian Army ) Italy ( from September 1943 ) Liberia Luxembourg Mexico Netherlands Newfoundland New Zealand Norway Philippines Poland Romania ( from August 1944 ) Sierra Leone South Africa Southern Rhodesia Soviet Union Tuva United Kingdom British Empire United States Puerto Rico Yugoslavia Axis Albania protectorate Bulgaria (until September 1944) State of Burma Republic of China (Wang Jingwei) Independent State of Croatia Finland (until September 1944) German Reich Hungary Azad Hind Iraq Italy (until September 1943) Italian Social Republic Empire of Japan Manchukuo Mengjiang Philippines Romania (until August 1944) Slovak Republic Thailand Vichy France Guangzhouwan French Indochina French Madagascar Syria–Lebanon French North Africa French West Africa Collaboration Neutral Afghanistan Andorra Bhutan Ireland Liechtenstein Monaco Portugal San Marino Saudi Arabia Spain Sweden Switzerland Tibet Turkey Vatican City Yemen Resistance Albania Austria Belgium Bulgaria Czech lands Denmark Dutch East Indies Estonia Ethiopia France Germany Greece Hong Kong Italy Japan Jews Korea Korean Liberation Army Korean Volunteer Army Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malaya Netherlands Northeast China Norway Philippines Poland Romania Thailand Soviet Union Slovakia Western Ukraine Vietnam Quốc dân Đảng Viet Minh Yugoslavia POWs Finnish prisoners in the Soviet Union German prisoners Soviet Union Azerbaijan United States United Kingdom Italian prisoners in the Soviet Union Japanese prisoners Soviet Union German atrocities against Polish POWs Soviet prisoners Finland atrocities by Germans Polish prisoners in the Soviet Union Romanian prisoners in the Soviet Union Timeline Prelude Africa Second Italo-Ethiopian War Asia Second Sino-Japanese War Battles of Khalkhin Gol Europe Remilitarisation of the Rhineland Anschluss Munich Agreement Occupation of Czechoslovakia Operation Himmler Italian invasion of Albania 1939 Invasion of Poland Battle of the Atlantic Phoney War First Battle of Changsha Battle of South Guangxi Winter War 1939–1940 Winter Offensive 1940 Norwegian campaign German invasion of Denmark Battle of Zaoyang–Yichang German invasion of Luxembourg German invasion of the Netherlands German invasion of Belgium Battle of France Dunkirk evacuation Battle of Britain Battle of the Mediterranean North Africa West Africa British Somaliland Hundred Regiments Offensive Baltic states Eastern Romania Japanese invasion of French Indochina Italian invasion of Greece Compass 1941 Battle of South Henan Battle of Shanggao Invasion of Yugoslavia German invasion of Greece Battle of Crete Anglo-Iraqi War Battle of South Shanxi Syria–Lebanon campaign East African campaign Invasion of the Soviet Union Summer War Finland ( Silver Fox ) Lithuania Battle of Kiev Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran Second Battle of Changsha Siege of Leningrad Battle of Moscow Bombing of Gorky Siege of Sevastopol Attack on Pearl Harbor Japanese invasion of Thailand Fall of Hong Kong Fall of the Philippines Battle of Guam Battle of Wake Island Malayan campaign Battle of Borneo Japanese invasion of Burma Third Battle of Changsha Greek famine of 1941–1944 1942 Fall of Singapore Battle of the Java Sea St Nazaire Raid Battle of Christmas Island Battle of the Coral Sea Battle of Madagascar Zhejiang-Jiangxi campaign Battle of Gazala Battle of Dutch Harbor Battle of Midway Aleutian Islands campaign Kiska Attu Blue First Battle of El Alamein Battle of Stalingrad Kokoda Track campaign Rzhev Jubilee Second Battle of El Alamein Guadalcanal campaign Torch Chinese famine of 1942–1943 1943 Black May Tunisian campaign Battle of West Hubei Battle of Attu Bombing of Gorky Battle of Kursk Allied invasion of Sicily Smolensk Solomon Islands campaign Cottage Battle of the Dnieper Allied invasion of Italy Armistice of Cassibile Burma Northern Burma and Western Yunnan Changde Second Battle of Kiev Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign Tarawa Makin Bengal famine of 1943 1944 Tempest Monte Cassino / Anzio Korsun–Cherkassy Narva U-Go Imphal Ichi-Go Kohima Overlord Neptune Mariana and Palau Bagration Western Ukraine Second Battle of Guam Tannenberg Line Warsaw Uprising Eastern Romania Liberation of Paris Dragoon Gothic Line Belgrade offensive Battle of San Marino Lapland Market Garden Estonia Crossbow Pointblank Vietnamese famine of 1944–1945 Philippines (1944–1945) Leyte Syrmian Front Hungary Budapest Burma (1944–1945) Ardennes Bodenplatte Dutch famine of 1944–1945 1945 Vistula–Oder Battle of Manila Battle of Iwo Jima Indochina Vienna offensive Project Hula Western invasion of Germany Bratislava–Brno offensive Battle of Okinawa Second Guangxi campaign West Hunan Italy (Spring 1945) Battle of Berlin Prague offensive Surrender of Germany document Borneo Taipei Naval bombardment of Japan Manchuria Atomic bombings Debate South Sakhalin Kuril Islands Shumshu Surrender of Japan Potsdam Declaration document End of World War II in Asia World portal Bibliography Category v t e Finland articles History Prehistory Finland under Swedish rule Cudgel War Great Northern War The Great Wrath Finnish War Grand Duchy Golden Age of Finnish Art Independence of Finland Civil War Finland in World War II Winter War Continuation War Lapland War Finlandization History of independent Finland Military history Geography Cities and towns Extreme points Geology Islands Lakes Municipalities National parks Provinces Regions Åland Rivers Urban areas Helsinki Tampere Turku Oulu Jyväskylä Wildlife Politics Administrative divisions Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights Judiciary Law Law enforcement Military NATO Parliament Political parties President Prime Minister Economy Agriculture Central bank Energy Government-owned companies Industry National income agreement Nordic model Ship-building Startups Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Transport Rail Society Abortion Crime Climate change Demographics Education Finns Healthcare Languages Finnish Swedish Religion Welfare system Culture Anthem Architecture Art Cinema Coat of arms Cuisine Flag Folklore Literature The Kalevala Media Music Mythology National symbols Public holidays Independence Day Sauna Sport World Heritage Sites Outline Index Bibliography Category Portal v t e Finnish Defence Forces Leadership Commander-in-chief : President of Finland Minister of Defence Chief of Defence List of senior officers Organization Branches Finnish Air Force ( list of aircraft ) Finnish Army ( list of equipment ) Finnish Navy ( list of equipment · list of ships ) Command Ministry of Defence Defence Command (Divisions: Personnel · Intelligence · Operations · Logistics · Plans and Policy · C5 Systems · Training · Legal ) Specialized FINCENT Finnish Defence Intelligence Agency National Defence University Auxiliary Finnish Border Guard National Defence Training Association Territorial Forces History Allotment system of Sweden Military of the Grand Duchy of Finland Finnish Civil War World War II ( Winter War , Continuation War and Lapland War ) War in Afghanistan Other Civil defence Conscription Demilitarization of Åland List of wars involving Finland Military ranks Marshal of Finland Raising the Flag on the Three-Country Cairn v t e Armed conflicts involving Russia (including Tsarist , Imperial and Soviet times) Related Early modern warfare Military history of Russia Military history of the Russian Empire Military history of the Soviet Union Military history of the Russian Federation Post-Soviet conflicts Russian Armed Forces Lists by opponent Muscovite–Lithuanian Wars Russo-Crimean Wars Soviet-Finnish wars Russo-Kazan Wars Russo-Persian Wars Russo-Polish Wars Russo-Swedish wars Russo-Turkish wars Russo-Ukrainian Wars Sino-Russian border conflicts List of wars involving Russia List of wars involving the Soviet Union List of battles involving the Russian Federation Internal Uprising of Bolotnikov Razin's Rebellion Bulavin Rebellion Pugachev's Rebellion Decembrist revolt Russian Civil War August Uprising Coup attempt (1991) 1993 Russian constitutional crisis First Chechen War War of Dagestan Second Chechen War Insurgency in the North Caucasus Wagner Group rebellion Tsardom of Russia Russo-Crimean Wars Russo-Kazan Wars Russo-Swedish War (1554–1557) Livonian War Russian Conquest of Siberia (1580–1747) Russo-Turkish War (1568–1570) Russo-Swedish War (1590–1595) Polish–Muscovite War (1605–1618) and the Time of Troubles Ingrian War Smolensk War Russo-Persian War (1651–1653) Sino-Russian border conflicts (1652–1689) Russo-Polish War (1654–1667) Deluge Second Northern War Russo-Turkish War (1676–1681) Russo-Turkish War (1686–1700) 18th–19th century Great Northern War Russo-Turkish War (1710–1711) Russo-Persian War (1722–1723) War of the Polish Succession (1733–1738) Austro-Russian–Turkish War (1735–1739) War of the Austrian Succession (1740–1748) Russo-Swedish War (1741–1743) Seven Years' War Russo-Turkish war (1768–1774) Bar Confederation Russo-Turkish War (1787–1792) Russo-Swedish War (1788–1790) Russo-Polish War (1792) Russian colonization of North America Kościuszko Uprising Russo-Persian War (1796) War of the Second Coalition War of the Third Coalition Russo-Persian War (1804–1813) War of the Fourth Coalition Russo-Turkish War (1806–1812) Anglo-Russian War Finnish War War of the Fifth Coalition French invasion of Russia War of the Sixth Coalition War of the Seventh Coalition Russian conquest of the Caucasus Caucasian War Russo-Circassian War Murid War Russo-Persian War (1826–1828) Russo-Turkish War (1828–1829) November Uprising Hungarian Revolution of 1848 Crimean War Åland War Amur Annexation January Uprising Russian conquest of Central Asia Russian conquest of Bukhara Khivan campaign of 1873 Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878) Boxer Rebellion Russian invasion of Manchuria 20th century Russo-Japanese War Russian occupation of Tabriz World War I Battle of Robat Karim Russian Civil War Ukrainian–Soviet War 1919 Soviet invasion of Ukraine Kazakhstan Campaign Finnish Civil War Sochi conflict Heimosodat Soviet westward offensive of 1918–1919 Estonian War of Independence Latvian War of Independence Lithuanian–Soviet War Georgian–Ossetian conflict (1918–1920) Polish–Soviet War Red Army invasion of Azerbaijan Red Army invasion of Armenia Red Army invasion of Georgia Red Army intervention in Mongolia East Karelian uprising Central Asian Revolt August Uprising Urtatagai conflict (1925–1926) Sino-Soviet conflict (1929) Red Army intervention in Afghanistan (1929) Red Army intervention in Afghanistan (1930) Chechen uprising of 1932 [ ru ] Soviet–Japanese border conflicts Soviet invasion of Xinjiang Xinjiang War (1937) World War II Soviet invasion of Poland Winter War Soviet occupation of the Baltic states (1940) Soviet occupation of Latvia in 1940 Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina Continuation War Eastern Front (World War II) Soviet re-occupation of the Baltic states (1944) Soviet re-occupation of Latvia in 1944 Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran Soviet–Japanese War Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Guerrilla war in Ukraine Anti-communist resistance in Poland (1944–1953) Ili Rebellion First Indochina War Korean War East German uprising of 1953 Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Vietnam War Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia Sino-Soviet border conflict War of Attrition Eritrean War of Independence Angolan Civil War Ogaden War South African Border War Soviet–Afghan War Gulf War Soviet OMON assaults on Lithuanian border posts First Nagorno-Karabakh War War in Abkhazia (1992–1993) South Ossetia war (1991–1992) Transnistria War Georgian Civil War Tajikistani Civil War First Chechen War War of Dagestan Second Chechen War 21st century Russo-Georgian War Russo-Ukrainian War Outline Annexation of Crimea War in Donbas 2022 invasion Intervention in Syria Western Libya campaign Deployment in Nagorno-Karabakh (2020) Deployment in Kazakhstan (2022) Bibliographies Early Slavs and Rus' Russian history (1223–1613) Russian history (1613–1917) Russo-Japanese War World War I Russian Revolution and Civil War Stalinism and the Soviet Union World War II Post Stalinist Soviet Union Russian history (1991–present) Navigation Outline of Russia Outline of the Russo-Ukrainian War Timeline of Russian history Timeline of the Great Purge Timeline of the 1991 Soviet coup attempt Timelines of the Russian invasion of Ukraine Timelines of the war in Donbas Russian Winter Russian Revolution Cold War Sphere of influence v t e Nazi German–Soviet relations before 1941 Prior antagonism Anti-Comintern Pact " Jewish Bolshevism " Spanish Civil War German occupation of Czechoslovakia Political Relations before 1941 Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact negotiations Boundary and Friendship Treaty Population transfers Axis talks Gestapo–NKVD conferences Economic Economic relations Commercial Agreement (1939) Commercial Agreement (1940) Border and Commercial Agreement (1941) Military Invasion of Poland Soviet invasion of Poland Occupation of the Baltic states Winter War Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina Naval cruiser Lützow Soviet offensive plans controversy Basis Nord Komet Northern Sea Route Raid German–Soviet military parade in Brest-Litovsk Aftermath Operation Barbarossa Eastern Front Katyń massacre Falsifiers of History Baltic Way Category v t e Joseph Stalin General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (1922–1952) Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union (1946–1953) Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of Stalinism and the Soviet Union History and politics Overviews Early life Russian Revolution, Russian Civil War, Polish–Soviet War Rise Rule as Soviet leader Political views Cult of personality Death and state funeral Death toll Chronology August Uprising Anti-religious campaign (1921–1928) / (1928–1941) Collectivization Kolkhoz Sovkhoz Chinese Civil War First five-year plan Sino-Soviet conflict (1929) 16th / 17th Congress of the Communist Party 1931 Menshevik Trial Spanish Civil War Soviet invasion of Xinjiang Soviet–Japanese border conflicts 1937 Islamic rebellion in Xinjiang 1937 legislative election 18th Congress of the Communist Party Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact World War II Invasion of Poland Winter War Moscow Peace Treaty Occupation of the Baltic states German–Soviet Axis talks Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact Great Patriotic War Tehran Conference Yalta Conference Potsdam Conference Soviet atomic bomb project Ili Rebellion Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance 1946 legislative election Cold War 1946 Iran crisis Turkish Straits crisis First Indochina War Eastern Bloc Comecon Cominform Greek Civil War 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Berlin Blockade Korean War Sino-Soviet Treaty Tito–Stalin split 1950 legislative election 19th Congress of the Communist Party Concepts Stalinism Socialism in one country Neo-Stalinism Korenizatsiya Socialism in One Country Great Break Socialist realism Stalinist architecture Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Five-year plans Great Construction Projects of Communism Engineers of the human soul 1936 Soviet Constitution New Soviet man Stakhanovite Transformation of nature Backwardness brings on beatings by others Crimes, repressions, and controversies 1906 Bolshevik raid on the Tsarevich Giorgi 1907 Tiflis bank robbery National delimitation in the Soviet Union Georgian Affair Decossackization Dekulakization Wittorf affair Great Break Demolition of Cathedral of Christ the Saviour Soviet famine of 1932–33 Holodomor Gulag Murder of Sergey Kirov Great Purge Vasiliy Ulrikh NKVD prisoner massacres Berezhany Berezwecz Dubno Chortkiv Kurapaty Katyn Lutsk Lviv Medvedev Forest Sambir Valozhyn Vileyka Vinnytsia Zolochiv Moscow Trials Case of the Anti-Soviet "Bloc of Rightists and Trotskyites" Case of Trotskyist Anti-Soviet Military Organization Dewey Commission Hotel Lux Repressions in Azerbaijan Ideological repression in science Suppressed research Lysenkoism Japhetic theory , Slavists case 1937 Soviet Census 1941 Red Army purge Soviet offensive plans controversy Hitler Youth Conspiracy Soviet war crimes Allegations of antisemitism Population transfer ( German–Soviet ) Deportations Operation "Lentil" Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina Koreans Operation "North" Operation "Priboi" Nazino affair Forced settlement Tax on trees 1946–1947 Soviet famine Leningrad Affair Mingrelian Affair Rootless cosmopolitan Night of the Murdered Poets Doctors' plot Censorship of images Mass graves in the Soviet Union Kommunarka shooting ground Stalin's shooting lists Works " Anarchism or Socialism?

" " Marxism and the National Question " " Foundations of Leninism " " Dizzy with Success " " Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia " "Ten Blows" speech Alleged 19 August 1939 speech Falsifiers of History Stalin Note The History of the Communist Party 1936 Soviet Constitution Stalin's poetry Dialectical and Historical Materialism Order No. 227 Order No. 270 " Marxism and Problems of Linguistics " Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR De-Stalinization 20th Congress of the Communist Party Pospelov Commission Rehabilitation Khrushchev thaw On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences Gomulka thaw (Polish October) Soviet Nonconformist Art Shvernik Commission 22nd Congress of the Communist Party Era of Stagnation 1956 Georgian demonstrations Criticism and opposition Stalin Epigram Lenin's Testament Ryutin Affair Anti-Stalinist left Trotskyism Kremlin Plot True Communists Darkness at Noon Animal Farm Nineteen Eighty-Four Comparison of Nazism and Stalinism The Soviet Story Antisemitism Remembrance Iosif Stalin tank Iosif Stalin locomotive Generalissimo of the Soviet Union Stalin statues Pantheon, Moscow 1956 Georgian demonstrations List of awards and honours bestowed upon Joseph Stalin Statue of Joseph Stalin, Berlin Stalin Monument in Budapest Stalin Monument in Prague Joseph Stalin Museum, Gori Batumi Stalin Museum Places named after Stalin State Stalin Prize Stalin Peace Prize Stalin Society Stalin Bloc – For the USSR Cultural depictions Apocalypse: Stalin The Death of Stalin Mikheil Gelovani Family Besarion Jughashvili (father) Keke Geladze (mother) Kato Svanidze (first wife) Yakov Dzhugashvili (son) Konstantin Kuzakov (son) Artyom Sergeyev (adopted son) Nadezhda Alliluyeva (second wife) Vasily Stalin (son) Svetlana Alliluyeva (daughter) Yevgeny Dzhugashvili (grandson) Galina Dzhugashvili (granddaughter) Joseph Alliluyev (grandson) Sergei Alliluyev (second father-in-law) Alexander Svanidze (brother-in-law) Yuri Zhdanov (son-in-law) William Wesley Peters (son-in-law) Stalin's residences Stalin's house, Gori Tiflis Seminary Kureika Room at Kremlin Kuntsevo Stalin's bunker Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Winter_War&oldid=1303580599 " Categories : Winter War 1939 in Finland 1939 in the Soviet Union 1940 in Finland 1940 in the Soviet Union Conflicts in 1939 Conflicts in 1940 November 1939 in Europe December 1939 in Europe January 1940 in Europe February 1940 in Europe March 1940 in Europe Eastern European theatre of World War II Finland in World War II Germany–Soviet Union relations (1918–1941) History of Karelia Karelian Isthmus League of Nations Soviet-Finnish wars Winter in the Soviet Union European winters Hidden categories: Articles containing Finnish-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing Russian-language text CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Featured articles Use dmy dates from April 2024 Use British English from January 2018 Use shortened footnotes from January 2018 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) CS1 uses Ukrainian-language script (uk) CS1 Hungarian-language sources (hu) CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 20:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Winter War 85 languages Add topic

