Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concept and duration 2 Background Toggle Background subsection 2.1 Landing in Visigothic Hispania and initial expansion 2.2 Islamic rule 3 Early Reconquista Toggle Early Reconquista subsection 3.1 Beginning of the Reconquista 3.2 Frankish invasions 4 Northern Christian realms Toggle Northern Christian realms subsection 4.1 Kingdom of Asturias (718–924) 4.2 Kingdom of León (910–1230) 4.3 Kingdom of Castile (1037–1230) 4.4 Kingdom of Navarre (824–1620) 4.5 Kingdom and Crown of Aragon (1035–1706) 4.6 Kingdom of Portugal (1139–1249) 4.7 Minor Christian realms 5 Southern Islamic realms Toggle Southern Islamic realms subsection 5.1 Umayyads 5.2 Taifas 5.3 Almoravids 5.4 Almohads 5.5 Granada War and the end of Muslim rule 6 Infighting Toggle Infighting subsection 6.1 Christian infighting 6.2 Muslim infighting 7 Christian repopulation 8 Christian military culture Toggle Christian military culture subsection 8.1 Reconquista as Crusade 8.2 Other Motivations 8.3 Christian cavalry and infantry 8.4 Equipment 8.5 Technological changes 9 Conversions and expulsions Toggle Conversions and expulsions subsection 9.1 Spanish Inquisition 10 Classifications and later consequences 11 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 11.1 French emulation 11.2 Festivals in modern Spain and Portugal 11.3 Persistent effects 11.4 Reverberations 11.5 Far-right motif 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References 15 Bibliography 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Reconquista 85 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Picard Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medieval Christian military campaigns For other uses, see Reconquista (disambiguation) .

Detail of the Cantiga #63 (13th century), which deals with a late 10th-century battle in San Esteban de Gormaz involving the troops of Count García and Almanzor .

[ 1 ] The Reconquista ( Spanish and Portuguese for ' reconquest ' ) [ a ] or the fall of al-Andalus [ b ] was a series of military and cultural campaigns that European Christian kingdoms waged against Muslim-ruled al-Andalus , culminating in the reign of the Catholic Monarchs of Spain .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The beginning of the Reconquista is traditionally dated to the Battle of Covadonga ( c.

718 or 722), approximately a decade after the Muslim conquest of the Iberian Peninsula began, in which the army of the Kingdom of Asturias achieved the first Christian victory over the forces of the Umayyad Caliphate since the beginning of the military invasion.

[ 6 ] The Reconquista ended in 1492 with the fall of the Nasrid kingdom of Granada to the Catholic Monarchs .

[ 5 ] In the late 10th century, the Umayyad vizier Almanzor waged a series of military campaigns for 30 years to subjugate the northern Christian kingdoms. When the Umayyad state of Córdoba finally disintegrated in the early 11th century, a series of petty successor states known as taifas emerged. The northern kingdoms took advantage of this situation and struck deep into al-Andalus; they fostered civil war, intimidated the weakened taifas , and made them pay parias , large tributes for "protection".

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] In the 12th century, the Reconquista was above all a political action to develop the kingdoms of Portugal , León and Castile , and Aragon . The king's actions took precedence over those of the local lords with the help of military orders and also supported by Repoblación , the repopulation of territory by Christian kingdoms.

[ 11 ] Following a Muslim resurgence under the Almohad Caliphate in the 12th century, the greatest strongholds fell to Christian forces in the 13th century after the decisive Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa (1212), the Siege of Córdoba (1236) and the Siege of Seville (1248)—leaving only the Muslim enclave of Granada as a tributary state in the south. After the surrender of Granada in January 1492, the entire Iberian peninsula was controlled by Christian rulers.

On 30 July 1492, as a result of the Alhambra Decree , the Jewish communities of Castile and Aragon —some 200,000 people—were forcibly expelled . The conquest was followed by a series of edicts (1499–1526) that forced the conversions of Muslims in Castile, Navarre, and Aragon ; these same groups were expelled from Habsburg Spain by a series of decrees starting in 1609.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Approximately three million Muslims emigrated or were driven out of Spain between 1492 and 1610.

[ 15 ] Beginning in the 19th century, [ 16 ] traditional historiography has used the term Reconquista for what was earlier thought of as a restoration of the Visigothic Kingdom over conquered territories.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] The concept of Reconquista , consolidated in Spanish historiography in the second half of the 19th century, was associated with Spanish nationalism during the period of Romantic nationalism .

[ 19 ] It is an excuse for the Moros y cristianos festival, very popular in the southern Valencian Community , and which is also celebrated in parts of Spanish America . Pursuant to an Islamophobic worldview, the concept is a symbol of significance for the 21st century European far-right .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Concept and duration [ edit ] The term 'Reconquista' was not used by medieval writers to describe the struggle between Christians and Muslims in the Iberian Peninsula. Since its development as a term in historiography occurred centuries after the events it references, it has acquired various meanings. Its meaning as an actual "reconquest" has been subject to the particular concerns or prejudices of scholars, who have sometimes wielded it as a weapon in ideological disputes.

[ 22 ] A discernible irredentist ideology that became part of the concept of Christian conquest appeared in writings by the end of the 9th century.

[ 23 ] For example, the anonymous Christian chronicle Chronica Prophetica (883–884) claimed a historical connection between Tariq ibn Ziyad 's conquest of the Visigothic Kingdom in 711 and the Kingdom of Asturias in which the document was produced, and stressed a Christian and Muslim cultural and religious divide in Hispania, and a necessity to drive out the Muslims and restore conquered territories. Literature from both sides described a divide based on ethnicity and culture between the inhabitants of the small Christian kingdoms of the north and the dominant elite in the Muslim-ruled south.

[ 23 ] One of the arguments challenging the concept of Reconquista is that for the majority of the 781 years of Islamic rule in Iberia, Muslims and Christians coexisted and were not at war with each other.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] The linear approach to the origins of the Reconquista adopted in early twentieth-century historiography is complicated by several issues.

[ 23 ] For example, periods of peaceful coexistence, or at least of limited and localised skirmishes on the frontiers, were more prevalent over the 781 years of Muslim rule than periods of significant military conflict.

[ 23 ] Additionally, both Christian and Muslim rulers fought other Christians and Muslims , and cooperation and alliances between Muslims and Christians were not uncommon, such as between Íñigo Arista , the founder of the Kingdom of Pamplona (later 'Navarre'), and the Banu Qasi as early as the 9th century.

[ 23 ] [ 25 ] Blurring distinctions even further were the mercenaries from both sides who fought for whoever paid the most.

[ 25 ] The period is seen today to have had long episodes of relative religious coexistence and tolerance such as the Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain .

[ 26 ] The idea of a continuous Reconquista has been challenged by modern scholars.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] The Almohad Caliphate and surrounding states, including the Christian Kingdoms of Portugal , Leon , Castile , Navarre , and the Crown of Aragon , c. 1200.

Documents dating from the 10th and 11th centuries are mute on any idea of reconquest. The Crusades , which started late in the 11th century, birthed the religious ideology of a reconquest. In al-Andalus, Christian states of that era were confronted by the century-long rule of the Sanhaja -ruled Almoravid dynasty and subsequently the religious extremism of the Almohad Caliphate of the Masmuda , which supported a similarly staunch ideology of jihad .

[ 28 ] Propaganda accounts of Muslim-Christian hostility came into being to support that idea, most notably the Chanson de Roland , an 11th-century French chanson de geste that offers a fictionalised retelling of the Battle of Roncevaux Pass dealing with the Saracens or Moors , and centuries later introduced in the French school system to instill moral and national values in the population following the 1870 defeat of the French in the Franco-Prussian War , regardless of the actual events.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] The consolidation of the modern idea of a Reconquista is inextricably linked to the foundational myths of 19th-century Spanish nationalism, associated with the development of a Centralist, Castilian, and staunchly Catholic nationalism, [ 32 ] evoking nationalistic, romantic and sometimes colonialist themes.

[ 19 ] The concept gained further track in the 20th century during the Francoist dictatorship .

[ 33 ] It thus became one of the key tenets of the historiographical discourse of National Catholicism , the mythological and ideological identity of the regime. The discourse was underpinned in its most traditional version by an avowed 'historical illegitimacy' of al-Andalus and the subsequent glorification of the Christian conquest.

[ 34 ] The idea of a "liberation war" against Muslims, who were viewed as foreigners, suited the anti-Republican rebels of the Spanish Civil War . This Nationalist faction agitated for the banner of the patria , the fatherland which, according to them, was being threatened by regionalism and communism .

[ 35 ] Their rebellious pursuit was thus a crusade for the restoration of the unity of the Church and State, where Franco stood for both Pelagius of Asturias and El Cid .

[ 35 ] The Reconquista has become a rallying call for right-wing populist and far-right parties of Spain such as Vox to expel from office incumbent progressive or peripheral nationalist options as well as their values in different political contexts.

[ 36 ] [ 33 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Similar propaganda was circulated during the Spanish Civil War by the Republicans , who wanted to portray their enemies as foreign invaders, especially given the prominence of the Army of Africa among Franco's troops. This army consisted of Berber soldiers of the Tiradores de Ifni and Regulares from the Spanish protectorate in Morocco .

[ 40 ] Traditionalist scholarship viewed the Reconquista as proof that the process of Christian state-building in Iberia was often defined by the reclamation of lands that had been lost to foreigners in past generations. State-building was characterised—at least in ideological, if not practical, terms—as a process by which Iberian states were being "rebuilt".

[ 41 ] Current historians dispute the entire concept of the Reconquista as created a posteriori in the service of later political goals. A few historians point out that Spain and Portugal did not previously exist as nations and the heirs of the Christian Visigothic Kingdom were not re conquering them, as the name suggests.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] One of the first Spanish intellectuals to question the idea of a "reconquest" that lasted for eight centuries was José Ortega y Gasset , writing in the first half of the 20th century.

[ 44 ] However, the term Reconquista is still widely in use.

[ 45 ] Background [ edit ] Further information: Islam in Spain v t e Battles in the Reconquista 8th century Covadonga 1st Roncevaux Pass Burbia River Orbieu River Lutos Las Babias Río Quirós Oviedo 1st Lisbon 1st Barcelona 9th century 1st Tortosa Pancorbo 2nd Roncevaux Pass Clavijo Albelda Guadalacete Monte Laturce Morcuera Polvoraria 1st Cellorigo 2nd Cellorigo 2nd Barcelona 10th century Day of Zamora 1st Majorca Pallars and Ribagorza 1st San Esteban de Gormaz 2nd San Esteban de Gormaz Valdejunquera 1st Toledo Alhandic Simancas Estercuel Torrevicente Rueda Rovirans 3rd Barcelona Cervera 11th century Calatañazor Torà Albesa Aqbat al-Bakr Cesar Graus Coimbra Barbastro Paterna Cabra Piedra Pisada Morella 2nd Toledo 1st Zaragoza Sagrajas Tudela Tévar Aledo 3rd Toledo Almodóvar del Río 1st Valencia Quart de Poblet 2nd Lisbon Alcoraz Bairén Consuegra 4th Toledo 5th Toledo 12th century 2nd Valencia Mollerussa Balaguer Uclés Norwegian raid 3rd Lisbon Talavera Formentera Ibiza 1st Balearic Islands Valtierra 6th Toledo Vatalandi 1st Santarém 1st Catalonia 2nd Balearic Islands 2nd Catalonia Martorell 4th Barcelona Coimbra 2nd Zaragoza Calatayud Cutanda 1st Lleida 1st Granada Arnisol Corbins Alcalá 3rd Valencia Aceca Alamín 1st Andalusia 1st Badajoz Fraga Leiria Guadalquivir 1st Coria Ourique Oreja Trancoso 2nd Coria 4th Lisbon 1st Montiel Soure Albacete 1st Córdoba 1st Almería Al-Ludjdj 2nd Santarém Sacavém 5th Lisbon 2nd Tortosa 2nd Lleida 2nd Almería 1st Alcácer do Sal Palmela 1st Évora 2nd Badajoz Juromenha 3rd Santarém Tarragona Cuenca Calatrava 2nd Seville Abrantes 2nd Évora 1st Silves 4th Santarém Alvor 2nd Silves 3rd Silves Tomar 2nd Alcácer do Sal 4th Silves Alarcos Talamanca 13th century Al-Dāmūs Las Navas de Tolosa Úbeda 3rd Alcácer do Sal 1st Jaén Peníscola Aragonese raid 2nd Majorca Portopí Artà 2nd Jaén 1st Jerez Ares Burriana 2nd Córdoba El Puig 4th Valencia Algarve 1st Xàtiva 2nd Xàtiva Biar 3rd Jaén 3rd Seville Faro 2nd Jerez Mudéjar revolt 3rd Jerez 1st Murcia Écija 1st Martos 2nd Andalusia 1st Algeciras 2nd Algeciras 1st Moclín Tarifa Iznalloz Arjona 14th century 1st Gibraltar 3rd Algeciras 3rd Almería 2nd Gibraltar Vega de Granada Shepherds' Crusade 2nd Martos Teba Guardamar 3rd Gibraltar 4th Gibraltar Vega de Pagana Getares Río Salado Estepona Guadalmesí 4th Algeciras 5th Gibraltar Linuesa Guadix 2nd Montiel 5th Algeciras 2nd Murcia Puerto Lope 15th century Collejares Setenil Antequera 6th Gibraltar La Higueruela Archidona 7th Gibraltar Castril Río Verde Hellín Los Alporchones 8th Gibraltar 2nd Granada campaign Loja Axarquía Lucena 2nd Moclín Málaga Post-Reconquista Rebellions 1st Alpujarras 2nd Alpujarras North Africa 1st Ceuta Salé Strait 2nd Ceuta 3rd Ceuta Tétouan 4th Ceuta 5th Ceuta 1st Tangier 2nd Tangier Asilah 3rd Tangier Landing in Visigothic Hispania and initial expansion [ edit ] Further information: Muslim conquest of the Iberian Peninsula and Battle of Guadalete In 711, a predominantly Berber army commanded by Tariq ibn Ziyad crossed the Strait of Gibraltar , engaging a Visigothic force led by King Roderic at the Battle of Guadalete (July 19–26) in a moment of severe infighting and division across the Visigothic Kingdom of Hispania .

[ 46 ] Many of Roderic's troops deserted, leading to his defeat. He drowned while crossing the Guadalquivir .

After Roderic's defeat, the Umayyad governor of Ifriqiya , Musa ibn Nusayr , joined Tariq, directing a campaign against different towns and strongholds in Hispania. Some, like Mérida , Córdoba , or Zaragoza in 712, and probably Toledo as well, were captured. Others agreed to a treaty in exchange for maintaining autonomy, such as Theodemir 's dominion in the southeastern peninsula, or the area of Pamplona .

[ 47 ] The invading Islamic armies did not exceed 60,000 men.

[ 48 ] Islamic rule [ edit ] Main articles: Berbers and Islam and Berber Revolt The Caliphate of Córdoba in the early 10th century After the establishment of a local emirate , Al-Walid I , ruler of the Umayyad Caliphate , removed many of the successful Muslim commanders. Tariq ibn Ziyad was recalled to Damascus and replaced with Musa ibn-Nusayr, who had been his former superior. Musa's son, Abd al-Aziz ibn Musa, apparently married Egilona , Roderic 's widow, and established his regional government in Seville . He was suspected of being under the influence of his wife and was accused of wanting to convert to Christianity and of planning a secessionist rebellion. A concerned Al-Walid I ordered Abd al-Aziz's assassination. Al-Walid I died in 715 and was succeeded by his brother, Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik . Sulayman appears to have punished the surviving Musa ibn Nusayr, who died during the Hajj in 716. In the end, Abd al-Aziz ibn Musa's cousin, Ayyub ibn Habib al-Lakhmi , became the wali (governor) of al-Andalus.

[ citation needed ] A significant weakness among the Muslim conquerors was the ethnic tension between Berbers and Arabs .

[ 49 ] The Berbers were indigenous inhabitants of North Africa who had only recently converted to Islam; they provided most of the soldiery of the invading armies, but experienced systematised discrimination .

[ 50 ] This latent internal conflict jeopardised Umayyad unity. The Umayyad forces arrived and crossed the Pyrenees by 719 and conquered Narbona . The last Visigothic king, Ardo , resisted them in Septimania , where he fended off the Berber-Arab armies until 720.

[ 51 ] After the Umayyad conquests of 711–718 and the establishment of the state, an expedition suffered a major defeat at the Battle of Toulouse against the armies of the Duchy of Aquitaine .

Odo the Great had married his daughter to Munuza , a rebel and lord of Cerdanya (trans-Pyrenean Catalunya ), in an attempt to secure his southern borders to fend off Charles Martel 's attacks on the north. However, a major punitive expedition led by Amir Abd al-Rahman ibn Abd Allah al-Ghafiqi defeated and killed Uthman, and the governor then mustered an expedition north across the western Pyrenees, looted areas up to Bordeaux , and then defeated Odo in the Battle of the River Garonne in 732.

[ 52 ] A desperate Odo turned to his archrival Charles Martel for help, who led the remaining Aquitanian armies alongside his Frankish forces against the Umayyad armies, defeating them in the Battle of Tours on 10 October 732, killing al Ghafiqi. While Muslim rule began to recede in what is now France, it would remain in the Iberian Peninsula for another 760 years.

[ 53 ] Early Reconquista [ edit ] Beginning of the Reconquista [ edit ] Main article: Kingdom of Asturias A drastic increase of taxes on Christians by the emir Anbasa ibn Suhaym Al-Kalbi provoked several rebellions in al-Andalus, which a series of succeeding weak emirs were unable to suppress. Around 722, a Muslim military expedition was sent into the north in late summer to suppress a rebellion led by Pelagius of Asturias (Pelayo in Spanish, Pelayu in Asturian). Traditional historiography has hailed Pelagius's victory at Covadonga as the beginning of the Reconquista .

[ 54 ] Two northern realms, Navarre [ 55 ] and Asturias, despite their small size, demonstrated an ability to maintain their independence. Because the Umayyad rulers based in Córdoba were unable to extend their power over the Pyrenees, they decided to consolidate their power within the Iberian peninsula. Arab-Berber forces made periodic incursions deep into Asturias, but this area was a cul-de-sac on the fringes of the Islamic world fraught with inconveniences during campaigns and of little interest.

[ 56 ] It comes then as no surprise that, besides focusing on raiding the Arab-Berber strongholds of the Meseta, Alfonso I of Asturias centred on expanding his domains at the expense of the neighbouring Galicians and Basques at either side of his realm just as much.

[ 57 ] During the first decades, Asturian control over part of the kingdom was weak, and for this reason it had to be continually strengthened through matrimonial alliances and war with other peoples from the north of the Iberian Peninsula. After Pelayo's death in 737, his son Favila of Asturias was elected king. Favila, according to the chronicles, was killed by a bear during a trial of courage. Pelayo's dynasty in Asturias survived and gradually expanded the kingdom's boundaries until all of northwest Hispania was included by roughly 775. However, credit is due to him and to his successors, the Banu Alfons from the Arab chronicles. Further expansion of the northwestern kingdom towards the south occurred during the reign of Alfonso II of Asturias (from 791 to 842). A king's expedition arrived in and pillaged Lisbon in 798, probably concerted with the Carolingians.

[ 58 ] The Asturian kingdom became firmly established with the recognition of Alfonso II as king of Asturias by Charlemagne and the Pope. During his reign, the bones of St. James the Great were declared to have been found in Galicia, at Santiago de Compostela . Pilgrims from all over Europe opened a channel of communication between the isolated Asturias and the Carolingian lands and beyond, centuries later.

[ 59 ] Frankish invasions [ edit ] Main articles: Umayyad invasion of Gaul and Marca Hispanica After the Umayyad conquest of the Iberian heartland of the Visigothic kingdom, the Muslims crossed the Pyrenees and gradually took control of Septimania , starting in 719 with the conquest of Narbonne through 725 when Carcassonne and Nîmes were secured. From the stronghold of Narbonne, they tried to conquer Aquitaine but suffered a major defeat at the Battle of Toulouse (721) .

[ 60 ] Ten years after halting their advance north, Odo of Aquitaine married his daughter to Uthman ibn Naissa , a rebel Berber and lord of Cerdanya (perhaps all of contemporary Catalonia as well), in an attempt to secure his southern borders to fend off Charles Martel 's attacks on the north. However, a major punitive expedition led by Abdul Rahman Al Ghafiqi , the latest emir of al-Andalus, defeated and killed Uthman.

[ 60 ] After expelling the Muslims from Narbonne in 759 and driving their forces back over the Pyrenees, the Carolingian king Pepin the Short conquered Aquitaine in an eight-year war. Charlemagne followed his father by subduing Aquitaine by creating counties, taking the Church as his ally and appointing counts of Frankish or Burgundian stock, like his loyal William of Gellone , making Toulouse his base for expeditions against al-Andalus.

[ 60 ] Charlemagne decided to organize a regional subkingdom, the Spanish March , which included part of contemporary Catalonia , in order to keep the Aquitanians in check and to secure the southern border of the Carolingian Empire against Muslim incursions. In 781, his three-year-old son Louis was crowned king of Aquitaine , under the supervision of Charlemagne's trustee William of Gellone, and was nominally in charge of the incipient Spanish March.

[ 60 ] Meanwhile, the takeover of the southern fringes of al-Andalus by Abd ar-Rahman I in 756 was opposed by Yusuf ibn Abd al-Rahman , autonomous governor ( wāli ) or king ( malik ) of al-Andalus. Abd ar-Rahman I expelled Yusuf from Cordova, [ 61 ] but it took still decades for him to expand to the north-western Andalusian districts. He was also opposed externally by the Abbasids of Baghdad who failed in their attempts to overthrow him. In 778, Abd al-Rahman closed in on the Ebro valley. Regional lords saw the Umayyad emir at the gates and decided to enlist the nearby Christian Franks. According to Ali ibn al-Athir , a Kurdish historian of the 12th century, Charlemagne received the envoys of Sulayman al-Arabi , Husayn, and Abu Taur at the Diet of Paderborn in 777. These rulers of Zaragoza , Girona , Barcelona , and Huesca were enemies of Abd ar-Rahman I, and in return for Frankish military aid against him offered their homage and allegiance.

[ 62 ] Reconquista of the main towns, per year (present-day state borders) Charlemagne, seeing an opportunity, agreed upon an expedition and crossed the Pyrenees in 778. Near the city of Zaragoza Charlemagne received the homage of Sulayman al-Arabi . However the city, under the leadership of Husayn , closed its gates and refused to submit.

[ 62 ] Unable to conquer the city by force, Charlemagne decided to retreat. On the way home the rearguard of the army was ambushed and destroyed by Basque forces at the Battle of Roncevaux Pass .

The Song of Roland , a highly romanticised account of this battle, would later become one of the most famous chansons de geste of the Middle Ages. Around 788 Abd ar-Rahman I died and was succeeded by Hisham I . In 792 Hisham proclaimed a jihad , advancing in 793 against the Kingdom of Asturias and Carolingian Septimania (Gothia) . They defeated William of Gellone, Count of Toulouse, in battle, but William led an expedition the following year across the eastern Pyrenees.

Barcelona , a major city, became a potential target for the Franks in 797, as its governor Zeid rebelled against the Umayyad emir of Córdoba. An army of the emir managed to recapture it in 799, but Louis, at the head of an army, crossed the Pyrenees and besieged the city for seven months until it finally capitulated in 801.

[ 63 ] The main passes in the Pyrenees were Roncesvalles , Somport and La Jonquera . Charlemagne established across them the vassal regions of Pamplona , Aragon , and Catalonia respectively. Catalonia was itself formed from a number of small counties , including Pallars , Girona , and Urgell ; it was called the Marca Hispanica by the late 8th century. They protected the eastern Pyrenees passes and shores and were under the direct control of the Frankish kings. Pamplona's first king was Iñigo Arista , who allied with his Muslim kinsmen the Banu Qasi and rebelled against Frankish overlordship and overcame a Carolingian expedition in 824 that led to the setup of the Kingdom of Pamplona . Aragon, founded in 809 by Aznar Galíndez , grew around Jaca and the high valleys of the Aragon River , protecting the old Roman road. By the end of the 10th century, Aragon, which then was just a county, was annexed by Navarre. Sobrarbe and Ribagorza were small counties and had little significance to the progress of the Reconquista .

[ 64 ] In the late 9th century under Count Wilfred , Barcelona became the de facto capital of the region. It controlled the other counties' policies in a union, which led in 948 to the independence of Barcelona under Count Borrel II , who declared that the new dynasty in France (the Capets ) were not the legitimate rulers of France nor, as a result, of his county. These states were small and, with the exception of Navarre, did not have the capacity for attacking the Muslims in the way that Asturias did, but their mountainous geography rendered them relatively safe from being conquered, and their borders remained stable for two centuries.

[ 65 ] Northern Christian realms [ edit ] See also: Spain in the Middle Ages § Medieval Christian Spain , and Portugal in the Middle Ages § Reconquista in Portugal The northern principalities and kingdoms survived in their mountainous strongholds (see above). However, they started a definite territorial expansion south at the turn of the 10th century (Leon, Najera). The fall of the Caliphate of Cordova (1031) heralded a period of military expansion for the northern kingdoms, now divided into several mighty regional powers after the division of the Kingdom of Navarre (1035). Myriad autonomous Christian kingdoms emerged thereafter.

[ 66 ] Kingdom of Asturias (718–924) [ edit ] Main article: Kingdom of Asturias See also: Kingdom of Galicia and Duchy of Cantabria The Kingdom of Asturias was located in the Cantabrian Mountains , a wet and mountainous region in the north of the Iberian Peninsula. It was the first Christian power to emerge. The kingdom was established by a Visigothic nobleman, named Pelagius ( Pelayo ), who had possibly returned after the Battle of Guadalete in 711 and was elected leader of the Asturians, [ 67 ] and the remnants of the gens Gothorum (the Hispano-Gothic aristocracy and the Hispano-Visigothic population who took refuge in the North). Historian Joseph F. O'Callaghan says an unknown number of them fled and took refuge in Asturias or Septimania. In Asturias they supported Pelagius's uprising, and joining with the indigenous leaders, formed a new aristocracy .

The population of the mountain region consisted of native Astures, Galicians, Cantabri, Basques and other groups unassimilated into Hispano-Gothic society, [ 68 ] laying the foundations for the Kingdom of Asturias and starting the Astur-Leonese dynasty that spanned from 718 to 1037 and led the initial efforts in the Iberian peninsula to take back the territories then ruled by the Moors.

[ 67 ] Although the new dynasty first ruled in the mountains of Asturias, with the capital of the kingdom established initially in Cangas de Onís , and was in its dawn mostly concerned with securing the territory and settling the monarchy, the latest kings (particularly Alfonso III of Asturias ) emphasised the nature of the new kingdom as heir of that in Toledo and the restoration of the Visigothic nation in order to vindicate the expansion to the south.

[ 69 ] However, such claims have been overall dismissed by modern historiography, emphasizing the distinct, autochthonous nature of the Cantabro-Asturian and Vasconic domains with no continuation to the Gothic Kingdom of Toledo.

[ 70 ] Pelagius's kingdom initially was little more than a gathering point for the existing guerrilla forces. During the first decades, the Asturian dominion over the different areas of the kingdom was still lax, and for this reason it had to be continually strengthened through matrimonial alliances with other powerful families from the north of the Iberian Peninsula. Thus, Ermesinda, Pelagius's daughter, was married to Alfonso , Dux Peter of Cantabria 's son. Alfonso's son Fruela married Munia, a Basque from Álava , after crushing a Basque uprising (probably resistance). Their son is reported to be Alfonso II , while Alfonso I's daughter Adosinda married Silo, a local chief from the area of Flavionavia, Pravia.

[ 71 ] Alfonso's military strategy was typical of Iberian warfare at the time. Lacking the means needed for wholesale conquest of large territories, his tactics consisted of raids in the border regions of Vardulia . With the plunder he gained further military forces could be paid, enabling him to raid the Muslim cities of Lisbon , Zamora , and Coimbra . Alfonso I also expanded his realm westwards conquering Galicia .

[ 72 ] Saint James the Great depicted as Saint James the Moor-slayer .  Legend of the Reconquista During the reign of King Alfonso II (791–842), the kingdom was firmly established, and a series of Muslim raids caused the transfer of the Asturian capital to Oviedo . The king is believed to have initiated diplomatic contacts with the kings of Pamplona and the Carolingians , thereby gaining official recognition for his kingdom and his crown from the Pope and Charlemagne .

[ 73 ] The bones of St.

James the Great were proclaimed to have been found in Iria Flavia (present day Padrón ) in 813 or probably two or three decades later. The cult of the saint was transferred later to Compostela (from Latin campus stellae , literally "the star field"), possibly in the early 10th century when the focus of Asturian power moved from the mountains over to Leon, to become the Kingdom of León or Galicia-Leon. Santiago's were among many saint relics proclaimed to have been found across north-western Hispania. Pilgrims started to flow in from other Iberian Christian realms, sowing the seeds of the later Way of Saint James (11–12th century) that sparked the enthusiasm and religious zeal of continental Christian Europe for centuries.

[ citation needed ] Despite numerous battles, neither the Umayyads nor the Asturians had sufficient forces to secure control over these northern territories. Under the reign of Ramiro , famed for the highly legendary Battle of Clavijo , the border began to slowly move southward and Asturian holdings in Castile , Galicia, and Leon were fortified, and an intensive program of re-population of the countryside began in those territories. In 924 the Kingdom of Asturias became the Kingdom of León , when Leon became the seat of the royal court (it didn't bear any official name).

[ 74 ] Kingdom of León (910–1230) [ edit ] Main articles: Kingdom of León , Kingdom of Galicia , County of Portugal , and Portugal in the Reconquista Alfonso III of Asturias repopulated the strategically important city Leon and established it as his capital. King Alfonso began a series of campaigns to establish control over all the lands north of the Douro river. He reorganised his territories into the major duchies ( Galicia and Portugal) and major counties ( Saldaña and Castile), and fortified the borders with many castles. At his death in 910 the shift in regional power was completed as the kingdom became the Kingdom of León . From this power base, his heir Ordoño II was able to organize attacks against Toledo and even Seville .

[ 75 ] The Caliphate of Córdoba was gaining power, and began to attack Leon. King Ordoño allied with Navarre against Abd-al-Rahman, but they were defeated in Valdejunquera in 920. For the next 80 years, the Kingdom of León suffered civil wars, Moorish attack, internal intrigues and assassinations, and the partial independence of Galicia and Castile, thus delaying the reconquest and weakening the Christian forces. It was not until the following century that the Christians started to see their conquests as part of a long-term effort to restore the unity of the Visigothic kingdom.

[ citation needed ] The only point during this period when the situation became hopeful for Leon was the reign of Ramiro II . King Ramiro, in alliance with Fernán González of Castile and his retinue of caballeros villanos , defeated the Caliph in Simancas in 939. After this battle, when the Caliph barely escaped with his guard and the rest of the army was destroyed, King Ramiro obtained 12 years of peace, but he had to give González the independence of Castile as payment for his help in the battle. After this defeat, Moorish attacks abated until Almanzor began his campaigns.

Alfonso V finally regained control over his domains in 1002. Navarre, though attacked by Almanzor, remained intact.

[ 76 ] The conquest of Leon did not include Galicia which was left to temporary independence after the withdrawal of the Leonese king. Galicia was conquered soon after (by Ferdinand, son of Sancho the Great, around 1038). Subsequent kings titled themselves kings of Galicia and Leon, instead of merely king of Leon as the two were in a personal union .

[ 77 ] At the end of the 11th century, King Afonso VI of León reached the Tagus (1085), repeating the same policy of alliances and developing collaboration with Frankish knights. The original repoblación was then complete. His aim was to create a Hispanic empire like the Visigothic Kingdom (418–720) to reclaim his hegemony over the entire Iberian Peninsula .

[ 78 ] Within this context, the territory between the Douro and the Tagus was repopulated and a western nucleus was formed in Portugal that wanted independence .

[ 79 ] This marks the beginning of the Portuguese Repovoação ou Repovoamento occurred during the reigns of the House of Burgundy up to the middle of the thirteenth century when the Portuguese Reconquista was also brought to an end with the ultimate conquering of Gharb al-Andalus when in March 1249 the city of Faro was conquered by Afonso III of Portugal .

[ 80 ] [ 79 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] Kingdom of Castile (1037–1230) [ edit ] Main article: Kingdom of Castile 20th century ceramic depiction of the conquest of Toledo by Alfonso VI , at the Plaza de España Ferdinand I of Leon was the leading king of the mid-11th century. He conquered Coimbra and attacked the taifa kingdoms, often demanding the tributes known as parias . Ferdinand's strategy was to continue to demand parias until the taifa was greatly weakened both militarily and financially. He also repopulated the Borders with numerous fueros . Following the Navarrese tradition, on his death in 1064 he divided his kingdom between his sons. His son Sancho II of Castile wanted to reunite the kingdom of his father and attacked his brothers, with a young noble at his side: Rodrigo Díaz, later known as El Cid Campeador . Sancho was killed in the siege of Zamora by the traitor Bellido Dolfos (also known as Vellido Adolfo) in 1072. His brother Alfonso VI took over Leon, Castile and Galicia.

[ 84 ] Alfonso VI the Brave gave more power to the fueros and repopulated Segovia , Ávila and Salamanca . Once he had secured the Borders, King Alfonso conquered the powerful Taifa kingdom of Toledo in 1085.

Toledo , which was the former capital of the Visigoths, was a very important landmark, and the conquest made Alfonso renowned throughout the Christian world . However, this "conquest" was conducted rather gradually, and mostly peacefully, during the course of several decades.

[ 85 ] However, Toledo was not fully secured and integrated into Alfonso's kingdom until after a period of gradual resettlement and consolidation, during which Christian settlers were encouraged to move into the area.

Alfonso VI was first and foremost a tactful monarch who chose to understand the kings of taifa and employed unprecedented diplomatic measures to attain political feats before considering the use of force. He adopted the title Imperator totius Hispaniae ("Emperor of all Hispania ", referring to all the Christian kingdoms of the Iberian Peninsula, and not just the modern country of Spain). Alfonso's more aggressive policy towards the taifas worried the rulers of those kingdoms, who called on the African Almoravids for help.

[ 86 ] Kingdom of Navarre (824–1620) [ edit ] Main article: Kingdom of Navarre The Kingdom of Pamplona primarily extended along either side of the Pyrenees on the Atlantic Ocean. The kingdom was formed when local leader Íñigo Arista led a revolt against the regional Frankish authority and was elected or declared King in Pamplona (traditionally in 824), establishing a kingdom inextricably linked at this stage to their kinsmen, the muwallad Banu Qasi of Tudela.

[ 87 ] Although relatively weak until the early 11th century, Pamplona took a more active role after the accession of Sancho the Great (1004–1035). The kingdom expanded greatly under his reign, as it absorbed Castile, Leon, and what was to be Aragon, in addition to other small counties that would unite and become the Principality of Catalonia . This expansion also led to the independence of Galicia, as well as gaining overlordship over Gascony .

[ 88 ] In the 12th century, however, the kingdom contracted to its core, and in 1162 King Sancho VI declared himself king of Navarre . Throughout its early history, the Navarrese kingdom engaged in frequent skirmishes with the Carolingian Empire, from which it maintained its independence, a key feature of its history until 1513.

[ 89 ] Kingdom and Crown of Aragon (1035–1706) [ edit ] Main articles: Kingdom of Aragon , County of Barcelona , Principality of Catalonia , Kingdom of Valencia , Kingdom of Mallorca , and Crown of Aragon The Moors request permission from James I of Aragon The Kingdom of Aragon started off as an offshoot of the Kingdom of Navarre. It was formed when Sancho III of Navarre decided to divide his large realm among all his sons. Aragon was the portion of the realm which passed to Ramiro I of Aragon , an illegitimate son of Sancho III. The kingdoms of Aragon and Navarre were several times united in personal union until the death of Alfonso the Battler in 1135.

[ 90 ] In 1137, the heiress of the kingdom married the count of Barcelona , and their son Alfonso II ruled from 1162 the combined possessions of his parents, resulting in the composite monarchy that modern historians call the Crown of Aragon .

[ 91 ] Alfonso successfully reincorporated the Principality of Tarragona into their realm, expelling the Norman d'Aguiló family.

[ 92 ] In the following centuries, the Crown of Aragon conquered a number of territories in the Iberian peninsula and the Mediterranean, including the kingdom of Valencia and the kingdom of Mallorca .

James I of Aragon , also known as James the Conqueror, expanded his territories to the north, south and east. James also signed the Treaty of Corbeil (1258) , in which the French king renounced to any feudal claim over Catalonia.

[ 93 ] Early in his reign, James attempted to reunite the Aragonese and Navarrese crowns through a treaty with the childless Sancho VII of Navarre . But the Navarrese nobles rejected him, and chose Theobald IV of Champagne in his stead.

[ citation needed ] Later on, Ferdinand II of Aragon , married Isabella of Castile , leading to a dynastic union which eventually gave birth to modern Spain, after the conquest of Upper Navarre (Navarre south of the Pyrenees) and the Emirate of Granada .

[ 94 ] Kingdom of Portugal (1139–1249) [ edit ] Main article: Portugal in the Reconquista Statue of Geraldo Geraldes Sem Pavor or Gerald the Fearless . A Portuguese folk hero with the head of a Moor In 1139, after an overwhelming victory in the Battle of Ourique against the Almoravids , Afonso Henriques was proclaimed the first King of Portugal by his troops. According to the legend, Christ announced from heaven [ citation needed ] Afonso's great deeds, whereby he would establish the first Portuguese Cortes at Lamego and be crowned by the Primate Archbishop of Braga . In 1142 a group of Anglo-Norman crusaders on their way to the Holy Land helped King Afonso Henriques in a failed Siege of Lisbon (1142) .

[ 95 ] In the Treaty of Zamora in 1143, Alfonso VII of Leon and Castile recognized Portuguese independence from the Kingdom of León.

[ 96 ] In 1147, Portugal captured Santarém , and seven months later the city of Lisbon was also brought under Portuguese control after the Siege of Lisbon . By the papal bull Manifestis Probatum , Pope Alexander III recognized Afonso Henriques as King of Portugal in 1179.

[ 97 ] With Portugal finally recognized as an independent kingdom by its neighbors, Afonso Henriques and his successors, aided by Crusaders and the military monastic orders the Knights Templar , the Order of Aviz or the Order of Saint James , pushed the Moors to the Algarve on the southern coast of Portugal. After several campaigns, the Portuguese part in the Reconquista came to an end with the definitive capture of the Algarve in 1249. With all of Portugal now under the control of Afonso III of Portugal , religious, cultural and ethnic groups became gradually homogenized.

[ citation needed ] Cross of the Order of Christ After the completion of the Reconquista , the Portuguese territory was a Roman Catholic realm. Nonetheless, Denis of Portugal carried out a short war with Castile for possession of the towns of Serpa and Moura . After this, Denis avoided war. In 1297, he signed the Treaty of Alcanizes with Ferdinand IV of Castile , establishing a permanent border between the two kingdoms.

[ 98 ] During the suppression of the Knights Templar all over Europe, under the influence of Philip IV of France and Pope Clement V requesting its annihilation by 1312, King Denis reinstituted the Templars of Tomar as the Order of Christ in 1319. Denis believed that the Order's assets should by their nature stay in any given Order instead of being taken by the King, largely for the Templars' contribution to the Reconquista and the reconstruction of Portugal after the wars.

[ 99 ] The experience gained during the battles of the Reconquista was fundamental to Conquest of Ceuta , [ 94 ] the first step to the establishment of the Portuguese Empire . Likewise, the contact with Muslim's navigation techniques and sciences enabled the creation of Portuguese nautical innovations such as the caravel – the principal Portuguese ship during their voyages of exploration in the Age of Discovery .

[ 100 ] Minor Christian realms [ edit ] Minor Christian realms were the Kingdom of Viguera (970–1005), the Lordship of Albarracín (1167–1300), the Principality of Tarragona (1129–1173), and the Principality of Valencia (1094–1102).

[ 101 ] Southern Islamic realms [ edit ] Further information: al-Andalus Umayyads [ edit ] Main articles: Emirate of Córdoba and Caliphate of Córdoba The Battle of the Puig at El Puig de Santa Maria in 1237 During the 9th century the Berbers returned to North Africa in the aftermath of revolts. Many governors of large cities distant from the capital, Córdoba, had planned to establish their independence. Then, in 929, the Emir of Córdoba ( Abd-ar-Rahman III ), the leader of the Umayyad dynasty, declared himself Caliph , independent from the Abbasids in Baghdad . He took all the military, religious, and political power and reorganised the army and the bureaucracy.

[ citation needed ] After regaining control over the dissident governors, Abd-ar-Rahman III tried to conquer the remaining Christian kingdoms of the Iberian peninsula, attacking them several times and forcing them back beyond the Cantabrian Mountains . Abd-ar-Rahman's grandson later became a puppet in the hands of the great Vizier Almanzor ( al-Mansur , "the victorious"). Almanzor waged several campaigns attacking and sacking Burgos , Leon, Pamplona , Barcelona , and Santiago de Compostela before his death in 1002.

[ citation needed ] Taifas [ edit ] Main article: Taifa Between Almanzor's death and 1031, al-Andalus suffered many civil wars, which ended in the division into the Taifa kingdoms . The taifas were small kingdoms, established by the city governors. The result was many (up to 34) small kingdoms, each centered upon its capital. Their governors had no larger-scale vision of the Moorish presence in the Iberian peninsula and had no qualms about attacking their neighbouring kingdoms whenever they could gain advantage by doing so.

[ citation needed ] The split into the taifa states weakened the Islamic presence, and the Christian kingdoms further advanced as Alfonso VI of Leon and Castile conquered Toledo in 1085. Surrounded by enemies, taifa rulers sent a desperate appeal to the Berber chieftain Yusuf ibn Tashfin , leader of the Almoravids.

[ citation needed ] Taifas reemerged when the Almoravid dynasty collapsed in the 1140s, and again when the Almohad Caliphate declined in the 1220s.

[ citation needed ] Almoravids [ edit ] Main article: Almoravid dynasty Extent of the Reconquista into Almohad territory as of 1157.

Capture of Seville by Ferdinand III of Castile (painted by Francisco Pacheco ) The Almoravids were a Muslim militia composed of Berbers, and unlike previous Muslim rulers, they were not so tolerant towards Christians and Jews. Their armies entered the Iberian peninsula on several occasions (1086, 1088, 1093) and defeated King Alfonso at the Battle of Sagrajas in 1086, but initially their purpose was to unite all the taifas into a single Almoravid Caliphate. Their actions halted the southward expansion of the Christian kingdoms. Their only defeat came at Valencia in 1094, due to the actions of El Cid .

[ citation needed ] Meanwhile, Navarre lost all importance under King Sancho IV , for he lost Rioja to Sancho II of Castile , and nearly became the vassal of Aragon. At his death, the Navarrese chose as their king Sancho Ramírez , King of Aragon, who thus became Sancho V of Navarre and I of Aragon. Sancho Ramírez gained international recognition for Aragon, uniting it with Navarre and expanding the borders south, conquering Wasqa t Huesca deep in the valleys in 1096 and building a fort, El Castellar, 25 km from Saraqusta t Zaragoza .

[ citation needed ] Catalonia came under intense pressure from the taifas of Zaragoza and Lérida , as well as from internal disputes, as Barcelona suffered a dynastic crisis that led to open war among the smaller counties. But by the 1080s, the situation had calmed down, and the dominion of Barcelona over the smaller counties was restored.

[ citation needed ] Almohads [ edit ] Main article: Almohad Caliphate The Surrender of Granada by Francisco Pradilla Ortiz After a brief period of disintegration (the second Taifa period), the Almohads, the rising power in North Africa, took over most of al-Andalus . However they were decisively defeated at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa (1212) by a Christian coalition, losing almost all the remaining lands of al-Andalus in the following decades. By 1252 only the Emirate of Granada remained intact but as a vassal state of Castile.

[ citation needed ] Granada War and the end of Muslim rule [ edit ] Main articles: Granada War and Treaty of Granada (1491) Ferdinand and Isabella completed the Reconquista with a war against the Emirate of Granada that started in 1482 and ended with Granada's surrender on 2 January 1492. The Moors in Castile previously numbered "half a million within the realm". By 1492 some 100,000 had died or been enslaved, 200,000 had emigrated, and 200,000 remained in Castile. Many of the Muslim elite, including Granada's former Emir Muhammad XII , who had been given the area of the Alpujarras mountains as a principality, found life under Christian rule intolerable and emigrated to Fez in North Africa.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] [ 104 ] In 1497, Spanish forces took Melilla , west of Oran, and the island of Djerba , south of Tunis, and went on to more important gains, with the bloody seizure of Oran in 1509 , and the capture of Bougie and Tripoli in 1510 . The Spanish capture of Tripoli cost them some 300 men, while the inhabitants suffered between 3,000 and 5,000 killed and another 5,000–6,000 carried off as slaves.

[ 105 ] Soon thereafter, however, they faced competition from the rapidly expanding Ottoman Empire in the east and were pushed back.

[ 106 ] Infighting [ edit ] Christian infighting [ edit ] Clashes and raids on bordering Andalusian lands did not keep the Christian kingdoms from battling among themselves or allying with Muslim kings.

[ 25 ] Some Muslim kings had Christian-born wives or mothers.

[ citation needed ] Some Christian mercenaries, like El Cid , were contracted by taifa kings to fight against their neighbours.

[ 25 ] Indeed, El Cid's first battle experience was gained fighting for a Muslim state against a Christian state.

[ citation needed ] At the Battle of Graus in 1063, he and other Castilians fought on the side of al-Muqtadir , Muslim sultan of Zaragoza , against the forces of Ramiro I of Aragon .

[ citation needed ] There is even an instance of a crusade being declared against another Christian king in Hispania.

[ 107 ] Although Christian rulers Fernán González of Castile and Ramiro II of León had cooperated to defeat the Muslims at the Battle of Simancas (939), Fernán attacked Ramiro soon after and the Leonese–Castilian war that followed lasted until Ramiro's victory in 944.

[ 108 ] Ramiro II's death caused the war of the Leonese succession (951–956) between his sons, and the winner Ordoño III of León concluded peace with caliph Abd al-Rahman III of Córdoba.

[ 108 ] A map of Christian realms in the north and Islamic taifas in the south (1037). During the Reconquista , the Iberian states not only fought along religious lines, but also amongst themselves and internally, especially during wars of succession and clan feuds.

After the defeat of Alfonso VIII , King of Castile, at Alarcos , Kings Alfonso IX of Leon and Sancho VII of Navarre entered an alliance with the Almohads and invaded Castile in 1196.

[ citation needed ] By the end of the year Sancho VII had dropped out of the war under Papal pressure. Early in 1197, at the request of Sancho I , King of Portugal, Pope Celestine III declared a crusade against Alfonso IX and released his subjects from their responsibilities to the king, declaring that "the men of his realm shall be absolved from their fidelity and his dominion by authority of the apostolic see." [ 28 ] Together the Kings of Portugal, Castile, and Aragon invaded Leon. In the face of this onslaught combined with pressure from the Pope, Alfonso IX was finally forced to sue for peace in October 1197.

[ citation needed ] In the late years of al-Andalus , Castile had the might to conquer the remnants of the kingdom of Granada , but the kings preferred to wait and claim the tribute of the Muslim parias . The trade of Granadan goods and the parias were a major means by which African gold entered medieval Europe .

[ citation needed ] Muslim infighting [ edit ] Similarly, there was frequent Muslim infighting throughout the existence of al-Andalus. The Abbasid Revolution (747–750) divided Muslim rulers in Iberia into the pro- Abbasid Caliphate faction (based in Baghdad ) and the pro- Umayyad faction (reconstituted as the Emirate of Córdoba ).

[ 109 ] Charlemagne 's failed 778 campaign into Iberia was prompted by the invitation of the pro-Abbasid governor of Barcelona, Sulayman al-Arabi , which led to a brief Abbasid-Carolingian Alliance against the Umayyads.

[ 110 ] During the Fitna of al-Andalus (1009–1031), the Umayyad-run Caliphate of Córdoba fell apart into rival taifas headed by Islamic emirs warring each other.

[ 111 ] After the Christian king of Castile and León conquered Toledo in 1085, the emirs requested Yusuf ibn Tashfin , leader of the strict Islamic Almoravid sect, to come to their defence, which he did at the Battle of Sagrajas (1086). However, Yusuf soon turned on the Muslim emirs of Spain, defeating them all and conquering their lands by 1091.

[ 112 ] A similar scenario occurred in 1147–1157, when the Almoravid dynasty fell, a Second Taifas period happened, and the Muslim-controlled cities of al-Andalus were conquered by the new Almohad Caliphate .

[ 113 ] The War of the Granada succession (1482–1492) took place after the deposition of emir Abu'l-Hasan Ali of Granada by his son Muhammad XII of Granada ; the deposed emir's brother Muhammad XIII of Granada also joined the fight. This succession conflict took place simultaneously with the Granada War , and was ended only by the Castilian conquest in 1492.

[ 114 ] Christian repopulation [ edit ] Further information: Medieval demography and Repoblación The Reconquista was a process not only of war and conquest, but also of repopulation . Christian kings moved their own people to locations abandoned by Muslims in order to have a population capable of defending the borders. The main repopulation areas were the Douro Basin (the northern plateau), the high Ebro valley ( La Rioja ) and central Catalonia . The repopulation of the Douro Basin took place in two distinct phases. North of the river, between the 9th and 10th centuries, the "pressure" (or presura ) system was employed. South of the Douro , in the 10th and 11th centuries, the presura led to the "charters" ( forais or fueros ).

Fueros were used even south of the Central Range.

[ 115 ] [ better source needed ] The presura referred to a group of peasants who crossed the mountains and settled in the abandoned lands of the Douro Basin. Asturian laws promoted this system, for instance granting a peasant all the land he was able to work and defend as his own property. Of course, Asturian and Galician minor nobles and clergymen sent their own expeditions with the peasants they maintained. This led to very feudalised areas, such as Leon and Portugal, whereas Castile, an arid land with vast plains and harsh climate, only attracted peasants with no hope in Biscay. As a consequence, Castile was governed by a single count, but had a largely non-feudal territory with many free peasants.

Presuras also appear in Catalonia, when the count of Barcelona ordered the Bishop of Urgell and the count of Gerona to repopulate the plains of Vic .

[ citation needed ] During the 10th century and onwards, cities and towns gained more importance and power, as commerce reappeared and the population kept growing.

Fueros were charters documenting the privileges and usages given to all the people repopulating a town. The fueros provided a means of escape from the feudal system , as fueros were only granted by the monarch. As a result, the town council was dependent on the monarch alone and, in turn, was required to provide auxilium —aid or troops—for their monarch. The military force of the towns became the caballeros villanos . The first fuero was given by count Fernán González to the inhabitants of Castrojeriz in the 940's. The most important towns of medieval Hispania had fueros , or forais . In Navarre, fueros were the main repopulating system. Later on, in the 12th century, Aragon also employed the system; for example, the fuero of Teruel , which was one of the last fueros, in the early 13th century.

[ citation needed ] From the mid-13th century on, no more charters were granted, as the demographic pressure had disappeared and other means of re-population were created.

Fueros remained as city charters until the 18th century in Aragon, Valencia and Catalonia and until the 19th century in Castile and Navarre.

Fueros had an immense importance for those living under them, who were prepared to go to war to defend their rights under the charter. In the 19th century, the abolition of the fueros in Navarre would be one of the causes of the Carlist Wars . In Castile, disputes over the system contributed to the war against Charles I ( Castilian War of the Communities ).

[ citation needed ] Christian military culture [ edit ] Reconquista as Crusade [ edit ] At the First Council of the Lateran , Pope Callixtus II declared the Reconquista as 
part of Crusades and its participants as Crusaders having an equal spiritual standing with those in the east.

[ 116 ] In the 13th century, Pope Innocent III declared a crusade and persuaded warriors from many parts of Europe in and outside the Iberian peninsula to assist the Iberians against the Almohad Caliphate army.

[ 117 ] The Almohads then advanced into Europe with the intent of undoing the previous achievements of the Reconquista and marching on Rome itself.

[ 118 ] The crusading campaign culminated in a resounding Crusader victory at the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa , effectively turning the tide of war in favour of the Christians.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] Other Motivations [ edit ] Territories of the military orders of the Iberian kingdoms towards the end of 15th century Jim Bradbury (2004) noted that the Christian belligerents in the Reconquista were not all equally motivated by religion, and that a distinction should be made between 'secular rulers' on the one hand, and on the other hand Christian military orders which came from elsewhere (including the three main orders of Knights Templar , Knights Hospitaller and Teutonic Knights ), or were established inside Iberia (such as those of Santiago , Alcántara and Calatrava ).

[ 121 ] '[The Knights] were more committed to religious war than some of their secular counterparts, were opposed to treating with Muslims and carried out raids and even atrocities, such as decapitating Muslim prisoners.' [ 121 ] On the other hand, Christian armies sometimes forged temporary alliances with Islamic emirs, and Christian mercenaries were quite willing to fight for Arab and Berber rulers if the price was right.

[ 25 ] El Cid is a well-known example of a Christian mercenary leader who was in paid military service of the Islamic kings of Zaragoza for years .

[ 25 ] Mercenaries were an important factor, as many kings did not have enough soldiers available.

Norsemen , Flemish spearmen, Frankish knights, Moorish mounted archers (archers who travelled on horseback), and Berber light cavalry were the main types of mercenaries available and used in the conflict.

[ citation needed ] Christian cavalry and infantry [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Medieval Christian armies mainly comprised two types of forces: the cavalry (mostly nobles, but including commoner knights from the 10th century on) and the infantry, or peones (peasants). Infantry only went to war if needed, which was not frequent. In an atmosphere of constant conflict, warfare and daily life were strongly intertwined during this period. These armies reflected the need for society to be on constant alert during the first chapters of the Reconquista. These forces were capable of moving long distances in short times.

[ citation needed ] Coat of arms of Alcanadre .

La Rioja , Spain, depicting heads of slain Moors Cavalry tactics in Hispania involved knights approaching the enemy, throwing javelins , then withdrawing to a safe distance before commencing another assault. Once the enemy formation was sufficiently weakened, the knights charged with thrusting spears ( lances did not arrive in Hispania until the 11th century). There were three types of knights ( caballeros ): royal knights, noble knights ( caballeros hidalgos ), and commoner knights ( caballeros villanos , or "mounted soldier from a villa "). Royal knights were mainly nobles with a close relationship with the king, and thus claimed a direct Gothic inheritance.

[ citation needed ] Royal knights in the early stages of the Reconquista were equipped with mail hauberk , kite shield, a long sword (designed to fight from the horse), javelins, spears and an axe . Noble knights came from the ranks of the infanzones or lower nobles, whereas the commoner knights were not noble but were wealthy enough to afford a horse. Uniquely in Europe, these horsemen comprised a militia cavalry force with no feudal links, being under the sole control of the king or the count of Castile because of fueros (charters) with the crown. Both noble and common knights wore padded armour and carried javelins, spears and round-tasselled shield (influenced by Moorish shields), as well as a sword.

[ citation needed ] The peones were peasants who went to battle in service of their feudal lord. Poorly equipped, with bows and arrows, spears and short swords, they were mainly used as auxiliary troops. Their function in battle was to contain the enemy troops until the cavalry arrived and to block the enemy infantry from charging the knights. The longbow , the composite bow , and the crossbow were the basic types of bows and were especially popular in the infantry.

[ citation needed ] Equipment [ edit ] In the early Middle Ages in Hispania, armour was typically made of leather, with iron scales. Head protections consisted of a round helmet with nose protector (influenced by the designs used by Vikings , who attacked during the 8th and 9th centuries) and a chain mail headpiece. Shields were often round or kidney-shaped, except for the kite-shaped designs used by the royal knights. Usually adorned with geometric designs, crosses or tassels, shields were made out of wood and had a leather cover.

[ citation needed ] Steel swords were the most common weapon. The cavalry used long double-edged swords and the infantry short, single-edged ones. Guards were either semicircular or straight, but always highly ornamented with geometrical patterns. Spears and javelins were up to 1.5 metres long and had an iron tip. The double-axe—made of iron, 30 cm long, and possessing an extremely sharp edge—was designed to be equally useful as a thrown weapon or in close combat. Maces and hammers were not common, but some specimens have remained and are thought to have been used by members of the cavalry.

[ citation needed ] Technological changes [ edit ] This style of warfare remained dominant in the Iberian Peninsula until the late 11th century, when lance tactics entered from France, although the traditional horse javelin-shot techniques continued to be used. In the 12th and 13th centuries, soldiers typically carried a sword, a lance, a javelin, and either bow and arrows or crossbow and darts/bolts. Armor consisted of a coat of mail over a quilted jacket, extending at least to the knees, a helmet or iron cap, and bracers protecting the arms and thighs, either metal or leather.

[ citation needed ] The Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa (1212), an important turning point of the Reconquista Shields were round or triangular, made of wood, covered with leather, and protected by an iron band; the shields of knights and nobles would bear the family's coat of arms. Knights rode in both the Muslim style, a la jineta (i.e. the equivalent of a modern jockey's seat), a short stirrup strap and bended knees allowed for better control and speed, or in the French style, a la brida , a long stirrup strap allowed for more security in the saddle (i.e. the equivalent of the modern cavalry seat, which is more secure) when acting as heavy cavalry. Horses were occasionally fitted with a coat of mail as well.

[ citation needed ] Around the 14th and 15th centuries heavy cavalry gained a predominant role, including knights wearing full plate armor.

[ citation needed ] Conversions and expulsions [ edit ] Main articles: Treaty of Granada (1491) , Alhambra decree , Expulsion of the Moriscos , Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain , and Persecution of Jews and Muslims by Manuel I of Portugal Forces of Muhammed IX , Nasrid Sultan of Granada , at the Battle of La Higueruela , 1431 The new Christian hierarchy demanded heavy taxes from non-Christians and gave them rights, such as in the Treaty of Granada (1491) only for Moors in recently Islamic Granada. On 30 July 1492, all the Jewish community—some 200,000 people—were forcibly expelled.

[ 122 ] The next year, the Alhambra decree ordered the expulsion of practicing Jews, leading many of them to convert to Catholicism. In 1502, Queen Isabella I declared that conversion to Catholicism was compulsory within the Kingdom of Castile.

Holy Roman Emperor Charles V imposed the same religious requirement on Moors in the Kingdom of Aragon in 1526, forcing its Muslim population to convert during the Revolt of the Germanies .

[ 123 ] Spanish Inquisition [ edit ] Main article: Spanish Inquisition Making things more complex were the many former Muslims and Jews known as Moriscos , Marranos , and Conversos , who shared ancestors in common with many Christians, especially among the aristocracy, causing much concern over loyalty and attempts by the aristocracy to hide their non-Christian ancestry. Some—the numbers are debated—continued to secretly practice their religions and use their languages well into the sixteenth century.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Those that the Spanish Inquisition found to be secretly practicing Islam or Judaism were executed, imprisoned, or exiled.

[ citation needed ] Nevertheless, all those deemed to be "New Christians" were repeatedly suspected of illegally continuing in secret to practice their religions. Various crimes against the Spanish state including continued practice of Islam or Judaism. New Christians were subject to many discriminatory practices starting in the sixteenth century.

[ 126 ] Classifications and later consequences [ edit ] Saint Dominic presiding over an auto-da-fé , by Pedro Berruguete (around 1495) [ 127 ] The many advances and retreats created several social types: [ citation needed ] The Muwallad : native Iberians under Islamic rule who converted to Islam after the arrival of the Muslim Arabs and Berbers.

The Mozarabs : Christians in Muslim-held lands. Some of them migrated to the north of the peninsula in times of persecution bringing elements of the styles, food and agricultural practices learned from the Andalusians, while they continued practicing their Christianity with older forms of Catholic worship and their own versions of the Latin language.

" New Christians ": Jews converting to Christianity called conversos , or pejoratively Marranos . Jews converted to Christianity voluntarily or through force. Some were Crypto-Jews who continued practicing Judaism secretly. All remaining Jews were expelled from Spain as a consequence of the 1492 Alhambra Decree , and from Portugal in 1497. Former Jews were subject to the Spanish and Portuguese Inquisitions , established to enforce Christian faith and practice, which often resulted in secret investigations and public punishments of conversos in autos-da-fé ("acts of faith"), often public executions by burning the victim alive [ 128 ] The Mudéjar : Muslims in Christian-held lands.

Moriscos : Muslim conversos . Muslims who converted to Catholicism. A significant number were Crypto-Muslims who continued practicing Islam secretly. They ranged from successful skilled artisans, valued and protected in Aragon, to impoverished peasants in Castile. After the Alhambra Decree the entire Islamic population was forced to convert or leave, and at the beginning of the seventeenth century a significant number were expelled in the expulsion of the Moriscos .

Legacy [ edit ] See also: History of Spain , History of Portugal , and Portugal in the period of discoveries Since the 19th century, traditional Western and especially Iberian historiography has stressed the existence of the Reconquista , [ 129 ] a continual phenomenon by which the Christian Iberian kingdoms opposed and conquered the Muslim kingdoms, understood as a common enemy who had militarily seized territory from native Iberian Christians.

[ 28 ] However, modern scholarship has challenged this concept of a "reconquista" as a national myth tied to Spanish nationalism.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] The concept has served the idea "that Spain is a nation shaped against Islam", contributing to "a largely biased and distorted vision of the Iberian medieval past, aimed at delegitimizing the Islamic presence (al-Andalus) and therefore at legitimizing the Christian conquest of the Muslim territory." [ 132 ] Among other arguments, one of those advanced by scholars is that "no military campaign lasts eight centuries." [ 133 ] The term "reconquista" in this sense first appeared in the 19th century, and only entered the dictionary of the Royal Spanish Academy in 1936, with the rise of Francisco Franco .

[ 134 ] The concept of the reconquista continues to have significance and has even experienced a resurgence in modern politics—especially for the extreme right Spanish party Vox , but also more broadly among xenophobic and especially Islamophobic conservatives in the West, with the influence of the doctrine of a " Clash of Civilizations ".

[ 132 ] Real, legendary, and fictional episodes from the Reconquista are the subject of much of medieval Galician-Portuguese , Spanish , and Catalan literature such as the cantar de gesta .

[ citation needed ] Old Mosque in Mértola , Portugal, converted into a church.

Some noble genealogies show the close, though not numerous, relations between Muslims and Christians. For example, Al-Mansur Ibn Abi Aamir , whose rule is considered to have marked the peak of power for Moorish al-Andalus Hispania, married Abda, daughter of Sancho Garcés II of Navarra , who bore him a son, named Abd al-Rahman and commonly known in a pejorative sense as Sanchuelo ( Little Sancho ; in Arabic: Shanjoul ).

[ citation needed ] After his father's death, Sanchuelo/Abd al-Rahman, as a son of a Christian princess, was a strong contender to take over the ultimate power in Muslim al-Andalus. A hundred years later, King Alfonso VI of Castile , regarded as one of the greatest medieval Spanish kings, designated his son (also named Sancho) by the Muslim princess refugee Zaida of Seville , as his heir.

[ citation needed ] The Reconquista was a war with long periods of respite between the adversaries, partly for pragmatic reasons and also due to infighting among the Christian kingdoms of the North spanning over seven centuries. Some populations practiced Islam or Christianity as their own religion during these centuries, so the identity of contenders changed over time.

[ citation needed ] It is noteworthy that the popular hero El Cid , whose name is very much associated with the Reconquista, had at one part of his career actually fought  for the Muslim rulers of Zaragoza , whom he defended from its traditional enemy, the Christian Aragon . The most important achievement of El Cid's career, the conquest of the kingdom-city of Valencia , was actually achieved in close alliance with the Banu Hud and other Muslim dynasties opposed to the Almoravids .

[ 135 ] French emulation [ edit ] In 1558, the armies of King Henry II of France managed to conquer the city of Calais , which had been under English rule for centuries. Queen Mary I of England considered the loss of Calais as the greatest disaster of her reign.

[ 136 ] The region around Calais, then-known as the Calaisis , was renamed the Pays Reconquis ("Reconquered Country") in commemoration of its recovery by the French.

[ 137 ] The French were certainly aware of the Spanish Reconquista, and since at the time Philip II of Spain was Queen Mary's consort, use of this term might have been intended as a deliberate snub to him.

[ 138 ] Festivals in modern Spain and Portugal [ edit ] Moros y Cristianos festival in Pego, Alicante , 2016 Currently, festivals called moros y cristianos (Spanish), moros i cristians ( Catalan ), mouros e cristãos (Portuguese) and mouros e cristiáns (Galician), which all mean "Moors and Christians", recreate the fights as colorful parades with elaborate garments and many fireworks, especially on the central and southern towns of the Land of Valencia , like Alcoi , Ontinyent or Villena .

[ citation needed ] Persistent effects [ edit ] A 2016 study found that the "rate of Reconquest"—how rapidly the Christian frontier was expanded—has persistent effects on the Spanish economy to this day. After an initial phase of military conquest, Christians states incorporated the conquered land. When large frontier regions were incorporated at once, the land was mostly given to the nobility and the military orders, with negative effects on long-term development. The incorporation of small regions, on the other hand, generally allowed for the participation of individual settlers and was more likely to fall under the auspices of the crown. This led to a more equitable distribution of land and greater social equality, with positive effects on long-term development.

[ 139 ] Reverberations [ edit ] The Portuguese forces, personally commanded by King Afonso V , in the conquest of Asilah , Morocco, 1471, from the Pastrana Tapestries .

As the Christian kingdoms completed their conquest of territory on the Iberian Peninsula, they shifted their impetus elsewhere, even to the Maghreb , which is  located across the Strait of Gibraltar. A Castilian Crown-sanctioned punitive expedition against Tetouan, a corsair stronghold, was launched as early as 1399–1400.

[ 140 ] The conquest of Ceuta in 1415 marked the beginning of Portuguese expansion in Africa. Thereby, it allowed Portugal to exert control over Castilian and Aragonese trade through the Strait, and it also allowed Portugal to establish a powerbase for the launching of raid expeditions in Muslim-ruled lands.

[ 141 ] Some 15th-century political writers promoted the idea of a "Gothic Monarchy", an heir to Rome , that included territory across the Strait.

[ 142 ] The African enterprise which was undertaken during the rule of the Catholic Monarchs was nominally endorsed by papal bulls and it was also financed with donations which were used to pay the crusade tax, even if it was viewed with some suspicion by the Papacy.

[ 143 ] Conquest efforts in Africa on the part of the Catholic Monarchy by and large stalled following the death of Ferdinand II of Aragon.

[ 144 ] The model of conquest and repopulation by Christian powers in the Peninsula was however never reproduced in Northern Africa, and with the conquered territory—a fortified mark with very few fortresses scattered along an extensive coastline—merely adopting a defensive role, it allowed for Ottoman expansion in the region.

[ 145 ] The Portuguese warred with the Ottoman Caliphate in the Mediterranean , [ 146 ] Indian Ocean [ 147 ] and Southeast Asia as the Portuguese conquered the Ottomans' allies: the Sultanate of Adal in East Africa, the Sultanate of Delhi in South Asia and the Sultanate of Malacca in Southeast Asia.

[ 148 ] Christopher Columbus 's initial 1492 voyage to the Americas was predicated on the completion of the Granada War, with the Spanish monarchy only able to assent to his overseas journeys once it had completed the process of defeating the Moors.

[ 149 ] Columbus's views of the New World and the Christian convictions that shaped his actions there were influenced by historical European anti-Muslim ideas that had underpinned the Reconquista itself; [ 150 ] he believed that by his voyaging, he would be able to reach the Grand Khan of Asia and create a coalition that could attack the Middle East from both sides and thus bring Jerusalem back under Christian rule.

[ 151 ] Far-right motif [ edit ] An army parade in Granada attended by far-right sympathizers who are waving the Francoist flags (2 January 2016) Along with the rhetoric of the crusades , the rhetoric of the 'Reconquista' serves as a rallying point in the political discourse of the contemporary far-right in Spain, Portugal and, more broadly, it also serves as a rallying point in the political discourse of the far-right in Europe.

[ 152 ] Frequently, references to the Reconquista and the crusades are allegorically played as internet meme by 21st-century online far-right groups which seek to convey anti-Muslim sentiments .

[ 153 ] The theme has also been used as a major rallying point by identitarian groups in France and Italy.

[ 154 ] The annual commemoration of the surrender of Sultan Boabdil in Granada on 2 January acquired a markedly nationalistic undertone during the early years of the Francoist regime and, since the death of the dictator Francisco Franco in 1975, it has served as glue for extreme right groups by facilitating their open-air physical gatherings and providing them with an occasion which they can use to explicitly state their political demands.

[ 155 ] A Spanish Legion unit usually parades and sings El novio de la muerte ("Boyfriend of death").

[ 156 ] The far right has also waged a culture war by claiming dates in the history of the Reconquista, such as the aforementioned 2 January or 2 February, regional festivities for the related autonomous communities ( Andalusia and Murcia ).

[ 155 ] See also [ edit ] Convivencia Notes [ edit ] ^ While it is largely spelled in the same way, the pronunciation of it varies among the different languages which are spoken on the Iberian Peninsula as well as in neighboring territories. The pronunciations of it are as follows: Asturleonese , Galician and Spanish: [rekoŋˈkista] ; Portuguese: [ʁɨkõˈkiʃtɐ] ; Catalan : [rəkuŋˈkestə] or [rekoŋˈkesta] , spelled Reconquesta ; colloquially also known as and spelled Reconquista (pron.

[rəkuŋˈkistə] or [rekoŋˈkista] ); Basque : [erekoŋkis̺ta] , spelled Errekonkista ; Aragonese : [ɾekoŋˈkjesta] , spelled Reconquiesta ; Aranese and Gascon : [rekuŋˈkɛsta] , spelled Reconquèsta , or [rekuŋˈkistɔ] , spelled Reconquista ; French : [ʁəkɔ̃kɛt] , spelled Reconquête ; Reconquista commonly used as well.

^ Arabic : الاسترداد , romanized : al-Istirdād , lit.

'the Recovery', although it is more commonly known as سقوط الأندلس suqūṭ al-Andalus 'the fall of al-Andalus '.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ Chico Picaza, M.ª Victoria (2012).

"Composición, estilo y texto en la miniatura del Códice Rico de las CSM" .

Alcanate: Revista de Estudios Alfonsíes .

8 : 170−171.

ISSN 1579-0576 .

^ Kabha, M. (2023).

"The Fall of Al-Andalus and the Evolution of its Memory in Modern Arab-Muslim Historiography" .

The Maghreb Review .

48 (3): 289– 303.

doi : 10.1353/tmr.2023.a901468 .

S2CID 259503095 .

^ Al-Mallah, M. (2019).

"The Afterlife of Al-Andalus: Muslim Iberia in Contemporary Arab and Hispanic Narratives" .

Comparative Literature Studies .

56 (1): e–22.

doi : 10.5325/complitstudies.56.1.e-22 .

S2CID 239092774 .

^ Caraccioli, Mauro José (2021), "Narratives of Conquest and the Conquest of Narrative" , Writing the New World , The Politics of Natural History in the Early Spanish Empire, University Press of Florida, pp.

14– 38, ISBN 978-1-68340-170-4 , JSTOR j.ctv1gt9419.6 , retrieved 11 September 2024 , La Reconquista: a 700-year military and cultural campaign against the Moorish Caliphates of Southern Iberia that culminated in the joint reign of Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile as Reyes Católicos.

^ a b "Reconquista" .

Britannica . 23 November 2022.

^ Collins 1989 , p. 147; Reilly 1993 , pp. 75–76; Deyermond 1985 , p. 346; Hillgarth 2009 , p. 66 n. 28 ^ "parias." Diccionario de la Lengua Española , 22nd ed. (online).

^ According to Catlos, 83, Arabic authors referred to the parias as a jizya , the equivalent of the Islamic head tax on non-believers.

^ Fletcher, 7–8.

^ Reilly, 9.

^ Porto Editora – Reconquista Cristã na Infopédia [em linha]. Porto: Porto Editora. [consult. 2024-04-16 12:44:27]. Disponível em https://www.infopedia.pt/$reconquista-crista ^ Mary Elizabeth Perry (2012).

"8: Morisco Stories and the Complexities of Resistance and Assimilation" . In Kevin Ingram (ed.).

The Conversos and Moriscos in Late Medieval Spain and Beyond: Volume Two: The Morisco Issue . Brill. p. 167.

ISBN 978-90-04-22860-3 .

^ Dadson, Trevor J. (2014).

Tolerance and Coexistence in Early Modern Spain: Old Christians and Moriscos in the Campo de Calatrava . Boydell & Brewer Ltd. p. 101.

ISBN 978-1855662735 .

^ Boase, Roger (4 April 2002). "The Muslim Expulsion from Spain".

History Today .

52 (4).

The majority of those permanently expelled settling in the Maghreb or Barbary Coast , especially in Oran, Tunis, Tlemcen, Tetuán, Rabat and Salé. Many travelled overland to France, but after the assassination of Henry of Navarre by Ravaillac in May 1610, they were forced to emigrate to Italy, Sicily or Constantinople.

^ "Islamic Encounters" .

www.brown.edu .

Brown University . Archived from the original on 13 July 2024 . Retrieved 25 May 2023 .

Between 1492 and 1610, some 3,000,000 Muslims voluntarily left or were expelled from Spain, resettling in North Africa.

^ "La reconquista es un mito" .

Diario de Burgos (in Spanish). 2 November 2013.

Archived from the original on 25 September 2019 . Retrieved 13 September 2019 .

^ Ríos Saloma, Martín.

La Reconquista: génesis de un mito historiográfico (PDF) (Report). Instituto de Investigaciones Históricas/UNAM Departamento de Historia México.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016.

^ Sanjuán, Alejandro García.

"Al-Andalus en la historiografía del nacionalismo españolista (siglos xix–xxi). Entre la Reconquista y la España musulmana." A 1300 Años de la conquista de Al-Andalus (711–2011) (2012): 65.

^ a b García Fitz 2009 , pp. 144–145 "Hay que reconocer que la irrupción de este concepto en la historiografía hispánica del siglo XIX, con su fuerte carga nacionalista, romántica y, en ocasiones, colonialista, tuvo un éxito notable y se transmitió, manteniendo algunos de sus rasgos identitarios más llamativos, a la del siglo XX. [It is necessary to recognize that the emergence of this concept in Iberian historiography of the 19th century, with its strong dual nationalistic, romantic and, at times, colonialist emphasis, had a remarkable success and was transmitted, retaining some of its most striking features, into the 20th century.]" ^ Silva 2020 , pp. 57–65.

^ Paone, Antony; Thomas, Leigh (6 December 2021).

"Far-right French presidential hopeful promises 'reconquest' at rally" .

Reuters . Retrieved 22 June 2022 .

^ García Fitz 2009 , pp. 144–145.

^ a b c d e f McKitterick, Rosamond ; Collins, R. (1990).

The New Cambridge Medieval. History 1 . Cambridge University Press. p. 289.

ISBN 978-0521362924 . Retrieved 26 July 2012 .

By the later ninth century some of the distinctive ideology of the later 'Reconquista' had come into being. Christian writers, such as the anonymous author of the so-called 'Prophetic Chronicle' of 883/4, could look forward to the expulsion of the Arabs from Spain, and a sense of both an ethnic and a religious-cultural divide between the inhabitants of the small northern kingdoms and the dominant elite in the south was marked in the writings of both sides. On the other hand, it is unwise to be too linear in the approach to the origins of the 'Reconquista', as tended to be the way with Spanish historiography in the earlier part of the twentieth century. Periods of peaceful co-existence or of limited and localised frontier disturbances were more frequent than ones of all-out military conflict between al-Andalus and the Christian kingdoms. As has been mentioned, the former never made any serious effort to eliminate the latter. Moreover, as in the case of relations between the Arista dynasty in Pamplona and the Banü Qasi, the mutual interest could be a stronger bond than ideological divisions based on antagonistic creeds. These tendencies were, if anything, to be reinforced in the tenth century.

^ Alfonso X, Rey de Castilla (1283).

"Libro del axedrez, dados e tablas [Folio 64R (croppped)]" .

rbdigital.realbiblioteca.es . Real Biblioteca del Monasterio de San Lorenzo de El Escorial. Archived from the original on 23 November 2021 . Retrieved 24 June 2022 .

^ a b c d e f Keefe, Eugene K. (1976).

Area Handbook for Spain . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 105.

ISBN 978-0160015670 . Retrieved 7 April 2022 .

^ Menocal, Maria Rosa (2009).

The Ornament of the World: How Muslims, Jews, and Christians Created a Culture of Tolerance in Medieval Spain . Little, Brown. pp. 214, 223.

ISBN 978-0-316-09279-1 .

.

^ Fernández-Morera, Darío (2016).

The Myth of the Andalusian Paradise . Open Road Media. p. 50.

ISBN 978-1-5040-3469-2 .

^ a b c d O'Callaghan, Joseph F. (2013).

Reconquest and Crusade in Medieval Spain . University of Pennsylvania Press. pp.

18– 19.

ISBN 978-0-8122-0306-6 .

^ Kinoshita, Sharon (Winter 2001). " 'Pagans are wrong and Christians are right': Alterity, Gender, and Nation in the Chanson de Roland ".

Journal of Medieval and Early Modern Studies .

31 (1): 79– 111.

doi : 10.1215/10829636-31-1-79 .

S2CID 143132248 .

^ DiVanna, Isabel N. (2010). "Politicizing national literature: the scholarly debate around La Chanson de Roland in the nineteenth century".

Historical Research .

84 (223): 109– 134.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-2281.2009.00540.x .

^ Lucken, Christopher (16 April 2019), Bähler, Ursula; Cangemi, Valérie; Corbellari, Alain (eds.), "Actualité de la Chanson de Roland: Une épopée populaire au programme d'agrégation" , Le savant dans les Lettres , Interférences, Rennes: Presses universitaires de Rennes, pp.

93– 106, ISBN 978-2-7535-5783-3 , retrieved 18 November 2022 ^ García Fitz 2009 , p. 152.

^ a b Alejandro García Sanjuán (5 December 2018).

"Vox, la Reconquista y la salvación de España" .

eldiario.es (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 16 February 2019 . Retrieved 15 February 2019 .

^ García Sanjuán, Alejandro (2016).

"La persistencia del discurso nacionalcatólico sobre el Medievo peninsular en la historiografía española actual" .

Historiografías .

12 (12). Zaragoza: Prensas de la Universidad de Zaragoza : 133.

doi : 10.26754/ojs_historiografias/hrht.2016122367 .

ISSN 2174-4289 .

^ a b García Fitz 2009 , pp. 146–147.

^ "¿Por qué Vox rescata ahora el viejo concepto de 'Reconquista'?" .

www.publico.es . 15 January 2019.

Archived from the original on 16 February 2019 . Retrieved 15 February 2019 .

^ "Casado, tras apelar Vox a la Reconquista: El PP ha empezado la reconquista por Andalucía y la acabará en Asturias" . Europa Press. 11 January 2019.

Archived from the original on 16 February 2019 . Retrieved 15 February 2019 .

^ Bravo, Francisca (31 January 2019).

"Vox designa a Toledo como el punto donde comenzar la 'reconquista' del centro de España" .

eldiario.es (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 16 February 2019 . Retrieved 15 February 2019 .

^ "Casado promete una 'reconquista' para que 'caiga el engaño independentista' " .

ElNacional.cat . 21 July 2018.

Archived from the original on 16 February 2019 . Retrieved 15 February 2019 .

^ Bolorinos Allard, Elisabeth. "The Crescent and the Dagger: Representations of the Moorish Other during the Spanish Civil War." Bulletin of Spanish Studies 93, no. 6 (2016): 965–988.

^ Purkis, William J. (2010).

Eleventh- and Twelfth-Century Perspectives on State Building in the Iberian Peninsula (PDF) . University of Birmingham. pp.

57– 58.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 October 2017 . Retrieved 15 October 2017 .

^ Eugènia de Pagès, " La 'Reconquista', allò que mai no va existir ", La Lamentable , 11 July 2014, lamentable.org Archived 28 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ Martín M. Ríos Saloma, " La Reconquista. Génesis de un mito historiográfico ", Historia y Grafía , 30, 2008, pp. 191–216, redalyc.org Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Retrieved 12 October 2014.

^ " Yo no entiendo cómo se puede llamar reconquista a una cosa que dura ocho siglos " ("I don't understand how something that lasted eight centuries can be called a reconquest"), in España invertebrada . Quoted by De Pagès, E. 11 July 2014.

^ Horswell, Mike; Awan, Akil N. (2019).

The Crusades in the Modern World: Engaging the Crusades, Volume Two . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-351-25046-7 .

^ Nick (10 November 2022).

"Battle of Guadalete: 2 Reasons It Changed History" .

The History Ace . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ Collins 1989 , pp. 38–45.

^ Fletcher, Richard (2006).

Moorish Spain . Los Angeles: University of California Press. p.

43 .

ISBN 978-0-520-24840-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Chris Lowney , A Vanished World: Muslims, Christians, and Jews in Medieval Spain , (Oxford University Press, 2005), 40.

^ Roger Collins, Early Medieval Spain , (St. Martin's Press, 1995), 164.

^ Collins, Roger (1989).

The Arab Conquest of Spain 710–797 . Oxford, UK / Cambridge, US: Blackwell. p. 45.

ISBN 978-0-631-19405-7 .

^ "Reconquista | Map and Timeline" .

HistoryMaps . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ Trawinski, Allan (2017).

The Clash of Civilizations . Page Publishing Inc.

ISBN 978-1635687125 .

[ page needed ] ^ Covadonga, la batalla que cambió la historia de España (in Spanish), 27 May 2022 , retrieved 11 August 2022 ^ Collins, Roger (1989).

The Arab Conquest of Spain 710–797 . Oxford, UK / Cambridge, US: Blackwell. p. 181.

ISBN 978-0-631-19405-7 .

^ Collins, Roger (1989).

The Arab Conquest of Spain 710–797 . Oxford, UK / Cambridge, US: Blackwell. p. 156.

ISBN 978-0-631-19405-7 .

^ Collins, Roger (1989).

The Arab Conquest of Spain 710–797 . Oxford, UK / Cambridge, US: Blackwell. pp. 156, 159.

ISBN 978-0-631-19405-7 .

^ Collins, Roger (1989).

The Arab Conquest of Spain 710–797 . Oxford, UK / Cambridge, US: Blackwell. p. 212.

ISBN 978-0-631-19405-7 .

^ "The Way of St. James – Bodega Tandem" . 31 July 2021. Archived from the original on 31 July 2021 . Retrieved 11 August 2022 .

^ a b c d Lewis, Archibald R.

(1965).

The Development of Southern French and Catalan Society, 718–1050 . The University of Texas Press. pp.

20– 33.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2017 . Retrieved 28 October 2017 .

^ Collins, Roger (1989).

The Arab Conquest of Spain 710–797 . Oxford, UK / Cambridge, US: Blackwell. pp.

118– 126.

ISBN 978-0-631-19405-7 .

^ a b Collins, Roger (1989).

The Arab Conquest of Spain 710–797 . Oxford, UK / Cambridge, US: Blackwell. pp.

177– 181.

ISBN 978-0-631-19405-7 .

^ Lewis, Archibald R.

(1965).

The Development of Southern French and Catalan Society, 718–1050 . The University of Texas Press. pp.

37– 49.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2017 . Retrieved 28 October 2017 .

It took place on 28 December 801.

^ "Archaeology" .

Perennial Pyrenees . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Counts – The Origins of Catalonia" .

www.autentic.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Kingdom of Navarre" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 27 October 2022 .

^ a b Ruiz De La Peña. La monarquia asturiana 718–910, p. 27. Cangas de Onís, 2000.

ISBN 9788460630364 / Fernández Conde. Estudios Sobre La Monarquía Asturiana, pp. 35–76. Estudios Históricos La Olmeda, 2015.

ISBN 978-8497048057 ^ Joseph F. O'Callaghan (2013).

A History of Medieval Spain . Cornell University Press. p. 176.

ISBN 978-0-8014-6872-8 .

^ Casariego, J.E.: Crónicas de los reinos de Asturias y León . Biblioteca Universitaria Everest, León 1985, p. 68.

ASIN B00I78R3S4 [ ISBN missing ] ^ García Fitz, Francisco. 2009, pp. 149–150 ^ "What was the Reconquista? – Boot Camp & Military Fitness Institute" .

bootcampmilitaryfitnessinstitute.com . 2 January 2021 . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ O'Callaghan, Joseph F. (2013).

A History of Medieval Spain . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-6872-8 .

^ "Alfonso II, Charlemagne and the Jacobean Cult (full text in Spanish)" (PDF) . 24 March 2022. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2022 . Retrieved 11 August 2022 .

^ Collins, Roger (1983).

Early Medieval Spain . New York: St. Martin's Press. p. 238.

ISBN 0-312-22464-8 .

^ "Chapter Four" .

somosprimos.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Fernán González | count of Castile | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Sancho III (king of Navarre) | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "El yermo estratégico del Desierto del Duero – Observatorio de Seguridad y Defensa" (in European Spanish) . Retrieved 19 March 2024 .

^ a b Porto Editora – Reconquista Cristã na Infopédia [em linha]. Porto: Porto Editora. [consult. 2024-03-19 17:48:31]. Disponível em https://www.infopedia.pt/$reconquista-crista ^ "Reconquista Cristã" .

História Online (in European Portuguese) . Retrieved 19 March 2024 .

^ Higounet, Charles (1953).

"La Reconquista española y la repoblación del país. Escuela de estudios medievales, Inst. de Estudios pirenaicos" .

Bulletin Hispanique .

55 (2): 206– 208.

^ "Reconquista española: qué fue y sus características" .

humanidades.com/ (in European Spanish) . Retrieved 19 March 2024 .

^ "Reconquista da Península Ibérica – Conheça a História" .

www.brasilparalelo.com.br (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 19 March 2024 .

^ "Ferdinand I | king of Castile and Leon | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Alfonso VI | Biography, Facts, & Children | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ Ampuero, Marcelo E. Fuentes (May 2018).

"An Empire of Two Religions: Muslims as Allies, Enemies, and Subjects in the Literature of the Iberian Christian Kingdoms" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 June 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Iñigo Arista | Basque ruler | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Sancho III Garcés | king of Pamplona [Navarre] | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Sancho VI | king of Navarre | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Kingdom of Aragon | medieval kingdom, Spain | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ Bisson, Thomas N. (1986).

Medieval crown of Aragon : a short history . Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp.

31– 57.

ISBN 978-0191675294 .

^ McCrank, Lawrence (1974).

Restoration and reconquest in medieval Catalonia: the church and principality of Tarragona . University of Virginia.

Archived from the original on 24 February 2022 . Retrieved 24 February 2022 .

^ "James I | King of Sicily & Valencia | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ a b "Reconquista | Definition, History, Significance, & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 5 May 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ Lucas Villegas-Aristizábal (2013).

"Revisiting the Anglo-Norman Crusaders' Failed Attempt to Conquer Lisbon c.

1142" .

Portuguese Studies .

29 : 7.

doi : 10.5699/portstudies.29.1.0007 .

^ "Sutori" .

www.sutori.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Battle of Lisbon | Summary | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ Juan-Manuel Trillo-Santamaría & Valerià Paül, 'The Oldest Boundary in Europe? A Critical Approach to the Spanish-Portuguese Border: The Raia Between Galicia and Portugal', Geopolitics , 19:1, 161–181 [167] ^ Archives, The National (29 November 2014).

"The National Archives – The Templars' 'curse' on the King of France" .

The National Archives blog . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ Hobson, John M. (2004).

The Eastern Origins of Western Civilisation .

Cambridge University Press . p. 141.

ISBN 978-0521547246 .

^ "Battle of Valencia | Summary | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ Kamen 2005 , pp. 37–38.

^ "نفح الطيب من غصن الاندلس الرطيب" p. 1317.  احمد المقري  المغربي المالكي الاشعري ^ Harvey, Leonard Patrick (1992).

Islamic Spain, 1250 to 1500 . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 327.

ISBN 0-226-31962-8 .

^ The Last Great Muslim Empires . p. 138.

^ Davison, Derek.

"Today in European history: the 'Reconquista' ends (1492)" .

fx.substack.com . Retrieved 13 September 2022 .

^ Joseph O'Callaghan (2003).

Reconquest and Crusade in Medieval Spain , Philadelphia: University of Philadelphia Press. p. 62.

^ a b Whitney, James Pounder (1922). Gwatkin, Henry Melvill (ed.).

The Cambridge Medieval History: Maps III. Germany and the Western Empire. 3 . Plantagenet Publishing. p. 338.

ISBN 978-0521045346 . Retrieved 7 April 2022 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Ullidtz, Per (2014).

1016: The Danish Conquest of England . Copenhagen: Books on Demand. p. 132.

ISBN 978-87-7145-720-9 .

^ Ullidtz 2014 , p. 132.

^ Tolan, John (2013).

Europe and the Islamic World: A History . Princeton: Princeton University press. pp.

39– 40.

^ Encarta Winkler Prins Encyclopaedia (1993–2002) s.v. "Almoraviden §2. Verbreiding". Microsoft Corporation/Het Spectrum.

^ Encarta Winkler Prins Encyclopaedia (1993–2002) s.v. "Almohaden §2. Machtsuitbreiding". Microsoft Corporation/Het Spectrum.

^ Encarta Winkler Prins Encyclopaedia (1993–2002) s.v. "Boabdil". Microsoft Corporation/Het Spectrum.

^ Viso, Julio Escalona; Martín, Iñaki (3 April 2020), "The Life and Death of an Historiographical Folly: The Early Medieval Depopulation and Repopulation of the Duero Basin", Beyond the Reconquista: New Directions in the History of Medieval Iberia , Brill, pp.

21– 51, doi : 10.1163/9789004423879_003 , hdl : 10261/238570 , ISBN 9789004423879 , S2CID 218803277 ^ Marin-Guzmán, Roberto (1992). "Crusade in Al-Andalus: The Eleventh Century formation of the Reconquista as an Ideology". Islamic Studies. 31 (3 (Autumn)): 295.

^ The Circle of War in the Middle Ages: Essays on Medieval Military and Naval History. United Kingdom: Boydell Press, 1999, pp.29-30 ^ Mann, Horace Kinder. The Lives of the Popes in the Early Middle Ages. United Kingdom: K. Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1915, pp.177-179 ^ Mann, Horace Kinder. The Lives of the Popes in the Early Middle Ages. United Kingdom: K. Paul, Trench, Trübner, 1915, pp.177-179 ^ The Circle of War in the Middle Ages: Essays on Medieval Military and Naval History. United Kingdom: Boydell Press, 1999, pp.29-30 ^ a b Bradbury 2004 , p. 314.

^ "Modern Jewish History: The Spanish Expulsion (1492)" Archived 15 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine , The Jewish Virtual Library .

^ Censorship and Book Production in Spain During the Age of the Incunabula Archived 18 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine , Ignacio Tofiño-Quesada. Graduate Center, CUNY.

^ Sicroff, Albert A. (2010).

Los estatutos de limpieza de sangre : controversias entre los siglos XV y XVII .

Juan de la Cuesta .

ISBN 978-1588711779 .

First published in French in 1960 ^ Childers, William (2004).

" 'Según es cristiana la gente': The Quintanar of Persiles y Sigismunda and the Archival Record" (PDF) .

Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America .

24 (2): 5– 41.

doi : 10.3138/Cervantes.24.2.005 .

S2CID 160282260 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2010.

^ Bethencourt, Francisco (2015).

Racisms: From the Crusades to the Twentieth Century . Princeton University Press. p. 153.

ISBN 978-0-691-16975-0 .

^ [1] Archived 2 December 2015 at the Wayback Machine at Prado Museum ^ The exact number of people executed by the Inquisition is not known.

Juan Antonio Llorente gave the following numbers for the Inquisition: 31,912 burnt, 17,696 burnt in effigy , and 291,450 reconciled de vehementi (i.e., following an act of penance) (Roth 1964:123).

José Amador de los Ríos gave even higher numbers, between the years 1484 and 1525 alone: 28,540 burnt in person, 16,520 burnt in effigy and 303,847 penanced (Roth1964).

However, after extensive examinations of archival records, modern scholars provide lower estimates, indicating that fewer than 10,000 were actually executed during the whole history of the Spanish Inquisition (Dedieu, p. 85; Perez, pp. 170–173.), perhaps around 3,000 (Monter, p. 53.).

^ García Fitz 2009 , p. 146 "Queda claro, pues, que el concepto de Reconquista, tal como surgió en el siglo XIX y se consolidó en la historiografía de la primera mitad del XX, se convirtió en uno de los principales mitos originarios alumbrados por el nacionalismo español. [It is clear, then, that the concept of Reconquista, as it emerged in the 19th century and was consolidated in the historiography of the first half of the 20th, became one of the principal origin myths illuminated by Spanish nationalism.]" ^ Federico., Ríos Saloma, Martín (2011).

La reconquista: una construcción historiográfica: siglos XVI–XIX . Marcial Pons Historia. p. 26.

ISBN 978-84-92820-47-4 .

OCLC 800884696 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Escalona, Julio; Viso, Iñaki Martín (2020).

"The Life and Death of an Historiographical Folly: The Early Medieval Depopulation and Repopulation of the Duero Basin" . In Barton, Simon; Portass, Robert (eds.).

Beyond the Reconquista: New Directions in the History of Medieval Iberia (711–1085) . Brill. p. 21.

ISBN 978-9004423879 .

^ a b García Sanjuán, Alejandro (2020).

"Weaponizing Historical Knowledge: the Notion of Reconquista in Spanish Nationalism" .

doi : 10.21001/itma.2020.14.04 .

hdl : 10272/19498 .

ISSN 1888-3931 .

S2CID 226491379 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Querol, Ricardo de (28 February 2020).

"There was no Reconquest. No military campaign lasts eight centuries' " .

El País English Edition . Retrieved 19 May 2022 .

^ "Vox reinvents history to claim 'Reconquista' of Spain | Francis Ghiles" .

AW . Retrieved 21 May 2022 .

^ Fletcher, Richard A. (1989).

The Quest for El Cid . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. pp.

166– 168, 198.

ISBN 978-0195069556 .

^ Holinshed, Raphael (1808) [1586] Holinshed's chronicles of England, Scotland and Ireland , Vol. 4 (England), Ellis, Sir H. (ed.), London : J. Johnson et al.

, 952 p.

^ Turpyn, Richard (1846).

The chronicle of Calais: in the reigns of Henry VII. and Henry VIII. to the year 1540 . British Library, Printed for the Camden Society by J.B. Nichols. p. 24 . Retrieved 5 February 2012 .

^ Larousse, Pierre (1960).

Grand Larousse encyclopédique . Librarire Larousse. p. 59.

^ Oto-Peralías, Daniel; Romero-Ávila, Diego (13 May 2016).

"The economic consequences of the Spanish Reconquest: the long-term effects of Medieval conquest and colonization" (PDF) .

Journal of Economic Growth .

21 (4): 409– 464.

doi : 10.1007/s10887-016-9132-9 .

hdl : 10023/10769 .

ISSN 1381-4338 .

S2CID 156897045 .

^ Bunes Ibarra 1995 , p. 18.

^ Bunes Ibarra 1995 , pp. 19–20.

^ Bunes Ibarra 1995 , pp. 16–17.

^ Bunes Ibarra 1995 , p. 17.

^ Bunes Ibarra 1995 , p. 14.

^ Bunes Ibarra, Miguel Ángel de (1995).

"La presencia española en el Norte de África: las diversas justificaciones de las conquistas en el Magreb" (PDF) .

Aldaba (25): 15, 23– 25.

ISSN 0213-7925 .

^ proficiscitur Hydruntum classis quam ex Portugallia accersivimus. … Speramus illam magno usui Hydruntine expugnationi futuram. … ^ Soucek, Svat (June 2013), "Piri Reis. His uniqueness among cartographers and hydrographers of the Renaissance" , in Vagnon, Emmanuelle; Hofmann, Catherine (eds.), Cartes marines : d'une technique à une culture. Actes du colloque du 3 décembre 2012.

, CFC, pp.

135– 144, archived from the original (PDF) on 27 June 2018 , retrieved 12 December 2019 ^ João Paulo de Oliveira e Costa, Vítor Luís Gaspar Rodrigues (2012) Campanhas de Afonso de Albuquerque: Conquista de Malaca, 1511 p. 13 Archived 18 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Years In Spain: Columbus Finds a Sponsor | Religious Studies Center" .

rsc.byu.edu . Retrieved 10 June 2024 .

^ Mikhail, Alan (17 December 2020).

"How the Specter of Islam Fueled European Colonization in the Americas" .

Literary Hub . Retrieved 10 June 2024 .

^ Hamdani, Abbas (1979).

"Columbus and the Recovery of Jerusalem" .

Journal of the American Oriental Society .

99 (1): 39– 48.

doi : 10.2307/598947 .

ISSN 0003-0279 .

JSTOR 598947 .

^ Silva, Tiago João Queimada e (2020). "The Reconquista revisited: mobilising medieval Iberian history in Spain, Portugal and beyond". In Horswell, Mike; Awan, Akil N. (eds.).

The Crusades in the Modern World .

Routledge . pp.

57– 65.

ISBN 978-1-138-06607-6 .

^ Bogerts, Lisa; Fielitz, Maik (2019).

" 'Do You Want Meme War?': Understanding the Visual Memes of the German Far Right" (PDF) . In Fielitz, Maik; Thurston, Nick (eds.).

Post-Digital Cultures of the Far Right: Online Actions and Offline Consequences in Europe and the US . transcript Verlag. p. 145.

doi : 10.14361/9783839446706-010 .

ISBN 978-3-8394-4670-6 .

S2CID 158818388 .

^ Šima, Karel (2021). "From Identity Politics to the Identitarian Movement. The Europeanisation of Cultural Stereotypes?".

National Stereotyping, Identity Politics, European Crises . Brill. pp.

75– 94.

doi : 10.1163/9789004436107_006 .

ISBN 978-90-04-43610-7 .

S2CID 236580880 .

^ a b García Sanjuan, Alejandro (3 April 2021).

"La manipulación del pasado por la ultraderecha y la reacción académica" .

eldiario.es .

^ "Así sonó 'El novio de la muerte' cantado por la Legión este 2 de enero en Granada" .

Ideal (in Spanish). 2 January 2020 . Retrieved 9 March 2022 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Barton, Simon.

Beyond the Reconquista: New Directions in the History of Medieval Iberia (711–1085) (2020) online Bishko, Charles Julian, 1975.

The Spanish and Portuguese Reconquest, 1095–1492 in A History of the Crusades, vol. 3: The Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries , edited by Harry W. Hazard, (University of Wisconsin Press) online edition Bradbury, Jim (2004).

The Routledge Companion to Medieval Warfare . Abingdon: Routledge. pp. 21, 314.

ISBN 978-1134598472 . Retrieved 6 April 2022 .

Brescó, Ignacio, and Floor van Alphen. "Chapter 4 – Reenacting the Reconquista Myth? Some Reflections on Moros y Cristianos Festivals in Spain" in Historical Reenactment (Berghahn, 2022) doi : 10.1515/9781800735415-006 Catlos, Brian A. (2018).

Kingdoms of Faith : A New History of Islamic Spain . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-05587-6 .

OCLC 1003304619 .

Collins, Roger (1989).

The Arab Conquest of Spain, 710–797 . Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 0-631-15923-1 .

Dedieu, Jean-Pierre (1987) L'Inquisition . Les Editions Fides Deyermond, Alan (1985). "The Death and Rebirth of Visigothic Spain in the Estoria de España ".

Revista Canadiense de Estudios Hispánicos .

9 (3): 345– 367.

Fábregas, Adela, ed. (2021).

The Nasrid kingdom of Granada between East and West : (thirteenth to fifteenth centuries) . Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-44234-4 .

Fletcher, R. A. "Reconquest and Crusade in Spain c. 1050–1150", Transactions of the Royal Historical Society 37, (1987). pp. 252–285.

doi : 10.2307/3679149 García Fitz, Francisco, Guerra y relaciones políticas. Castilla-León y los musulmanes, ss. XI–XIII , Universidad de Sevilla, 2002.

García Fitz, Francisco (2009).

"La Reconquista: un estado de la cuestión" (PDF) .

Clío & Crímen: Revista del Centro de Historia del Crimen de Durango (in Spanish) (6).

ISSN 1698-4374 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 April 2016 . Retrieved 12 December 2019 .

García Fitz, Francisco & Feliciano Novoa Portela Cruzados en la Reconquista , Madrid, 2014.

García-Sanjuán, Alejandro. "Rejecting al-Andalus, exalting the Reconquista: historical memory in contemporary Spain." Journal of Medieval Iberian Studies 10.1 (2018): 127–145.

online Hillgarth, J. N. (2009).

The Visigoths in History and Legend . Toronto: Pontifical Institute for Medieval Studies.

Kamen, Henry (2005).

Spain, 1469–1714: a society of conflict (3rd ed.). Harlow (GB) New York: Pearson/Longman.

ISBN 978-0-582-78464-2 .

Linehan, Peter.

History and the historians of medieval Spain (Oxford UP, 1993) pp. 95–127.

online Lomax, Derek William: The Reconquest of Spain.

Longman, London 1978.

ISBN 0-582-50209-8 Lopez, Cesar, Mario Carretero, and Maria Rodriguez-Moneo. "Conquest or reconquest? Students’ conceptions of nation embedded in a historical narrative." Journal of the Learning Sciences 24.2 (2015): 252–285.

[2] McKitterick, Rosamond, ed.

The New Cambridge Medieval History: Volume 2, c. 700–c. 900 (2015) Monter, William (1990).

Frontiers of Heresy. The Spanish Inquisition from the Basque Land to Sicily . Cambridge University Press Nicolle, David and Angus McBride.

El Cid and the Reconquista 1050–1492 (Men-At-Arms, No 200) (1988), focus on soldiers O'Callaghan, Joseph F.: Reconquest and Crusade in Medieval Spain (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2002), ISBN 0-8122-3696-3 O'Callaghan, Joseph F. (2014).

The Last Crusade in the West : Castile and the Conquest of Granada . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-0-8122-0935-8 .

Payne, Stanley, " The Emergence of Portugal ", in A History of Spain and Portugal : Volume One.

Perez, Joseph (2006) The Spanish Inquisition: A History , Yale University Press.

ISBN 0-300-11982-8 , ISBN 978-0-300-11982-4 Queimada e Silva, Tiago . "The Reconquista revisited: mobilising medieval Iberian history in Spain, Portugal and beyond."  in The Crusades in the Modern World (2019) pp: 57–74.

Reilly, Bernard F. (1993).

The Medieval Spains . Cambridge Medieval Textbooks. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-39741-3 .

Riley-Smith, Jonathan, The Atlas of the Crusades . Facts on File, Oxford (1991) Roth, Cecil. The Spanish Inquisition. (W.W Norton & Company, New York Press, 1964) Van Alphen, Floor, and Brady Wagoner. "Reconstructing the ‘Reconquista’: Students’ negotiation of a Spanish master narrative." Memory studies 16.5 (2023): 1156–1172.

online Villegas-Aristizábal, Lucas, 2013, "Revisiting the Anglo-Norman Crusaders' Failed Attempt to Conquer Lisbon c. 1142", Portuguese Studies 29:1, pp. 7–20.

JSTOR 10.5699/portstudies.29.1.0007 Villegas-Aristizábal, Lucas, 2009, " Anglo-Norman Involvement in the Conquest and Settlement of Tortosa, 1148–1180 ", Crusades 8, pp. 63–129.

Villegas-Aristizábal, Lucas, 2018, "Was the Portuguese Led Military Campaign against Alcácer do Sal in the Autumn of 1217 Part of the Fifth Crusade?" Al-Masāq 30:1 doi : 10.1080/09503110.2018.1542573 Watt, W. Montgomery: A History of Islamic Spain.

Edinburgh University Press (1992).

Watt, W. Montgomery: The Influence of Islam on Medieval Europe. (Edinburgh 1972).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Reconquista .

Islamic Spain and the Reconquista – Atlas and Article Forging a Unique Spanish Christian Identity: Santiago and El Cid in the Reconquista v t e History of Christianity Spread History of theology Historicity of the Bible List of martyrs Timeline Centuries 1st 2nd and 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st Early Christianity Origins and Apostolic Age Background Chronology of Jesus birth baptism ministry crucifixion resurrection Great Commission ascension historical Jesus Holy Spirit Apostles in the New Testament Jewish Christianity Split Paul the Apostle Council of Jerusalem Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period Diversity Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Donatism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Canon development Persecution Apostolic / Church Fathers Clement of Rome Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Tertullian Origen Great Church Early African Late antiquity Constantine Constantinian shift Roman state religion Monasticism Councils Nicaea I Creed Christianity Athanasius Jerome Augustine Constantinople I Ephesus I Chalcedon Chalcedonian / Non-Chalcedonian Biblical canon Catholicism ( Timeline ) Papacy Development of primacy Eastern Orthodox opposition Peace and Truce of God Crusading movement Lateran IV Art patronage of Julius II Leo X Counter-Reformation Trent Art Catholic Reformation Jesuits Xavier Thomas More Monastery dissolution Wars Mass rocks and priest holes Guadalupe Jansenists Molinists Neo-Scholasticism Teresa Modernism Independent Catholics Vatican I and Vatican II Ecclesial community Eastern Christianity Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Church of the East Chrysostom Nestorianism Icons Iconodulism Iconoclasm Great Schism Fall of Constantinople Armenia Georgia Greece Egypt Syriac Ethiopia Ottoman Empire Bulgaria Russia Serbia North America Middle Ages Pelagianism Gregory I Celtic Germanic Anglo-Saxon Franks Gothic Scandinavian Iceland Slavs Bohemia Bulgaria Kievan Rus' Moravia Poland Pomerania Investiture Anselm Abelard Bernard Bogomils Bosnian Cathars Apostolic Brethren Dulcinian Crusades Waldensians Inquisition Early Scholasticism Christian mysticism Dominic Francis Bonaventure Aquinas Five Ways Wycliffe Avignon Papal Schism Bohemian Reformation Hus Conciliarism Synods Reformation and Protestantism Erasmus Eucharist Calvinist–Arminian debate Arminianism Wars Resistance theories Separation of church and state Nicodemites Hymnody of continental Europe Formal and material principles Law and Gospel Literature Protestant work ethic Lutheranism Luther Ninety-five Theses Diet of Worms Theology Bible Melanchthon Book of Concord Orthodoxy Eucharist Art Calvinism Zwingli Calvin Huguenots Presbyterianism Scotland Knox TULIP Baptism Dort Three Forms of Unity Westminster Orthodoxy Metrical psalters Anglicanism ( Timeline ) Henry VIII Cranmer Elizabethan 39 Articles Puritans Civil War Church music Book of Common Prayer King James Version Anabaptism Theology Radical Reformation Grebel Swiss Brethren Müntzer Martyrs' Synod Menno Simons Smyth Martyrs Mirror Ausbund 1640–1789 Revivalism Missionaries timeline Baptists Separation of church and state Edicts of toleration Congregationalism First Great Awakening Methodism Millerism Pietism Fostering of early experimental science Neo- and Old Lutherans 1789–present Camp meeting Holiness movement Second Great Awakening Restorationists Jehovah's Witnesses Mormonism Seventh-day Adventist Adventism Oxford Movement Laestadianism Finnish Awakening Christian existentialism Third Great Awakening Azusa Revival Gospel music Fundamentalist – Modernist controversy Pacifism Ecumenism Five solae Jesus movement Pentecostalism Charismatics Liberation theology Reformed epistemology Fourth Great Awakening Evangelical and Mainline Protestants Christian right and left Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America v t e European Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Migration Period Decline of the Western Roman Empire Barbarian kingdoms Late antiquity Decline of Hellenistic religion Christianity in the Middle Ages Christianization Rise of Islam Papal States First Bulgarian Empire Frankish Empire Principality of Serbia Duchy of Croatia Kingdom of Croatia Anglo-Saxon England Viking Age Carolingian Empire Old Church Slavonic Rise of the Venetian Republic Civitas Schinesghe Kievan Rus' Growth of the Eastern Roman Empire Reconquista High Middle Ages Norman Conquest Holy Roman Empire Second Bulgarian Empire Georgian Empire Kingdom of Poland Croatia in personal union with Hungary Kingdom of Serbia Feudalism Rise of the Republic of Genoa Great Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Republic of Florence Scholasticism Capet–Plantagenet feud Monasticism Communalism Manorialism Medieval Warm Period Mongol invasion of Europe Kingdom of Portugal Late Middle Ages Hundred Years' War Wars of the Roses Hussite Wars Burgundy Milan France England Serbian Empire Castile Western Schism Fall of Constantinople Rise of the Ottoman Empire Swiss mercenaries Chivalry Renaissance Humanism Universities Crisis of the late Middle Ages Great Famine Little Ice Age Culture Agriculture Architecture Art Church and State Cuisine Crusading movement Dance Demography Domes Hastilude Household Hunting In popular culture Itinerant court Literature Medicine Minstrel Music Instruments Philosophy Poetry Science Slavery Technology Theatre Warfare Women Related Medieval anthropology Dark Ages Disability in the Middle Ages Basic topics list Land terms Medievalism Medieval reenactment Medieval studies Misconceptions Neo-medievalism Peasant Wars Post-classical history Timeline Historiography in the Middle Ages Medieval archaeology Portal Category WikiProject v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Colonization , decolonization , and separatism By region Exploration Americas Africa Asia Oceania Antarctica — World oceans Colonization and Imperialism List of empires Americas Antarctica Africa European colonies Asia Southeast Asia Oceania Extraterrestrial Decolonization and Anti-imperialism Sovereign states formation dates Americas in South America Africa Asia Europe Ottoman Spain Ukraine Oceania General topics Exploration Maritime history ( European ) Age of Discovery Colonization Antiquity — Imperialism Chartered companies Interventionism Colonialism Chronology History Empires Detribalization Settler colonialism wars Current: Non-self-governing Dependent Colonial empires in the modern era Overseas, major: British Dutch French German Italian Portuguese Spanish Overseas, minor: American Australian Austro-Hungarian Belgian Couronian (Polish-Lithuanian) Danish New Zealand Norwegian Swedish Mostly contiguous: American Chinese Japanese Ottoman Russian South African Decolonization and Separatism Independence Declaration Diplomatic recognition Facts on the ground Referendum Limited Namibia exception Non-recognition Partition Unilateral Nation-building Non-interventionism Political status Right to homeland Rebellion List Rump state Secession Self-determination League of Nations mandate Separatism Active Political parties Historical Sovereignty Special Committee on Decolonization Territorial integrity Wars of national liberation List Related concepts Anabaptism Analysis of European colonialism and colonization Endangered language Christianity and colonialism Criticisms of globalization Decolonization of knowledge Decolonization of public space Indigenous peoples Internal colonialism Neocolonialism Opposition to immigration Plantation Postcolonialism Settler Terra nullius Uncontacted peoples Zionism Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐5sfqt
Cached time: 20250817203513
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.060 seconds
Real time usage: 2.201 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 23258/1000000
Revision size: 137331/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 775181/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 48331/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 46/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 526977/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.226/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19369827/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1772.251      1 -total
 40.73%  721.818      2 Template:Reflist
 15.45%  273.841     49 Template:Cite_book
 14.46%  256.187     41 Template:Citation_needed
 12.38%  219.346     44 Template:Fix
 10.41%  184.574     43 Template:Cite_web
  9.41%  166.831     20 Template:Navbox
  7.69%  136.340     16 Template:Cite_journal
  7.38%  130.744      1 Template:Historiography
  7.27%  128.912      2 Template:Efn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26550:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817203513 and revision id 1306447955. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reconquista&oldid=1306447955 " Categories : Reconquista Christendom Christian terminology Crusades 1490s in Spain 1492 in Europe Christianity and law in the 15th century Anti-Islam sentiment in Spain History of Catholicism in Spain Military history of al-Andalus Crown of Aragon Wars involving the Republic of Genoa Wars involving the Kingdom of Castile Battles involving the Caliphate of Córdoba Military history of the Carolingian Empire Almohad Caliphate Wars of the Middle Ages Wars involving Portugal Decolonization Political terminology Military history of the Mediterranean Hidden categories: Pages with Spanish IPA Pages with Portuguese IPA Pages with Catalan IPA Pages with Basque IPA Pages with Aragonese IPA Pages with Occitan (post 1500) IPA Pages with French IPA Articles containing Arabic-language text CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: publisher location Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2023 Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) CS1 European Portuguese-language sources (pt-pt) CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from June 2023 Articles needing additional references from June 2021 All articles needing additional references Commons link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 20:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reconquista 85 languages Add topic

