Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Substance or Cartesian dualism 1.2 Emergent dualism 1.3 Thomistic dualism 1.4 Property dualism 1.5 Epiphenomenalism 1.6 Predicate dualism 2 Dualist views of mental causation Toggle Dualist views of mental causation subsection 2.1 Interactionism 2.2 Epiphenomenalism 2.3 Parallelism 2.4 Occasionalism 2.5 Kantianism 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Ancient Greek philosophy 3.2 From Neoplatonism to scholasticism 3.3 Descartes and his disciples 3.4 Recent 4 Arguments for dualism Toggle Arguments for dualism subsection 4.1 The subjective argument 4.2 The zombie argument 4.3 Special sciences argument 4.4 Argument from personal identity 4.5 Argument from reason 4.6 Cartesian arguments 5 Arguments against dualism Toggle Arguments against dualism subsection 5.1 Arguments from causal interaction 5.1.1 Replies 5.2 Argument from physics 5.2.1 Replies 5.3 Argument from brain damage 5.3.1 Replies 5.4 Argument from neuroscience 5.5 Argument from simplicity 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Mind–body dualism 33 languages العربية বাংলা Български Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latviešu Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Simple English سنڌي کوردی Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Mind-body dualism ) Philosophical theory Illustration of mind–body dualism by René Descartes . Inputs are passed by the sensory organs to the pineal gland , and from there to the immaterial spirit .

Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e In the philosophy of mind , mind–body dualism denotes either that mental phenomena are non-physical , [ 1 ] or that the mind and body are distinct and separable.

[ 2 ] Thus, it encompasses a set of views about the relationship between mind and matter, as well as between subject and object , and is contrasted with other positions, such as physicalism and enactivism , in the mind–body problem .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Aristotle shared Plato 's view of multiple souls and further elaborated a hierarchical arrangement, corresponding to the distinctive functions of plants, animals, and humans: a nutritive soul of growth and metabolism that all three share; a perceptive soul of pain, pleasure, and desire that only humans and other animals share; and the faculty of reason that is unique to humans only. In this view, a soul is the hylomorphic form of a viable organism, wherein each level of the hierarchy formally supervenes upon the substance of the preceding level. For Aristotle, the first two souls, based on the body, perish when the living organism dies, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] whereas there remains an immortal and perpetual intellective part of mind.

[ 5 ] For Plato, however, the soul was not dependent on the physical body; he believed in metempsychosis , the migration of the soul to a new physical body.

[ 6 ] It has been considered a form of reductionism by some philosophers, since it enables the tendency to ignore very big groups of variables by its assumed association with the mind or the body, and not for its real value when it comes to explaining or predicting a studied phenomenon.

[ 7 ] Dualism is closely associated with the thought of René Descartes (1641), who holds that the mind is a nonphysical—and therefore, non-spatial—substance. Descartes clearly identified the mind with consciousness and self-awareness and distinguished this from the physical brain as the seat of intelligence .

[ 8 ] Hence, he was the first documented Western philosopher to formulate the mind–body problem in the form in which it exists today.

[ 9 ] However, the theory of substance dualism has many advocates in contemporary philosophy such as Richard Swinburne , William Hasker, J. P. Moreland , E. J. Low, Charles Taliaferro , Seyyed Jaaber Mousavirad, and John Foster.

[ 10 ] Dualism is contrasted with various kinds of monism .

Substance dualism is contrasted with all forms of materialism , but property dualism may be considered a form of non-reductive physicalism .

Types [ edit ] Ontological dualism makes dual commitments about the nature of existence as it relates to mind and matter, and can be divided into three different types: Substance dualism asserts that mind and matter are fundamentally distinct kinds of foundations.

[ 1 ] Property dualism suggests that the ontological distinction lies in the differences between properties of mind and matter (as in emergentism ).

[ 1 ] Predicate dualism claims the irreducibility of mental predicates to physical predicates.

[ 1 ] Substance or Cartesian dualism [ edit ] Substance dualism asserts that mind and matter are fundamentally distinct kinds of foundations. There are different types of substance dualism. Most substance dualists hold the view that the mind and body are capable of causally affecting each other, known as interactionism .

[ 11 ] Notable defenders of substance dualism include John Foster , Stewart Goetz , Richard Swinburne and Charles Taliaferro .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Cartesian dualism, most famously defended by René Descartes , argues that there are two kinds of substances: mental and physical.

[ 8 ] [ 16 ] Descartes states that the mental can exist outside of the body, and the body cannot think. Substance dualism is important historically for having given rise to much thought regarding the famous mind–body problem . It is compatible with theologies which claim that immortal souls occupy an independent realm of existence distinct from that of the physical world.

[ 1 ] Cartesians tend to equate the soul to the mind.

[ 17 ] The Copernican Revolution and the scientific discoveries of the 17th century reinforced the belief that the scientific method was the unique way of knowledge. Bodies were seen as biological organisms to be studied in their constituent parts (materialism) by means of anatomy , physiology , biochemistry and physics (reductionism).

[ 18 ] Mind–body dualism remained the biomedical paradigm and model for the following three centuries.

[ 18 ] Emergent dualism [ edit ] Emergent dualism is a type of substance dualism that has been defended by William Hasker and Dean Zimmerman .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Emergent dualism asserts that mental substances come into existence when physical systems such as the brain reach a sufficient level of complexity.

[ 22 ] Hasker defines emergent dualism as: Human persons are not identical to any physical body, but consist of a physical body and a non-physical substantial soul, and (b) the human soul is naturally
emergent from and dependent on the structure and function of a living human brain and nervous system.

[ 23 ] Hasker has argued that emergent dualism is consistent with neuroscientific discoveries showing the dependence of mind on brain.

[ 20 ] [ 24 ] He likens the individual mind to a magnetic field in its qualitative difference from the physical properties that generate it and also in its ability to act on the brain that generates it.

[ 20 ] Consciousness is said to arise when the brain reaches a certain threshold level of organizational complexity and when properly organized gives rise to the soul.

[ 25 ] Thomistic dualism [ edit ] Thomistic dualism is a type of dualism derived from the views of Thomas Aquinas .

[ 26 ] Edward Feser has written that: Aristotelians and Thomists (those philosophers whose views are derived from St.Thomas Aquinas) sometimes suggest that their hylomorphic position is no more a version of dualism than it is of materialism. But though their view is not a Cartesian form of dualism, it is clear from a consideration of how the human soul differs from the souls of plants and animals (at least on the Thomistic variation of hylomorphism) that the view does amount to a kind of dualism: Thomistic dualism or hylomorphic dualism, as it has variously been called.

[ 26 ] Thomistic substance dualism has been defended by J. P. Moreland and Scott B. Rae .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Thomistic substance dualism distinguishes itself from Cartesian substance dualism by denying that the body and soul are different substances. Instead, a person is composed of only one substance, the soul, while the body is considered an ensouled physical structure.

[ 28 ] J. P. Moreland has commented: Thomistic substance dualism is not a dualism of two separable substances. There is only one substance, though I do not identify it with the body/soul composite. Rather, I take the one substance to be the soul, and the body to be an ensouled biological and physical structure that depends on the soul for its existence.

[ 17 ] Eleonore Stump has suggested that Thomas Aquinas 's views on matter and the soul are difficult to define in contemporary discussion but he would fit the criteria as a non-Cartesian substance dualist.

[ 29 ] Other terms for Thomistic dualism include hylomorphic dualism or Thomistic hylomorphism which are contrasted with substance dualism.

[ 26 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Hylomorphism is distinct from substance dualism as it holds the view that the immaterial (form) and material (matter) are not distinct substances and only share an efficient causality.

[ 26 ] Thomistic scholars such as Paul Chutikorn and Edward Feser have written that Aquinas was not a substance dualist.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Edward Feser who has defended hylomorphic dualism has suggested that it has advantages over substance dualism such as offering a possible solution to the interaction problem.

[ 26 ] Paul Chutikorn has commented that "adopting Aquinas' view of substance will provide a solution to the problem by avoiding altogether the position that man is made up of dual substances. Rather, Aquinas shows us that we can acknowledge a duality within substance itself, while maintaining its inherent substantial unity".

[ 32 ] Aristotelian hylomorphic dualism also has many similarities with Thomistic dualism.

[ 34 ] Michael Egnor is a notable advocate of Aristotelian dualism.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Property dualism [ edit ] Main article: Property dualism Property dualism asserts that an ontological distinction lies in the differences between properties of mind and matter, and that consciousness may be ontologically irreducible to neurobiology and physics. It asserts that when matter is organized in the appropriate way (i.e., in the way that living human bodies are organized), mental properties emerge. Hence, it is a sub-branch of emergent materialism . What views properly fall under the property dualism rubric is itself a matter of dispute. There are different versions of property dualism, some of which claim independent categorisation.

[ 37 ] Non-reductive physicalism is a form of property dualism in which it is asserted that all mental states are causally reducible to physical states. One argument for this has been made in the form of anomalous monism expressed by Donald Davidson , where it is argued that mental events are identical to physical events, however, strict law-governed causal relationships cannot describe relations of mental events. Another argument for this has been expressed by John Searle , who is the advocate of a distinctive form of physicalism he calls biological naturalism . His view is that although mental states are ontologically irreducible to physical states, they are causally reducible . He has acknowledged that "to many people" his views and those of property dualists look a lot alike, but he thinks the comparison is misleading.

[ 37 ] Epiphenomenalism [ edit ] Main article: Epiphenomenalism Epiphenomenalism is a form of property dualism, in which it is asserted that one or more mental states do not have any influence on physical states (both ontologically and causally irreducible). It asserts that while material causes give rise to sensations , volitions , ideas , etc., such mental phenomena themselves cause nothing further: they are causal dead-ends. This can be contrasted to interactionism , on the other hand, in which mental causes can produce material effects, and vice versa.

[ 38 ] Predicate dualism [ edit ] Predicate dualism is a view espoused by such non-reductive physicalists as Donald Davidson and Jerry Fodor , who maintain that while there is only one ontological category of substances and properties of substances (usually physical), the predicates that we use to describe mental events cannot be redescribed in terms of (or reduced to) physical predicates of natural languages.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Predicate dualism is most easily defined as the negation of predicate monism .

Predicate monism can be characterized as the view subscribed to by eliminative materialists , who maintain that such intentional predicates as believe , desire , think , feel , etc., will eventually be eliminated from both the language of science and from ordinary language because the entities to which they refer do not exist. Predicate dualists believe that so-called " folk psychology ," with all of its propositional attitude ascriptions, is an ineliminable part of the enterprise of describing, explaining, and understanding human mental states and behavior.

For example, Davidson subscribes to anomalous monism , according to which there can be no strict psychophysical laws which connect mental and physical events under their descriptions as mental and physical events. However, all mental events also have physical descriptions. It is in terms of the latter that such events can be connected in law-like relations with other physical events. Mental predicates are irreducibly different in character (rational, holistic, and necessary) from physical predicates (contingent, atomic, and causal).

[ 39 ] Dualist views of mental causation [ edit ] Four varieties of dualist causal interaction. The arrows indicate the direction of causations. Mental and physical states are shown in red and blue, respectively.

This part is about causation between properties and states of the thing under study, not its substances or predicates. Here a state is the set of all properties of what's being studied. Thus each state describes only one point in time.

Interactionism [ edit ] Main article: Interactionism (philosophy of mind) Interactionism is the view that mental states, such as beliefs and desires, causally interact with physical states. This is a position which is very appealing to common-sense intuitions, notwithstanding the fact that it is very difficult to establish its validity or correctness by way of logical argumentation or empirical proof. It seems to appeal to common-sense because we are surrounded by such everyday occurrences as a child's touching a hot stove (physical event) which causes him to feel pain (mental event) and then yell and scream (physical event) which causes his parents to experience a sensation of fear and protectiveness (mental event) and so on.

[ 8 ] Epiphenomenalism [ edit ] Main article: Epiphenomenalism Epiphenomenalism states that all mental events are caused by a physical event and have no physical consequences, and that one or more mental states do not have any influence on physical states. So, the mental event of deciding to pick up a rock (" M1 ") is caused by the firing of specific neurons in the brain (" P1 "). When the arm and hand move to pick up the rock (" P2 ") this is not caused by the preceding mental event M1 , nor by M1 and P1 together, but only by P1 . The physical causes are in principle reducible to fundamental physics, and therefore mental causes are eliminated using this reductionist explanation. If P1 causes both M1 and P2 , there is no overdetermination in the explanation for P2 .

[ 8 ] The idea that even if the animal were conscious nothing would be added to the production of behavior, even in animals of the human type, was first voiced by La Mettrie (1745), and then by Cabanis (1802), and was further explicated by Hodgson (1870) and Huxley (1874).

[ 41 ] Jackson gave a subjective argument for epiphenomenalism, but later rejected it and embraced physicalism .

[ 42 ] Parallelism [ edit ] Main article: Psychophysical parallelism Psychophysical parallelism is a very unusual view about the interaction between mental and physical events which was most prominently, and perhaps only truly, advocated by Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz . Like Malebranche and others before him, Leibniz recognized the weaknesses of Descartes' account of causal interaction taking place in a physical location in the brain. Malebranche decided that such a material basis of interaction between material and immaterial was impossible and therefore formulated his doctrine of occasionalism , stating that the interactions were really caused by the intervention of God on each individual occasion. Leibniz's idea is that God has created a pre-established harmony such that it only seems as if physical and mental events cause, and are caused by, one another. In reality, mental causes only have mental effects and physical causes only have physical effects. Hence, the term parallelism is used to describe this view.

[ 38 ] Occasionalism [ edit ] Main article: Occasionalism Occasionalism is a philosophical doctrine about causation which says that created substances cannot be efficient causes of events. Instead, all events are taken to be caused directly by God itself. The theory states that the illusion of efficient causation between mundane events arises out of a constant conjunction that God had instituted, such that every instance where the cause is present will constitute an "occasion" for the effect to occur as an expression of the aforementioned power. This "occasioning" relation, however, falls short of efficient causation. In this view, it is not the case that the first event causes God to cause the second event: rather, God first caused one and then caused the other, but chose to regulate such behaviour in accordance with general laws of nature. Some of its most prominent historical exponents have been Al-Ghazali , Louis de la Forge , Arnold Geulincx , and Nicolas Malebranche .

[ 43 ] Kantianism [ edit ] Main article: Kantianism According to the philosophy of Immanuel Kant , there is a distinction between actions done by desire and those performed by reason in liberty ( categorical imperative ). Thus, not all physical actions are caused either by matter alone or by freedom alone. Some actions are purely animal in nature, while others are the result of mind's free action on matter.

History [ edit ] Ancient Greek philosophy [ edit ] Hermotimus of Clazomenae (fl. c. 6th century BCE) was a philosopher who first proposed the idea of mind being fundamental in the cause of change.

[ 44 ] He proposed that physical entities are static, while reason [ 45 ] causes the change.

Sextus Empiricus places him with Hesiod , Parmenides , and Empedocles , as belonging to the class of philosophers who held a dualistic theory of a material and an active principle being together the origin of the universe.

[ 46 ] Similar ideas were expounded by Anaxagoras .

In the dialogue Phaedo , Plato formulated his famous Theory of forms as distinct and immaterial substances of which the objects and other phenomena that we perceive in the world are nothing more than mere shadows.

[ 6 ] In the Phaedo , Plato makes it clear that the Forms are the universalia ante res , i.e. they are ideal universals, by which we are able to understand the world. In his allegory of the cave , Plato likens the achievement of philosophical understanding to emerging into the sunlight from a dark cave, where only vague shadows of what lies beyond that prison are cast dimly upon the wall. Plato's forms are non-physical and non-mental. They exist nowhere in time or space, but neither do they exist in the mind, nor in the pleroma of matter; rather, matter is said to "participate" in form (μεθεξις, methexis ). It remained unclear however, even to Aristotle, exactly what Plato intended by that.

Aristotle argued at length against many aspects of Plato's forms, creating his own doctrine of hylomorphism wherein form and matter coexist. Ultimately however, Aristotle's aim was to perfect a theory of forms, rather than to reject it. Although Aristotle strongly rejected the independent existence Plato attributed to forms, his metaphysics do agree with Plato's a priori considerations quite often. For example, Aristotle argues that changeless, eternal substantial form is necessarily immaterial. Because matter provides a stable substratum for a change in form, matter always has the potential to change. Thus, if given an eternity in which to do so, it will , necessarily, exercise that potential.

Part of Aristotle's psychology , the study of the soul, is his account of the ability of humans to reason and the ability of animals to perceive. In both cases, perfect copies of forms are acquired, either by direct impression of environmental forms, in the case of perception, or else by virtue of contemplation, understanding and recollection. He believed the mind can literally assume any form being contemplated or experienced, and it was unique in its ability to become a blank slate, having no essential form. As thoughts of earth are not heavy, any more than thoughts of fire are causally efficient, they provide an immaterial complement for the formless mind.

[ 3 ] From Neoplatonism to scholasticism [ edit ] The philosophical school of Neoplatonism , most active in Late Antiquity, claimed that the physical and the spiritual are both emanations of the One . Neoplatonism exerted a considerable influence on Christianity, as did the philosophy of Aristotle via scholasticism .

[ 47 ] In the scholastic tradition of Saint Thomas Aquinas , a number of whose doctrines have been incorporated into Roman Catholic dogma , the soul is the substantial form of a human being.

[ 48 ] Aquinas held the Quaestiones disputate de anima , or 'Disputed questions on the soul', at the Roman studium provinciale of the Dominican Order at Santa Sabina , the forerunner of the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum during the academic year 1265–1266.

[ 49 ] By 1268 Aquinas had written at least the first book of the Sententia Libri De anima , Aquinas' commentary on Aristotle's De anima , the translation of which from the Greek was completed by Aquinas' Dominican associate at Viterbo , William of Moerbeke in 1267.

[ 50 ] Like Aristotle, Aquinas held that the human being was a unified composite substance of two substantial principles: form and matter. The soul is the substantial form and so the first actuality of a material organic body with the potentiality for life.

[ 51 ] While Aquinas defended the unity of human nature as a composite substance constituted by these two inextricable principles of form and matter, he also argued for the incorruptibility of the intellectual soul, [ 48 ] in contrast to the corruptibility of the vegetative and sensitive animation of plants and animals.

[ 48 ] His argument for the subsistence and incorruptibility of the intellectual soul takes its point of departure from the metaphysical principle that operation follows upon being ( agiture sequitur esse ), i.e., the activity of a thing reveals the mode of being and existence it depends upon. Since the intellectual soul exercises its own per se intellectual operations without employing material faculties, i.e. intellectual operations are immaterial, the intellect itself and the intellectual soul, must likewise be immaterial and so incorruptible. Even though the intellectual soul of man is able to subsist upon the death of the human being, Aquinas does not hold that the human person is able to remain integrated at death. The separated intellectual soul is neither a man nor a human person. The intellectual soul by itself is not a human person (i.e., an individual supposit of a rational nature).

[ 52 ] Hence, Aquinas held that "soul of St. Peter pray for us" would be more appropriate than "St. Peter pray for us", because all things connected with his person, including memories, ended with his corporeal life.

[ 53 ] The Catholic doctrine of the resurrection of the body does not subscribe that, sees body and soul as forming a whole and states that at the second coming , the souls of the departed will be reunited with their bodies as a whole person (substance) and witness to the apocalypse . The thorough consistency between dogma and contemporary science was maintained here [ 54 ] in part from a serious attendance to the principle that there can be only one truth. Consistency with science, logic, philosophy, and faith remained a high priority for centuries, and a university doctorate in theology generally included the entire science curriculum as a prerequisite. This doctrine is not universally accepted by Christians today. Many believe that one's immortal soul goes directly to Heaven upon death of the body.

[ 55 ] Descartes and his disciples [ edit ] In his Meditations on First Philosophy , René Descartes embarked upon a quest in which he called all his previous beliefs into doubt, to find out what he could be certain of.

[ 9 ] In so doing, he discovered that he could doubt whether he had a body (it could be that he was dreaming of it or that it was an illusion created by an evil demon), but he could not doubt whether he had a mind. This gave Descartes his first inkling that the mind and body were different things. The mind, according to Descartes, was a "thinking thing" ( Latin : res cogitans ), and an immaterial substance . This "thing" was the essence of himself, that which doubts, believes, hopes, and thinks. The body, "the thing that exists" ( res extensa ), regulates normal bodily functions (such as heart and liver). According to Descartes, animals only had a body and not a soul (which distinguishes humans from animals). The distinction between mind and body is argued in Meditation VI as follows: I have a clear and distinct idea of myself as a thinking, non-extended thing, and a clear and distinct idea of body as an extended and non-thinking thing. Whatever I can conceive clearly and distinctly, God can so create.

The central claim of what is often called Cartesian dualism , in honor of Descartes, is that the immaterial mind and the material body, while being ontologically distinct substances, causally interact. This is an idea that continues to feature prominently in many non-European philosophies. Mental events cause physical events, and vice versa. But this leads to a substantial problem for Cartesian dualism: How can an immaterial mind cause anything in a material body, and vice versa? This has often been called the "problem of interactionism." Descartes himself struggled to come up with a feasible answer to this problem. In his letter to Elisabeth of Bohemia, Princess Palatine , he suggested that spirits interacted with the body through the pineal gland , a small gland in the centre of the brain, between the two hemispheres .

[ 9 ] The term Cartesian dualism is also often associated with this more specific notion of causal interaction through the pineal gland. However, this explanation was not satisfactory: how can an immaterial mind interact with the physical pineal gland? Because Descartes' was such a difficult theory to defend, some of his disciples, such as Arnold Geulincx and Nicolas Malebranche , proposed a different explanation: That all mind–body interactions required the direct intervention of God. According to these philosophers, the appropriate states of mind and body were only the occasions for such intervention, not real causes. These occasionalists maintained the strong thesis that all causation was directly dependent on God, instead of holding that all causation was natural except for that between mind and body.

[ 43 ] Recent [ edit ] In addition to already discussed theories of dualism (particularly the Christian and Cartesian models) there are new theories in the defense of dualism.

Naturalistic dualism comes from Australian philosopher, David Chalmers (born 1966) who argues there is an explanatory gap between objective and subjective experience that cannot be bridged by reductionism because consciousness is, at least, logically autonomous of the physical properties upon which it supervenes. According to Chalmers, a naturalistic account of property dualism requires a new fundamental category of properties described by new laws of supervenience ; the challenge being analogous to that of understanding electricity based on the mechanistic and Newtonian models of materialism prior to Maxwell's equations .

A similar defense comes from Australian philosopher Frank Jackson (born 1943) who revived the theory of epiphenomenalism which argues that mental states do not play a role in physical states. Jackson argues that there are two kinds of dualism: substance dualism that assumes there is second, non-corporeal form of reality. In this form, body and soul are two different substances.

property dualism that says that body and soul are different properties of the same body.

He claims that functions of the mind/soul are internal, very private experiences that are not accessible to observation by others, and therefore not accessible by science (at least not yet). We can know everything, for example, about a bat's facility for echolocation, but we will never know how the bat experiences that phenomenon.

In 2018, The Blackwell Companion to Substance Dualism was published that contains arguments for and against Cartesian dualism, emergent dualism, Thomistic dualism, emergent individualism and nonreductive physicalism.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Contributors include Charles Taliaferro , Edward Feser, William Hasker, J. P. Moreland, Richard Swinburne, Lynne Rudder Baker , John W. Cooper and Timothy O'Connor.

[ 56 ] Arguments for dualism [ edit ] Another one of Descartes' illustrations. The fire displaces the skin, which pulls a tiny thread, which opens a pore in the ventricle (F) allowing the "animal spirit" to flow through a hollow tube, which inflates the muscle of the leg, causing the foot to withdraw.

The subjective argument [ edit ] An important fact is that minds perceive intra-mental states differently from sensory phenomena, [ 58 ] and this cognitive difference results in mental and physical phenomena having seemingly disparate properties. The subjective argument holds that these properties are irreconcilable under a physical mind.

Mental events have a certain subjective quality to them, whereas physical ones seem not to. So, for example, one may ask what a burned finger feels like, or what the blueness of the sky looks like, or what nice music sounds like.

[ 59 ] Philosophers of mind call the subjective aspects of mental events qualia .

There is something that it's like to feel pain, to see a familiar shade of blue, and so on. There are qualia involved in these mental events. And the claim is that qualia cannot be reduced to anything physical.

[ 1 ] Thomas Nagel first characterized the problem of qualia for physicalistic monism in his article, " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

". Nagel argued that even if we knew everything there was to know from a third-person, scientific perspective about a bat's sonar system, we still wouldn't know what it is like to be a bat. However, others argue that qualia are consequent of the same neurological processes that engender the bat's mind, and will be fully understood as the science develops.

[ 60 ] Frank Jackson formulated his well-known knowledge argument based upon similar considerations. In this thought experiment , known as Mary's room , he asks us to consider a neuroscientist, Mary, who was born, and has lived all of her life, in a black and white room with a black and white television and computer monitor where she collects all the scientific data she possibly can on the nature of colours. Jackson asserts that as soon as Mary leaves the room, she will come to have new knowledge which she did not possess before: the knowledge of the experience of colours (i.e., what they are like). Although Mary knows everything there is to know about colours from an objective, third-person perspective, she has never known, according to Jackson, what it was like to see red, orange, or green. If Mary really learns something new, it must be knowledge of something non-physical, since she already knew everything about the physical aspects of colour.

[ 61 ] However, Jackson later rejected his argument and embraced physicalism .

[ 62 ] He notes that Mary obtains knowledge not of color, but of a new intramental state, seeing color .

[ 42 ] Also, he notes that Mary might say "wow," and as a mental state affecting the physical, this clashed with his former view of epiphenomenalism .

David Lewis ' response to this argument, now known as the ability argument, is that what Mary really came to know was simply the ability to recognize and identify color sensations to which she had previously not been exposed.

[ 63 ] Daniel Dennett and others also provide arguments against this notion .

The zombie argument [ edit ] Main article: Philosophical zombie See also: Chinese room and Knowledge argument The zombie argument is based on a thought experiment proposed by David Chalmers over the issue of qualia or the hard problem of consciousness . The basic idea is that one can imagine, and, therefore, conceive the existence of, an apparently functioning human being/body without any conscious states being associated with it.

Chalmers' argument is that it seems plausible that such a being could exist because all that is needed is that all and only the things that the physical sciences describe and observe about a human being must be true of the zombie. None of the concepts involved in these sciences make reference to consciousness or other mental phenomena, and any physical entity can be described scientifically via physics whether it is conscious or not. The mere logical possibility of a p-zombie demonstrates that consciousness is a natural phenomenon beyond the current unsatisfactory explanations. Chalmers states that one probably could not build a living p-zombie because living things seem to require a level of consciousness. However (unconscious?) robots built to simulate humans may become the first real p-zombies. Hence Chalmers half-joking calls for the need to build a "consciousness meter" to ascertain if any given entity, human or robot, is conscious or not.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Others such as Dennett have argued that the notion of a philosophical zombie is an incoherent, [ 66 ] or unlikely, [ 67 ] concept. In particular, nothing proves that an entity (e.g., a computer or robot) which would perfectly mimic human beings, and especially perfectly mimic expressions of feelings (like joy, fear, anger, ...), would not indeed experience them, thus having similar states of consciousness to what a real human would have. It is argued that under physicalism , one must either believe that anyone including oneself might be a zombie, or that no one can be a zombie—following from the assertion that one's own conviction about being (or not being) a zombie is a product of the physical world and is therefore no different from anyone else's.

Avshalom Elitzur has described himself as a "reluctant dualist". One argument Elitzur makes in favor of dualism is an argument from bafflement. According to Elitzur, a conscious being can conceive of a P-zombie version of his/herself. However, a P-zombie cannot conceive of a version of itself that lacks corresponding qualia.

[ 68 ] Special sciences argument [ edit ] Howard Robinson argues that, if predicate dualism is correct, then there are "special sciences" that are irreducible to physics. These allegedly irreducible subjects, which contain irreducible predicates, differ from hard sciences in that they are interest-relative. Here, interest-relative fields depend on the existence of minds that can have interested perspectives.

[ 38 ] Psychology is one such science; it completely depends on and presupposes the existence of the mind.

Physics is the general analysis of nature , conducted to understand how the universe behaves. On the other hand, the study of meteorological weather patterns or human behavior is only of interest to humans themselves. The point is that having a perspective on the world is a psychological state. Therefore, the special sciences presuppose the existence of minds which can have these states. If one is to avoid ontological dualism, then the mind that has a perspective must be part of the physical reality to which it applies its perspective. If this is the case, then to perceive the physical world as psychological, the mind must have a perspective on the physical. This, in turn, presupposes the existence of mind.

[ 38 ] However, cognitive science [ 69 ] and psychology [ 70 ] do not require the mind to be irreducible, and operate on the assumption that it has physical basis. In fact, it is common in science to presuppose a complex system; [ 71 ] while fields such as chemistry , [ 72 ] biology , [ 73 ] or geology [ 74 ] could be verbosely expressed in terms of quantum field theory , it is convenient to use levels of abstraction like molecules , cells , or the mantle . It is often difficult to decompose these levels without heavy analysis [ 75 ] and computation.

[ 76 ] Sober has also advanced philosophical arguments against the notion of irreducibility.

[ 77 ] Argument from personal identity [ edit ] This argument concerns the differences between the applicability of counterfactual conditionals to physical objects, on the one hand, and to conscious, personal agents on the other.

[ 78 ] In the case of any material object, e.g. a printer, we can formulate a series of counterfactuals in the following manner: This printer could have been made of straw.

This printer could have been made of some other kind of plastics and vacuum-tube transistors.

This printer could have been made of 95% of what it is actually made of and 5% vacuum-tube transistors, etc..

Somewhere along the way from the printer's being made up exactly of the parts and materials which actually constitute it to the printer's being made up of some different matter at, say, 20%, the question of whether this printer is the same printer becomes a matter of arbitrary convention.

Imagine the case of a person, Frederick, who has a counterpart born from the same egg and a slightly genetically modified sperm . Imagine a series of counterfactual cases corresponding to the examples applied to the printer. Somewhere along the way, one is no longer sure about the identity of Frederick. In this latter case, it has been claimed, overlap of constitution cannot be applied to the identity of mind. As Madell puts it: [ 78 ] But while my present body can thus have its partial counterpart in some possible world, my present consciousness cannot. Any present state of consciousness that I can imagine either is or is not mine. There is no question of degree here.

If the counterpart of Frederick, Frederickus, is 70% constituted of the same physical substance as Frederick, does this mean that it is also 70% mentally identical with Frederick? Does it make sense to say that something is mentally 70% Frederick?

[ 79 ] A possible solution to this dilemma is that of open individualism .

Richard Swinburne , in his book The Existence of God , put forward an argument for mind-body dualism based upon personal identity. He states that the brain is composed of two hemispheres and a cord linking the two and that, as modern science has shown, either of these can be removed without the person losing any memories or mental capacities.

He then cites a thought-experiment for the reader, asking what would happen if each of the two hemispheres of one person were placed inside two different people. Either, Swinburne claims, one of the two is me or neither is—and there is no way of telling which, as each will have similar memories and mental capacities to the other. In fact, Swinburne claims, even if one's mental capacities and memories are far more similar to the original person than the others' are, they still may not be him.

From here, he deduces that even if we know what has happened to every single atom inside a person's brain, we still do not know what has happened to 'them' as an identity. From here it follows that a part of our mind, or our soul, is immaterial, and, as a consequence, that mind-body dualism is true.

[ 80 ] Christian List argues that Benj Hellie's vertiginous question , i.e. why people exist as themselves and not as someone else, and the existence of first-personal facts, are a refutation of physicalist philosophies of consciousness. List argues that first personal facts cannot supervene on third personal facts. However, List also argues that this also refutes standard versions of mind-body dualism that have purely third-personal metaphysics.

[ 81 ] Argument from reason [ edit ] Main article: Argument from reason Philosophers and scientists such as Victor Reppert , William Hasker , and Alvin Plantinga have developed an argument for dualism dubbed the "argument from reason". They credit C. S. Lewis with first bringing the argument to light in his book Miracles ; Lewis called the argument "The Cardinal Difficulty of Naturalism", which was the title of chapter three of Miracles .

[ 82 ] The argument postulates that if, as naturalism entails, all of our thoughts are the effect of a physical cause, then we have no reason for assuming that they are also the consequent of a reasonable ground. However, knowledge is apprehended by reasoning from ground to consequent. Therefore, if naturalism were true, there would be no way of knowing it (or anything else), except by a fluke.

[ 82 ] Through this logic, the statement "I have reason to believe naturalism is valid" is inconsistent in the same manner as "I never tell the truth." [ 83 ] That is, to conclude its truth would eliminate the grounds from which to reach it. To summarize the argument in the book, Lewis quotes J. B. S. Haldane , who appeals to a similar line of reasoning: [ 84 ] If my mental processes are determined wholly by the motions of atoms in my brain, I have no reason to suppose that my beliefs are true...and hence I have no reason for supposing my brain to be composed of atoms.

— J. B. S. Haldane, Possible Worlds , p. 209 In his essay "Is Theology Poetry?", Lewis himself summarises the argument in a similar fashion when he writes: If minds are wholly dependent on brains, and brains on biochemistry, and biochemistry (in the long run) on the meaningless flux of the atoms, I cannot understand how the thought of those minds should have any more significance than the sound of the wind in the trees.

— C. S. Lewis, The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses , p. 139 But Lewis later agreed with Elizabeth Anscombe 's response to his Miracles argument.

[ 85 ] She showed that an argument could be valid and ground-consequent even if its propositions were generated via physical cause and effect by non-rational factors.

[ 86 ] Similar to Anscombe, Richard Carrier and John Beversluis have written extensive objections to the argument from reason on the untenability of its first postulate.

[ 87 ] Cartesian arguments [ edit ] Main article: Meditations on the First Philosophy Descartes puts forward two main arguments for dualism in Meditations : firstly, the "modal argument," or the "clear and distinct perception argument," and secondly the "indivisibility" or "divisibility" argument.

Summary of the 'modal argument' [ 88 ] It is imaginable that one's mind might exist without one's body.

therefore It is conceivable that one's mind might exist without one's body.

therefore It is possible one's mind might exist without one's body.

therefore One's mind is a different entity from one's body.

The argument is distinguished from the Zombie Argument as it establishes that the mind could continue to exist without the body, rather than that the unaltered body could exist without the mind.

[ 89 ] Alvin Plantinga , [ 90 ] J. P. Moreland , [ 91 ] and Edward Feser [ 92 ] have both supported the argument, although Feser and Moreland think that it must be carefully reformulated to be effective.

The indivisibility argument for dualism was phrased by Descartes as follows: [ 93 ] [T]here is a great difference between a mind and a body, because the body, by its very nature, is something divisible, whereas the mind is plainly indivisible...insofar as I am only a thing that thinks, I cannot distinguish any parts in me.... Although the whole mind seems to be united to the whole body, nevertheless, were a foot or an arm or any other bodily part amputated, I know that nothing would be taken away from the mind...

The argument relies upon Leibniz ' principle of the identity of indiscernibles , which states that two things are the same if and only if they share all their properties. A counterargument is the idea that matter is not infinitely divisible, and thus that the mind could be identified with material things that cannot be divided, or potentially Leibnizian monads .

[ 94 ] Arguments against dualism [ edit ] Arguments from causal interaction [ edit ] Cartesian dualism compared to three forms of monism One argument against dualism is with regard to causal interaction. If consciousness ( the mind ) can exist independently of physical reality ( the brain ), one must explain how physical memories are created concerning consciousness. Dualism must therefore explain how consciousness affects physical reality. One of the main objections to dualistic interactionism is lack of explanation of how the material and immaterial are able to interact. Varieties of dualism according to which an immaterial mind causally affects the material body and vice versa have come under strenuous attack from different quarters, especially in the 20th century. Critics of dualism have often asked how something totally immaterial can affect something totally material—this is the basic problem of causal interaction .

First, it is not clear where the interaction would take place. For example, burning one's finger causes pain. Apparently there is some chain of events, leading from the burning of skin, to the stimulation of nerve endings, to something happening in the peripheral nerves of one's body that lead to one's brain, to something happening in a particular part of one's brain, and finally resulting in the sensation of pain. But pain is not supposed to be spatially locatable. It might be responded that the pain "takes place in the brain." But evidently, the pain is in the finger. This may not be a devastating criticism.

However, there is a second problem about the interaction. Namely, the question of how the interaction takes place, where in dualism "the mind" is assumed to be non-physical and by definition outside of the realm of science. The mechanism which explains the connection between the mental and the physical would therefore be a philosophical proposition as compared to a scientific theory. For example, compare such a mechanism to a physical mechanism that is well understood. Take a very simple causal relation, such as when a cue ball strikes an eight ball and causes it to go into the pocket. What happens in this case is that the cue ball has a certain amount of momentum as its mass moves across the pool table with a certain velocity, and then that momentum is transferred to the eight ball, which then heads toward the pocket. Compare this to the situation in the brain, where one wants to say that a decision causes some neurons to fire and thus causes a body to move across the room. The intention to "cross the room now" is a mental event and, as such, it does not have physical properties such as force. If it has no force, then it would seem that it could not possibly cause any neuron to fire. However, with Dualism, an explanation is required of how something without any physical properties has physical effects .

[ 95 ] Replies [ edit ] Alfred North Whitehead , and later David Ray Griffin , framed a new ontology ( process philosophy ) seeking precisely to avoid the pitfalls of ontological dualism.

[ 96 ] The explanation provided by Arnold Geulincx and Nicolas Malebranche is that of occasionalism , where all mind–body interactions require the direct intervention of God.

At the time C. S. Lewis wrote Miracles , [ 97 ] quantum mechanics (and physical indeterminism ) was only in the initial stages of acceptance, but still Lewis stated the logical possibility that, if the physical world was proved to be indeterministic, this would provide an entry (interaction) point into the traditionally viewed closed system, where a scientifically described physically probable/improbable event could be philosophically described as an action of a non-physical entity on physical reality. He states, however, that none of the arguments in his book will rely on this. Although some interpretations of quantum mechanics consider wave function collapse to be indeterminate, in others this event is defined as deterministic.

[ 98 ] Argument from physics [ edit ] The argument from physics is closely related to the argument from causal interaction. Many physicists and consciousness researchers have argued that any action of a nonphysical mind on the brain would entail the violation of physical laws, such as the conservation of energy .

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 102 ] By assuming a deterministic physical universe, the objection can be formulated more precisely. When a person decides to walk across a room, it is generally understood that the decision to do so, a mental event, immediately causes a group of neurons in that person's brain to fire, a physical event, which ultimately results in his walking across the room. The problem is that if there is something totally non-physical causing a bunch of neurons to fire, then there is no physical event which causes the firing. This means that some physical energy is required to be generated against the physical laws of the deterministic universe—this is by definition a miracle and there can be no scientific explanation of (repeatable experiment performed regarding) where the physical energy for the firing came from.

[ 103 ] Such interactions would violate the fundamental laws of physics . In particular, if some external source of energy is responsible for the interactions, then this would violate the law of the conservation of energy .

[ 104 ] Dualistic interactionism has therefore been criticized for violating a general heuristic principle of science: the causal closure of the physical world.

Replies [ edit ] The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy [ 8 ] and the New Catholic Encyclopedia [ 105 ] provide two possible replies to the above objections. The first reply is that the mind may influence the distribution of energy, without altering its quantity. The second possibility is to deny that the human body is causally closed, as the conservation of energy applies only to closed systems. However, physicalists object that no evidence exists for the causal non-closure of the human body.

[ 106 ] Robin Collins responds [ 107 ] that energy conservation objections misunderstand the role of energy conservation in physics. Well understood scenarios in general relativity violate energy conservation and quantum mechanics provides precedent for causal interactions, or correlation without energy or momentum exchange.

[ 108 ] However, this does not mean the mind spends energy and, despite that, it still doesn't exclude the supernatural.

Another reply is akin to parallelism—Mills holds that behavioral events are causally overdetermined , and can be explained by either physical or mental causes alone.

[ 109 ] An overdetermined event is fully accounted for by multiple causes at once.

[ 110 ] However, J. J. C. Smart and Paul Churchland have pointed out that if physical phenomena fully determine behavioral events, then by Occam's razor an unphysical mind is unnecessary.

[ 111 ] Howard Robinson suggests that the interaction may involve dark energy , dark matter or some other currently unknown scientific process.

[ 38 ] Another reply is that the interaction taking place in the human body may not be described by "billiard ball" classical mechanics . If a nondeterministic interpretation of quantum mechanics is correct then microscopic events are indeterminate , where the degree of determinism increases with the scale of the system. Philosophers Karl Popper and John Eccles and physicist Henry Stapp have theorized that such indeterminacy may apply at the macroscopic scale.

[ 112 ] However, Max Tegmark has argued that classical and quantum calculations show that quantum decoherence effects do not play a role in brain activity.

[ 113 ] Yet another reply to the interaction problem is to note that it doesn't seem that there is an interaction problem for all forms of substance dualism. For instance, Thomistic dualism doesn't obviously face any issue with regards to interaction, for in this view the soul and the body are related as form and matter.

[ 114 ] Argument from brain damage [ edit ] This argument has been formulated by Paul Churchland , among others. The point is that, in instances of some sort of brain damage (e.g. caused by automobile accidents, drug abuse, pathological diseases, etc.), it is always the case that the mental substance and/or properties of the person are significantly changed or compromised. If the mind were a completely separate substance from the brain, how could it be possible that every single time the brain is injured, the mind is also injured? Indeed, it is very frequently the case that one can even predict and explain the kind of mental or psychological deterioration or change that human beings will undergo when specific parts of their brains are damaged. So the question for the dualist to try to confront is how can all of this be explained if the mind is a separate and immaterial substance from, or if its properties are ontologically independent of, the brain.

[ 115 ] Phineas Gage , who suffered destruction of one or both frontal lobes by a projectile iron rod, is often cited as an example illustrating that the brain causes mind. Gage certainly exhibited some mental changes after his accident, suggesting a correlation between brain states and mental states. It has been noted, however, that Gage's most serious mental changes were only temporary, [ 116 ] and that he made a reasonable social and mental recovery.

[ 117 ] The changes in question have almost always been distorted and exaggerated by scientific and popular literature, often relying on hearsay.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] Similar examples abound; neuroscientist David Eagleman describes the case of another individual who exhibited escalating pedophilic tendencies at two different times, and in each case was found to have tumors growing in a particular part of his brain.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] Case studies aside, modern experiments have demonstrated that the relation between brain and mind is much more than simple correlation. By damaging, or manipulating, specific areas of the brain repeatedly under controlled conditions (e.g. in monkeys) and reliably obtaining the same results in measures of mental state and abilities, neuroscientists have shown that the relation between damage to the brain and mental deterioration is likely causal. This conclusion is further supported by data from the effects of neuro-active chemicals (e.g., those affecting neurotransmitters ) on mental functions, [ 123 ] but also from research on neurostimulation (direct electrical stimulation of the brain, including transcranial magnetic stimulation ).

[ 124 ] Replies [ edit ] Property dualism and William Hasker 's "emergent dualism" [ 125 ] seek to avoid this problem. They assert that the mind is a property or substance that emerges from the appropriate arrangement of physical matter, and therefore could be affected by any rearrangement of matter.

Writing in the 13th century, St.

Thomas Aquinas writes that "the body is necessary for the action of the intellect, not as it's origin of action." Thus, if the body is dysfunctional, the intellect will not actualize as it intends to.

[ 126 ] According to the philosopher Stephen Evans : We did not need neurophysiology to come to know that a person whose head is bashed in with a club quickly loses his or her ability to think or have any conscious processes. Why should we not think of neurophysiological findings as giving us detailed, precise knowledge of something that human beings have always known, or at least could have known, which is that the mind (at least in this mortal life) requires and depends on a functioning brain? We now know a lot more than we used to know about precisely how the mind depends on the body. However, that the mind depends on the body, at least prior to death, is surely not something discovered in the 20th century".

[ 127 ] Argument from neuroscience [ edit ] See also: Neurophilosophy , Neuroscience of free will , and Thought identification In some contexts, the decisions that a person makes can be detected up to 10 seconds in advance by means of scanning their brain activity.

[ 128 ] Subjective experiences and covert attitudes can be detected, [ 129 ] as can mental imagery .

[ 130 ] This is strong empirical evidence that cognitive processes have a physical basis in the brain.

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] Argument from simplicity [ edit ] The argument from simplicity is probably the simplest and also the most common form of argument against dualism of the mental. The dualist is always faced with the question of why anyone should find it necessary to believe in the existence of two, ontologically distinct, entities (mind and brain), when it seems possible and would make for a simpler thesis to test against scientific evidence, to explain the same events and properties in terms of one. It is a heuristic principle in science and philosophy not to assume the existence of more entities than is necessary for clear explanation and prediction.

This argument was criticized by Peter Glassen in a debate with J. J. C. Smart in the pages of Philosophy in the late 1970s and early 1980s.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] Glassen argued that, because it is not a physical entity, Occam's razor cannot consistently be appealed to by a physicalist or materialist as a justification of mental states or events, such as the belief that dualism is false. The idea is that Occam's razor may not be as "unrestricted" as it is normally described (applying to all qualitative postulates, even abstract ones) but instead concrete (only applies to physical objects). If one applies Occam's Razor unrestrictedly, then it recommends monism until pluralism either receives more support or is disproved. If one applies Occam's Razor only concretely, then it may not be used on abstract concepts (this route, however, has serious consequences for selecting between hypotheses about the abstract).

[ 136 ] This argument has also been criticized by Seyyed Jaaber Mousavirad, who argues that the principle of simplicity could only be applied when there is no need for an additional entity. Despite arguments indicating the need for the soul, the principle of simplicity does not apply. Therefore, if there were no argument establishing the existence of the soul, one could deny its existence based on the principle of simplicity. However, various arguments have been put forth to establish its existence. These arguments demonstrate that while neuroscience can explain the mysteries of the material brain, certain significant issues, such as personal identity and free will, remain beyond the scope of neuroscience. The crux of the matter lies in the essential limitations of neuroscience and the potency of substance dualism in explaining these phenomena.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Explanatory gap Mentalism (psychology) Nondualism Hard problem of consciousness Bipartite (theology) The Concept of Mind by Gilbert Ryle Trialism Advaita vedanta Vertiginous question References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Hart, W. D.

1996. "Dualism." pp. 265–267 in A Companion to the Philosophy of Mind , edited by S. Guttenplan . Oxford: Blackwell.

^ a b Crane, Tim; Patterson, Sarah (2001). "Introduction".

History of the Mind-Body Problem . pp.

1– 2.

the assumption that mind and body are distinct (essentially, dualism) ^ a b Aristotle. [c. mid 4th century BC] 1907.

On the Soul (De anima) , edited by R. D. Hicks . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1968. Books II-III, translated by D.W. Hamlyn, Clarendon Aristotle Series. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ Aristotle. [c. mid 4th century BC] 1924.

Metaphysics (Metaphysica) , edited by W. D. Ross. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2 vols.

1971. Books IV-VI, trans. C. A. Kirwan, Clarendon Aristotle Series. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1976. Books XIII–XIV trans. J. Annas, Clarendon Aristotle Series, Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1994. Books VII-VIII trans. D. Bostock, Clarendon Aristotle Series, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ Aristotle, De Anima III: "For whereas the sensitive faculty is not found apart from the body, the intellect is separate." (4, 429b3) "When mind is set free from its present conditions it appears as just what it is and nothing more: this alone is immortal and eternal." (5, 430a22) ^ a b Duke, E. A., W. F. Hicken, W. S. M. Nicoll, et al., eds. 1995.

Platonis Opera, Vol. 1: Tetralogiae I-II , Oxford Classical Texts .  Oxford: Clarendon Press.

doi : 10.1093/actrade/9780198145691.book.1 . (includes Euthyphro , Apologia Socratis , Crito , Phaedo , Cratylus , Theaetetus , Sophistes , and Politicus .) ^ "Reductionism in Biology" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 2017.

^ a b c d e Robinson, Howard . [2003] 2016. " Dualism " (rev.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , edited by Edward N. Zalta .

^ a b c Descartes, René . [1641] 1984. " Meditations on First Philosophy ." pp. 1–62 in The Philosophical Writings of René Descartes 2, translated by J. Cottingham, R. Stoothoff, and D. Murdoch. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

^ Mousavirad, Seyyed Jaaber; Philosophy Documentation Center (2023).

"Coherence of Substance Dualism" .

International Philosophical Quarterly .

63 (1): 33– 42.

doi : 10.5840/ipq20231114214 .

ISSN 0019-0365 .

^ Calef, Scott (2024).

"Dualism and Mind" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 23 June 2024.

^ a b Mousavirad, Seyyed Jaaber; Philosophy Documentation Center (2023).

"Coherence of Substance Dualism" .

International Philosophical Quarterly .

63 (1): 41– 42.

doi : 10.5840/ipq20231114214 .

ISSN 0019-0365 .

S2CID 265269649 .

^ Swinburne, Richard (1996).

"Dualism Intact" .

Faith and Philosophy: Journal of the Society of Christian Philosophers .

13 (1): 68– 77.

doi : 10.5840/faithphil199613116 .

^ Givens, Terryl L. (2012). "Reviewed Work: A Brief History of the Soul by Stewart Goetz, Charles Taliaferro".

Church History .

81 (3): 656– 658.

doi : 10.1017/S0009640712001357 .

JSTOR 23252345 .

^ Taliaferro, Charles. (2018).

Substance Dualism: A Defense . In Jonathan J. Loose, Angus John Louis Menuge & J. P. Moreland.

The Blackwell Companion to Substance Dualism . Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 41–60 ^ "Cartesian dualism" .

Oxford Reference . 2016.

^ a b Moreland, J. P. (2010).

"The Origin of the Soul in Light of Twinning, Cloning, and Frozen Etnbryos" (PDF) .

Journal of the International Society of Christian Apologetics .

3 (1): 1– 12.

^ a b Mehta, Neeta (2011).

"Mind-body Dualism: A critique from a Health Perspective" .

Mens Sana Monogr .

9 (1): 202– 209.

doi : 10.4103/0973-1229.77436 (inactive 12 July 2025).

ISSN 0973-1229 .

OCLC 8663197050 .

PMC 3115289 .

PMID 21694971 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Baker, Lynne Rudder (2002). "Reviewed Work: The Emergent Self William Hasker".

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research .

65 (3): 734– 736.

JSTOR 3071148 .

^ a b c Dilley, Frank B. (2003).

"A Critique of Emergent Dualism" .

Faith and Philosophy: Journal of the Society of Christian Philosophers .

20 (1): 37– 49.

doi : 10.5840/faithphil200320114 .

^ Hasker, William. (2018).

The Case for Emergent Dualism . In Jonathan J. Loose, Angus J. L. Menuge, J. P. Moreland.

The Blackwell Companion to Substance Dualism . Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 61–72.

ISBN 978-1119375265 ^ a b Spackman, John (2013).

"Consciousness and the Prospects for Substance Dualism" (PDF) .

Philosophy Compass .

8 (11): 1054– 106.

doi : 10.1111/phc3.12009 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 April 2024.

^ Rickabaugh, Brandon L.

Against Emergent Dualism . In Jonathan J. Loose, Angus J. L. Menuge, J. P. Moreland. (2018).

The Blackwell Companion to Substance Dualism . Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1119375265 ^ Gasparov, Ignor (2013).

"Substance Dualism and the Unity of Consciousness" (PDF) .

Forum Philosophicum .

18 (1): 109– 123.

doi : 10.35765/forphil.2013.1801.07 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2023.

^ Hershenov, David B; Taylor, Adam P. (2014). "Split brains: no headache for the soul theorist".

Religious Studies .

50 (4): 487– 503.

doi : 10.1017/S0034412514000109 .

JSTOR 43670546 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c d e Feser, Edward (2006).

Philosophy of Mind: A Beginner's Guide (PDF) . Oneworld Publications. pp.

221– 228.

ISBN 978-1851684786 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 September 2024.

^ Reichenbach, Bruce R. (2002).

"J. P. Moreland & Scott B. Rae, Body and Soul: Human Nature and the Crisis in Ethics" .

Faith and Philosophy: Journal of the Society of Christian Philosophers .

19 (1): 112– 116.

doi : 10.5840/faithphil200219112 .

^ a b Van Dyke, Christina (2009).

"Not Properly a Person: The Rational Soul and 'Thomistic Substance Dualism' " .

Faith and Philosophy .

26 (2): 186– 204.

doi : 10.5840/faithphil200926226 .

^ Stump, Eleonore (1995).

"Non-Cartesian Substance Dualism and Materialism Without Reductionism" .

Faith and Philosophy: Journal of the Society of Christian Philosophers .

12 (4): 505– 531.

doi : 10.5840/faithphil199512430 .

^ Stango, Marco (2017).

"Understanding Hylomorphic Dualism" .

Proceedings of the American Catholic Philosophical Association .

91 : 145– 158.

doi : 10.5840/acpaproc2019102295 .

^ Skrzypek, Jeremy W. (2021).

"Not Just a Terminological Difference: Cartesian Substance Dualism vs Thomistic Hylomorphism" .

Roczniki Filozoficzne .

69 (1): 103– 117.

doi : 10.18290/rf21691-10 .

^ a b Chutikorn, Paul (2018).

"A Thomistic Critique of Cartesian Dualism" .

Thomistica .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2024.

^ Feser, Edward (2020).

"Soul Proprietor" .

First Things .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2024.

^ "Aristotelian Hylomorphic Dualism" .

Thomistica . 2023.

Archived from the original on 27 September 2024.

^ Stoke, David (2017).

"Review of the 2017 Annual Meeting" .

The Christian Scientific Society .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024.

^ "Science Beyond Materialism: Cosmology, Astrobiology, Consciousness" .

Thomas H. Olbricht Christian Scholars Conference . 2021.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024.

^ a b Searle, John . [1983] 2002. " Why I Am Not a Property Dualist ." Archived from the original on 10 December 2006.

^ a b c d e Robinson, Howard . 2003. "Dualism." pp. 85–101 in The Blackwell Guide to Philosophy of Mind , edited by S. Stich and T. Warfield. Oxford: Blackwell.

^ a b Davidson, Donald. 1980.

Essays on Actions and Events . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-924627-0 .

^ Fodor, Jerry. 1968.

Psychological Explanation . Random House.

ISBN 0-07-021412-3 .

^ Gallagher, S. 2006. "Where's the action? Epiphenomenalism and the problem of free will". pp. 109–124 in Does Consciousness Cause Behavior?

, edited by S. Pockett, W. Banks, and S. Gallagher. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

^ a b Jackson, Frank (September 2003). "Mind and Illusion".

Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement .

53 : 251– 271.

doi : 10.1017/S1358246100008365 .

S2CID 170304272 .

^ a b Schmaltz, Tad . [2002] 2017. " Nicolas Malebranche ." The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , edited by E. N. Zalta .

^ Aristotle.

The Metaphysics 984b20, trans. by Hugh Lawson-Tancred. London, 2004.

^ Aristotle (2001).

The basic works of Aristotle . McKeon, Richard (Richard Peter). New York: Modern Library. pp. 696 (Metaphysics, Book 1, Chapter 3).

ISBN 0375757996 .

OCLC 46634018 .

^ Sextus Empiricus, adv. Math.

ix., ad Phys.

i. 7 ^ Whittaker, 1901, The Neo-Platonists , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

^ a b c "Summa Theologiae: Man who is composed of a spiritual and a corporeal substance: and in the first place, concerning what belongs to the essence of the soul (Prima Pars, Q. 75)" .

www.newadvent.org . Archived from the original on 19 January 2012.

^ Torrell, op. cit., 162 ^ Torrell, 161 ff.

^ Aristotle, de Anima II. 1–2.

^ Summa theologiae, I. 29.1; 75.4ad2; Disputed Questions on the Soul I.

^ Aquinas, Thomas Summa Theologica . trans. Fathers of the English Dominican Province, 2d, rev. ed., 22 vols., London: Burns, Oates & Washbourne; reprinted in 5 vols., Westminster, MD: Christian Classics, 1981.

^ "Apostles' Creed" .

Catechism of the Catholic Church .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2007.

^ Spong, John Selby . 1994.

Resurrection: Myth or Reality . New York: HarperCollins Publishing.

ISBN 0-06-067546-2 .

^ a b Oldhoff, Martine C. L. (2019).

"Review of The Blackwell Companion to Substance Dualism" .

Journal of Analytic Theology .

7 (1): 753– 758.

doi : 10.12978/jat.2019-7.1200-51141105 .

^ Prestes III, Flavio (2019).

"Review: The Blackwell Companion to Substance Dualism" .

Andrews University Seminary Studies .

57 (2): 414– 418.

^ Prinz, Wolfgang (January 1992). "Why don't we perceive our brain states?".

European Journal of Cognitive Psychology .

4 (1): 1– 20.

doi : 10.1080/09541449208406240 .

^ Nagel, Thomas . 1986.

The View from Nowhere . New York: Oxford University Press.

^ Dennett, Daniel C. (1991).

Consciousness Explained . Little, Brown and Co.

ISBN 978-0-316-18065-8 .

^ Jackson, Frank. 1977.

Perception: A Representative Theory . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

^ O'Hear, Anthony (2003).

Mind and Illusion, in "Minds and Persons" . Cambridge University Press. p. 251.

^ Lewis, David. [1988] 1999. "What Experience Teaches." pp. 262–290 in Papers in Metaphysics and Epistemology , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

^ Chalmers, David (1997).

The Conscious Mind . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-511789-9 .

^ Chalmers, David (2010).

The Character of Consciousness . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-531110-5 .

^ Dennett, Daniel (1995). "The unimagined preposterousness of zombies".

Journal of Consciousness Studies .

2 : 322– 326.

^ Dennett, Daniel (1991).

Consciousness Explained . Little, Brown and Co. p.

95 .

ISBN 978-0-316-18065-8 .

^ Elitzur, Avshalom (2009).

"Consciousness makes a difference: A reluctant dualist's confession" .

Irreducibly Conscious. Selected Papers on Consciousness . Retrieved 24 January 2025 .

^ Pylyshyn, Zenon W. (1986).

Computation and Cognition . MIT Press. p. 259.

ISBN 978-0262660587 .

^ Schwarz, Jeffrey M.; Stapp, Henry P.; Beauregard, Mario (June 2005).

"Quantum Physics in Neuroscience and Psychology: A Neurophysical Model of Mind-Brain Interaction" .

Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences .

360 (1458): 1309– 1327.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2004.1598 .

JSTOR 30041344 .

PMC 1569494 .

PMID 16147524 .

^ Brown (2003).

Chemistry . NJ: Prentice Hall. pp.

2– 3.

ISBN 978-0-13-066997-1 .

^ Various (December 1994). "Accurate First Principles Calculation of Molecular Charge Distributions and Solvation Energies from Ab Initio Quantum Mechanics and Continuum Dielectric Theory".

J. Am. Chem. Soc .

116 (26): 11875– 11882.

doi : 10.1021/ja00105a030 .

S2CID 10518482 .

^ Ma, Buyong; Nussinov, Ruth (November 2004).

"From computational quantum chemistry to computational biology: experiments and computations are (full) partners" .

Phys. Biol .

1 (4): 23– 6.

Bibcode : 2004PhBio...1P..23M .

doi : 10.1088/1478-3967/1/4/P01 .

PMID 16204832 .

S2CID 24333007 .

^ Various (April 2010).

"Quantum Monte Carlo computations of phase stability, equations of state, and elasticity of high-pressure silica" .

PNAS .

107 (21): 9519– 9524.

arXiv : 1001.2066 .

Bibcode : 2010PNAS..107.9519D .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0912130107 .

PMC 2906913 .

PMID 20457932 .

^ Pyykko, Pekka (21 July 2012). "The Physics behind Chemistry and the Periodic Table".

Chem. Rev .

112 (1): 371– 384.

doi : 10.1021/cr200042e .

PMID 21774555 .

S2CID 46487006 .

^ Pyykko, Pekka (22 October 2010). "A suggested periodic table up to Z ≤ 172, based on Dirac–Fock calculations on atoms and ions".

Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics .

13 (1): 161– 168.

Bibcode : 2011PCCP...13..161P .

doi : 10.1039/C0CP01575J .

PMID 20967377 .

S2CID 31590563 .

^ Sober, Elliott (December 1999). "The Multiple Realizability Argument against Reductionism".

Philosophy of Science .

66 (4): 542– 564.

doi : 10.1086/392754 .

JSTOR 188749 .

S2CID 54883322 .

^ a b Madell, G. 1981.

The Identity of the Self . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

^ Shoemaker, S., and Richard Swinburne . 1984.

Personal Identity . Oxford: Blackwell.

^ Swinburne, Richard . 1979.

The Existence of God . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ List, Christian (2023).

"The first-personal argument against physicalism" . Retrieved 3 September 2024 .

^ a b Reppert, Victor . 2003.

C.S. Lewis's Dangerous Idea . Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press.

ISBN 0-8308-2732-3 ^ "A Response to Richard Carrier's Review of C.S. Lewis's Dangerous Idea" .

infidels.org . Archived from the original on 20 December 2008.

^ "Philosophy Homepage | Department of Philosophy | UNC Charlotte" .

philosophy.uncc.edu . Archived from the original on 20 December 2008.

^ Sayer, George (2005).

Jack: A Life of C. S. Lewis . Crossway.

ISBN 978-1581347395 .

^ The Socratic Digest , No. 4 (1948) ^ Beversluis, John (2007).

C.S. Lewis and the Search for Rational Religion (Revised and Updated) . Prometheus Books.

ISBN 978-1591025313 .

^ "Dualism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2020.

^ Robinson, Howard . [2003] 2016. " Dualism § The Modal Argument ." Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Kuhn, Robert Lawrence , host. 2009. " Is the Person All Material?

" Ep. 43 in Closer to the Truth (television series). via YouTube.

^ Everist, Randy. 30 December 2015. " The Modal Argument for Substance Dualism: A Spirited Defense, Part 1 ." Possible Worlds . Accessed 31 July 2020.

^ Feser, Edward. 13 April 2009. " Descartes' "clear and distinct perception" argument ." Edward Feser on Blogger .

^ Calef, Scott. n.d. " Dualism and Mind § The Argument From Indivisibility ." Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Feser, Edward . 27 February 2017. " Descartes' "indivisibility" argument ." Edward Feser on Blogger .

^ "c. Problems of Interaction" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 28 October 2012 . Retrieved 15 November 2012 .

^ Weber, Michel , and Anderson Weekes, eds. 2009.

Process Approaches to Consciousness in Psychology, Neuroscience, and Philosophy of Mind , Whitehead Psychology Nexus Studies II. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

Archived 2015-04-08 at the Wayback Machine ^ Lewis, C.S (1947).

Miracles . HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-688-17369-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "Causal Determinism of Quantum Mechanics" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 16 November 2012 .

^ Wilson, D. L. 1999. "Mind-brain interaction and the violation of physical laws." pp. 185–200 in The Volitional Brain , edited by B. Libet, A. Freeman, and K. Sutherland. Thorverton, UK: Imprint Academic.

^ Mohrhoff, U. 1999. "The physics of interaction." pp. 165–184 in The Volitional Brain , edited by B. Libet, A. Freeman, and K. Sutherland. Thorverton, UK: Imprint Academic.

^ Jaswal, L (2005). "Isolating disparate challenges to Hodgson's account of free will".

Journal of Consciousness Studies .

12 (1): 43– 46.

^ Clark, T. W. (2005a). "Hodgson's black box".

Journal of Consciousness Studies .

12 (1): 38– 59.

^ Baker, Gordon and Morris, Katherine J. (1996) Descartes' Dualism , London: Routledge.

^ Lycan, William . 1996. "Philosophy of Mind." In The Blackwell Companion to Philosophy , edited by N. Bunnin and E. P. Tsui-James. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

^ Maher, Michael (1909) "The Law of Conservation of Energy", Catholic Encyclopedia , vol. 5, pp. 422 ff, "Catholic Encyclopedia: The Law of Conservation of Energy" .

Archived from the original on 1 July 2007 . Retrieved 20 May 2007 .

.

^ Murphy, Nancy (2009).

Downward Causation and the Neurobiology of Free Will . Springer.

ISBN 978-3642032042 .

^ Collins, Robin . 2008. "Modern Physics and the Energy Conservation Objection to Mind-Body Dualism." The American Philosophical Quarterly 45(1):31–42.

^ "Modern Physics and the Energy Conservation Objection to Mind-Body Dualism, by Robin Collins" .

Archived from the original on 25 June 2017 . Retrieved 1 July 2017 .

^ Mills, E. (1996). "Interactionism and Overdetermination".

American Philosophical Quarterly .

33 : 105– 117.

^ Althusser, Louis (1985).

"Contradiction and Overdetermination," in For Marx . Verso.

ISBN 978-0-902308-79-4 .

^ Churchland, Paul (1984).

Matter and Consciousness, Revised Edition . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0262530743 .

^ Popper, Karl R.

, and John C. Eccles . 1977.

The Self and Its Brain . Berlin: Springer.

^ Tegmark, Max (April 2000). "Importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes".

Phys. Rev. E .

61 (4): 4194– 4206.

arXiv : quant-ph/9907009 .

Bibcode : 2000PhRvE..61.4194T .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevE.61.4194 .

PMID 11088215 .

S2CID 17140058 .

^ "Edward Feser: Mind-body interaction: What's the problem?" . 17 September 2016.

Archived from the original on 25 April 2017 . Retrieved 24 April 2017 .

^ Churchland, Paul . 1988.

Matter and Consciousness (rev. ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

^ (September 2008). "Phineas Gage – Unravelling the myth". The Psychologist. 21 (9): 828–31.

^ Lena, M. L. (2010). "Rehabilitating Phineas Gage". Neuropsychological Rehabilitation. 20 (5): 641–58.

^ Macmillan, Malcolm B. (2014). "Phineas Gage". Encyclopedia of the Neurological Sciences. Academic Press. p. 383.

^ Kotowicz, Z. (2007). "The strange case of Phineas Gage". History of the Human Sciences. 20 (1): 115–31.

^ Grafman, J. (2002). "The Structured Event Complex and the Human Prefrontal Cortex". In Stuss, D. T.; Knight, R. T. (eds.). Principles of Frontal Lobe Function. pp. 292–310.

^ Choi, Charles. 21 October 2002. " Brain tumour causes uncontrollable paedophilia ." New Scientist .

Archived 2015-04-12 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Warburton, Nigel , and David Edmonds , hosts. 22 May 2011. " David Eagleman on Morality and the Brain ." Philosophy Bites (podcast).

^ Buchman AL, Sohel M, Brown M, et al. (2001). "Verbal and visual memory improve after choline supplementation in long-term total parenteral nutrition: a pilot study".

JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr .

25 (1): 30– 35.

doi : 10.1177/014860710102500130 .

PMID 11190987 .

^ Alterations of sociomoral judgement and glucose use in the frontomedial cortex induced by electrical stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) in Parkinsonian patients (2004): "Alterations of sociomoral judgement and glucose utilization in the frontomedial cortex induced by electrical stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) in Parkinsonian patients" .

Genman Medical Science : DocDI.06.06. 23 April 2004.

Archived from the original on 3 September 2004 . Retrieved 8 September 2008 .

^ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, "Emergent Properties" . Excerpt: "William Hasker (1999) goes one step further in arguing for the existence of the mind conceived as a non-composite substance which 'emerges' from the brain at a certain point in its development. He dubs his position 'emergent dualism,' and claims for it all the philosophical advantages of traditional, Cartesian substance dualism while being able to overcome a central difficulty, viz., explaining how individual brains and mental substances come to be linked in a persistent, 'monogamous' relationship. Here, Hasker, is using the term to express a view structurally like one (vitalism) that the British emergentists were anxious to disavow, thus proving that the term is capable of evoking all manner of ideas for metaphysicians." ^ "Summa Theologiae: Man who is composed of a spiritual and a corporeal substance: and in the first place, concerning what belongs to the essence of the soul" .

Article 2, Reply to Objection 3.

^ C. Stephen Evans , "Separable Souls: Dualism, Selfhood, and the Possibility of Life After Death." Christian Scholars Review 34 (2005): 333–34.

^ Haynes, John-Dylan; Heinze, Hans-Jochen; Brass, Marcel; Soon, Chun Siong (May 2008). "Unconscious determinants of free decisions in the human brain".

Nature Neuroscience .

11 (5): 543– 545.

doi : 10.1038/nn.2112 .

PMID 18408715 .

S2CID 2652613 .

^ Haynes, John-Dylan; Rees, Geraint (July 2006). "Decoding mental states from brain activity in humans".

Nature Reviews Neuroscience .

7 (7): 523– 534.

doi : 10.1038/nrn1931 .

PMID 16791142 .

S2CID 16025026 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2011 . Retrieved 29 June 2011 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Dehaene, Stanislas; Naccache, Lionel (April 2001). "Towards a cognitive neuroscience of consciousness: basic evidence and a workspace framework".

Cognition .

79 ( 1– 2): 1– 37.

doi : 10.1016/S0010-0277(00)00123-2 .

PMID 11164022 .

S2CID 1762431 .

^ Dehaene, Stanislas (2002).

The Cognitive Neuroscience of Consciousness . MIT. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0262541312 .

^ Glassen, Peter (1976). "J. J. C. Smart, Materialism and Occam's Razor".

Philosophy .

51 (197): 349– 352.

doi : 10.1017/s0031819100019392 .

S2CID 170163667 .

^ Smart, J. J. C. (1978). "Is Occam's Razor a Physical Thing?".

Philosophy .

53 (205): 382– 385.

doi : 10.1017/s0031819100022439 .

S2CID 170593277 .

^ Glassen, Peter (1983). "Smart, Materialism and Believing".

Philosophy .

58 (223): 95– 101.

doi : 10.1017/s0031819100056291 .

S2CID 170472361 .

^ Plato Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Simplicity . Excerpt: "Perhaps scientists apply an unrestricted version of Occam's Razor to that portion of reality in which they are interested, namely the concrete, causal, spatiotemporal world. Or perhaps scientists apply a 'concretized' version of Occam's Razor unrestrictedly. Which is the case? The answer determines which general philosophical principle we end up with: ought we to avoid the multiplication of objects of whatever kind, or merely the multiplication of concrete objects? The distinction here is crucial for a number of central philosophical debates. Unrestricted Occam's Razor favors monism over dualism, and nominalism over platonism. By contrast, 'concretized' Occam's Razor has no bearing on these debates, since the extra entities in each case are not concrete".

Further reading [ edit ] Amoroso, Richard L. 2010.

Complementarity of Mind and Body: Realizing the Dream of Descartes, Einstein and Eccles .

ISBN 978-1-61668-203-3 . History making volume with first comprehensive model of dualism-interactionism, that is also empirically testable.

Bracken, Patrick, and Philip Thomas. 2002. "Time to move beyond the mind–body split." British Medical Journal 325:1433–1434.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.325.7378.1433 . A controversial perspective on the use and possible overuse of the Mind–Body split and its application in medical practice.

Damasio, Antonio . 1994.

Descartes' Error .

Sinclair, Alistair J. 2015.

The Promise of Dualism . Almostic Publications.

ASIN 0957404433 . Introducing dualism as being interactive and distinct from the substance dualism of Descartes.

Spenard, Michael. 2011.

Dueling with Dualism: the forlorn quest for the immaterial soul [ usurped ] .

ISBN 978-0-578-08288-2 . An historical account of mind body dualism and a comprehensive conceptual and an empirical critique of the position.

Sperry, R. W. 1980. "Mind-brain interaction: Mentalism, yes; dualism, no." Neuroscience 5(2):195–206.

doi : 10.1016/0306-4522(80)90098-6 .

PMID 7374938 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Mind–body dualism .

Consciousness Studies at Wikibooks " Dualism ." Dictionary of Philosophy of Mind " Dualism ." the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy " Zombies ." Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy "Dualism and Mind" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Dualism at PhilPapers Dualism at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project Mind and body, Rene Descartes to William James Online Papers on Materialism and Dualism Dualism Arguments: Pros & Cons Archived 2 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Mind–body dualism Types Cartesian dualism Emergent dualism Non-Cartesian dualism Predicate dualism Property dualism Substance dualism Thomistic dualism Dualists Robert F. Almeder Mario Beauregard Frank B. Dilley John Beloff René Descartes Michael Egnor C. Stephen Evans Edward Feser Richard Fumerton Brie Gertler Stewart Goetz W. D. Hart William Hasker Michael Huemer Edward Francis Kelly Charles Landesman E. J. Lowe David. H. Lund Geoffrey Madell J. P. Moreland Denyse O'Leary Martine Nida-Rümelin Scott B. Rae Daniel N. Robinson Howard D. Roelofs Howard Robinson Jeffrey M. Schwartz Richard Swinburne Charles Taliaferro William Homan Thorpe Peter Unger Keith Yandell Dean Zimmerman Related Cartesianism Dualism (Indian philosophy) Interactionism Category Commons v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William James Wolfgang Köhler Neuroscience Anil Seth Antonio Damasio Benjamin Libet Bernard Baars Christof Koch Francis Crick Francisco Varela Gerald Edelman Giulio Tononi Karl Pribram Lawrence Weiskrantz Michael Gazzaniga Michael Graziano Patrick Wilken Roger Sperry Stanislas Dehaene Steven Laureys Stuart Hameroff Wolf Singer Others Annaka Harris David Bohm Eugene Wigner Erwin Schrödinger Marvin Minsky Max Planck Roger Penrose Susan Blackmore Victor J. Stenger Wolfgang Pauli Theories Philosophy of mind Anomalous monism Computationalism Double-aspect theory Eliminative materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Mind–body dualism Monism Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Panpsychism Parallelism Physicalism Property dualism Reflexive monism Revisionary materialism Solipsism Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory) Science Attention schema theory Consciousness causes collapse Dynamic core hypothesis Damasio's theory of consciousness Electromagnetic theories of consciousness Global workspace theory Higher-order theories of consciousness Holonomic brain theory Integrated information theory Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis Multiple drafts model Orchestrated objective reduction Topics Agnosia Altered state of consciousness Animal consciousness Artificial consciousness Attention Attentional control Awareness Binding problem Binocular rivalry Blindsight Brain Cartesian theater Consciousness after death Disorders of consciousness Divided consciousness Dual consciousness (split-brain) Experience Explanatory gap Free will Flash suppression Hallucination Hard problem of consciousness Heterophenomenology Higher consciousness Illusion Introspection illusion Knowledge argument Locked-in syndrome Mind Mind–body problem Minimally conscious state Neural correlates of consciousness Neurophenomenology Ontology Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Primary consciousness Problem of other minds Qualia Quantum mind Reentry Sakshi Purusha Secondary consciousness Sentience Sentientism Sociology of human consciousness Soul Stream of consciousness Subconscious Subjective character of experience Subjectivity and objectivity Unconscious mind Unconsciousness Upanishads Visual masking Consciousness causes collapse Yogachara Works A Universe of Consciousness Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Consciousness and Cognition Consciousness Explained Cosmic Consciousness How the Self Controls Its Brain Journal of Consciousness Studies Online Consciousness Conference Psyche The Astonishing Hypothesis The Conscious Mind The Emperor's New Mind The Science of Consciousness Understanding Consciousness " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" Wider than the Sky Category Commons v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐57jnb
Cached time: 20250814221048
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.403 seconds
Real time usage: 1.627 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7821/1000000
Revision size: 100972/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 304883/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6710/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 419396/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.807/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22668809/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1279.336      1 -total
 48.74%  623.485      1 Template:Reflist
 18.16%  232.375     42 Template:Cite_journal
 13.61%  174.173     18 Template:Cite_book
  8.71%  111.438      8 Template:Navbox
  7.86%  100.606      2 Template:Langx
  7.81%   99.930      1 Template:Philosophy_sidebar
  7.37%   94.272     17 Template:Cite_web
  5.85%   74.872      1 Template:Metaphysics
  5.63%   72.016      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:175456:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221048 and revision id 1304077909. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mind–body_dualism&oldid=1304077909 " Categories : Dualism (philosophy of mind) Arguments in philosophy of mind Baruch Spinoza Cartesianism Concepts in epistemology Concepts in metaphysics Concepts in the philosophy of mind Consciousness Metaphysics of mind Ontology René Descartes Theory of mind Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Latin-language text Articles using Template:ASIN with an all-numeric value Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 20:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mind–body dualism 33 languages Add topic

