Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Prevalence 1.2 Effectiveness 2 Green firebreak 3 History 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Firebreak 29 languages العربية Български Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English کوردی Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Natural or man-made gap in vegetation that acts as a barrier against wildfires This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Firebreak" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Red fire retardant dispersed aerially onto brush adjoining a firebreak during the Tumbleweed Fire in California, in July 2021; while vegetation to the left of the firebreak has completely burned, everything to its right was protected A firebreak on the Setúbal Peninsula in Portugal A firebreak or double track (also called a fire line , fuel break , fireroad and firetrail in Australia) is a gap in vegetation or other combustible material that acts as a barrier to slow or stop the progress of a bushfire or wildfire . A firebreak may occur naturally where there is an absence of vegetation or " fuel ", such as a river, lake or canyon. Firebreaks may also be man-made, and many of these also serve as roads, such as logging roads, four-wheel drive trails, secondary roads, or highways .

Overview [ edit ] A poster promoting plowing to create a fire break A video explaining firebreaks and contingency lines during the North Complex Fire .

In the construction of a firebreak, the primary goal is to remove deadwood and undergrowth down to mineral soil. Various methods may be used to accomplish this initially and to maintain this condition. Ideally, the firebreak will be constructed and maintained according to the established practices of sustainable forestry and fire protection engineering , also known as best management practices (BMP). The general goals are to maximize the effectiveness of the firebreak at slowing the spread of wildfire, and, by using firebreaks of sufficient size and density, to reduce the ultimate size of wildfires. Additional goals are to maintain the ecology of the forest and to reduce the impact of wildfires on air pollution and the global climate , and to balance the costs and benefits of the various projects.

[ citation needed ] These goals can be achieved through the use of appropriate operating practices, many of which can be potentially mutually beneficial to all. In many cases, it may be useful for firebreak upkeep to be maintained along with the harvesting of forestry products, such as lumber and biomass fuel, since the objectives are fundamentally related, in that the basic goals are to remove material from the forest. Furthermore, if done properly, the value of these products can significantly offset the cost of maintaining the firebreak. In addition, these commercial industries and small businesses are helped by a reduction in the property damages caused by wildfires, and reduced risk of investment . The biomass material that is not suitable for dimensioned lumber is suitable to make woodchips for the paper industry and the energy industry. Larger trees are sometimes left in place within some types of firebreaks, to shade the forest floor and reduce the rate of fuel accumulation, and to enhance the landscaping in recreational and inhabited locations.

[ citation needed ] Prevalence [ edit ] Forested areas often contain vast networks of firebreaks. Some communities are also using firebreaks as part of their city planning strategy .

[ 1 ] An example is the city of Revelstoke, British Columbia , which includes firebreaks in their Community Wildfire Protection Plan.

[ 2 ] Effectiveness [ edit ] By comparing the burnt (right) and unburnt (left) sides of a dirt road in South Africa after a major veldfire (grassland fire) the effectiveness of the road in acting as a firebreak can be seen.

Depending on the environmental conditions, and the relative effectiveness of a given firebreak, firebreaks often have to be backed up with other firefighting efforts. Even then, it is still sometimes possible for fire to spread across a seemingly impenetrable divide. For example, during the Cedar Fire of 2003, strong Santa Ana winds had blown enough burning embers across a 10-lane section of Interstate 15 to ignite the vegetation on the other side.

[ 3 ] During the 1988 fires in Yellowstone National Park , hot embers managed to cross the Lewis Canyon , a natural canyon up to a mile wide and 600 feet (180 m) deep.

[ citation needed ] In Australia, firebreaks are less effective against eucalyptus forest fires, since intense fires in tinder-dry eucalyptus forest spread through flying embers, which can be carried by the winds to trigger new blazes several kilometres away.

[ 4 ] In 2019, goats deployed to graze the nearby flammable vegetation and create a firebreak helped save the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Museum and Getty Museum from California wildfires .

[ 5 ] Green firebreak [ edit ] Green firebreaks are lines of low flammability vegetation, planted to retard fire.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Among their advantages are lower cost, biodiversity and reduced erosion.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] History [ edit ] Due to a lack of a standardized firefighting force at the time, the Great Fire of London in 1666 instead saw the Tower of London garrison using gunpowder and fire hooks in a widespread, ad-hoc firebreaking campaign across Central London. Historians believe this to have been one of the major contributing factors to the eventual defeat of the inferno.

The world's most expensive firebreak was created when part of Van Ness Avenue in San Francisco was dynamited to stop the spread of fire resulting from the 1906 San Francisco earthquake .

[ 8 ] Firefighting after an earthquake can be especially challenging, because an earthquake can cause water mains to rupture, resulting in a complete loss of water pressure.

Firebreak in the Brendan T. Byrne State Forest in New Jersey's Pine Barrens ecoregion See also [ edit ] Fire trail Controlled burn Defensible space (fire control) Fire ecology Firefighting Firewall (construction) Fuel ladder Glossary of wildfire terms Wildfire suppression References [ edit ] ^ "Prevention and Protection from Fires » City of Greater Geraldton" .

www.cgg.wa.gov.au . Archived from the original on 2018-07-26 . Retrieved 2018-05-30 .

^ Girard, Rob (2018-05-30).

"Community Wildfire Protection Plan" .

City of Revelstoke . Archived from the original on 2018-05-30 . Retrieved 25 July 2018 .

^ "SIO15: Cedar Fire" .

geowiki.ucsd.edu . Retrieved 2024-09-11 .

^ Adam, David (2009-02-09).

"Australian wild fires prompt call to return to Aboriginal bush control" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2017-02-12 .

^ "California fires: Goats help save Ronald Reagan Presidential Library" . BBC. 31 October 2019 . Retrieved 14 November 2019 .

^ a b Cui, Xinglei; Alam, Md Azharul; Perry, George LW.; Paterson, Adrian M.; Wyse, Sarah V.; Curran, Timothy J. (2019-03-01).

"Green firebreaks as a management tool for wildfires: Lessons from China" .

Journal of Environmental Management .

233 : 329– 336.

doi : 10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.12.043 .

ISSN 0301-4797 .

^ a b Warnell, K., Mason, S., Siegle, A., Merritt, M., & Olander, L (2023).

"Green Firebreaks - A DOI Nature-Based Solutions Roadmap Fact Sheet" (PDF) .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Coleman, Le Vert (1906-05-02).

"U.S. Army Dynamite Report - 1906 Earthquake" .

www.sfmuseum.org . Retrieved 2018-11-10 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Firebreaks at Wikimedia Commons v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Firebreak&oldid=1299619623 " Categories : Wildfire prevention Wildfire suppression Wildfire ecology Forestry and the environment Land management Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2012 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2013 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 12:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Firebreak 29 languages Add topic

