Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Progressive Era 2 Large corporations and monopolies: trust busting vs. regulation 3 Efficiency Toggle Efficiency subsection 3.1 Governmental corruption 3.2 Education 4 Social work Toggle Social work subsection 4.1 Anti-prostitution 4.2 Enactment of child labor laws 4.3 Support for the goals of organized labor 4.4 Prohibition 4.5 Eugenics 5 Purifying the electorate 6 Municipal administration 7 Conservation Toggle Conservation subsection 7.1 National parks and wildlife refuges 7.2 Reclamation 8 National politics 9 Culture 10 In the 21st century Toggle In the 21st century subsection 10.1 Mitigating income inequality 10.1.1 Wall Street reform 10.2 Health care reform 10.3 Minimum wage 10.4 Environmental justice 10.5 Social justice 10.6 Definition 11 Progressive parties Toggle Progressive parties subsection 11.1 Progressive Party, 1912 11.2 Progressive Party, 1924 11.3 Progressive Party, 1948 11.4 Farmer–Labor Parties 12 See also 13 References 14 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 14.1 Overview 14.2 National politics 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Progressivism in the United States 11 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch فارسی עברית 日本語 پښتو Português Русский کوردی 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political philosophy and reform movement Part of a series on Progressivism Movements 50501 movement BLM Conservation movement ECG Ethical movement Environmental movement Indivisible movement Labour LGBTQ movements #MeToo Occupy Wall Street Reform Social hygiene " The Resistance " Taiwan independence YIMBY Ideas Direct democracy Economic development Environmentalism Broad measures of economic progress Gender equality Green politics Human enhancement Indigenous rights Intersectionality Liberation theology Metaphysics Minority rights LGBTQ rights Multiculturalism Modernism Post Moral universalism Progress Philosophy of progress Progressive education In Latin America Progressive stack Progressive nationalism Progressive taxation Religious liberalism Reparations for slavery In the US Scientific management Scientific progress Social change Social constructivism Social justice Social justice warrior Social organization Social progress List of countries Solidarity unionism Strategic essentialism Sustainable design Ecological engineering Sustainable development Techno-progressivism Welfare state Women's suffrage Workplace democracy Youth rights Variants Christian Confucian Conservative Economic Islamic Neoliberal Techno Ideologies Ecevitism Kirchnerism Lulism Roosevelt Republican Activists Abbott (Edith) Abbott (Grace) Addams Armstrong Ahmed Ajamu X Alexander Alinsky Archer Belmont Bond Brandeis Breckinridge Cambell Cloward Dees Gilman Hammer Hanna Hassan Heumann Huang Jackson (Esther) Jackson (George) Jackson (Jesse) Kahane King (Shaun) King (Jr.) Lennon Ludmer Markey McIlrath Mckesson Page Pearson Roosevelt (Eleanor) Rothblatt Seligmann Smeeth Soros (Alexander) Soros (George) Su Walia Windsor Wong (Alice) Wong (Joshua) Woodhull Commentators Bedborough Brewis Cohen Conover Criado Perez Danskin Duberman Ellis Faust Favreau Fiorentini Glaude Goldberg Hartmann Hasan Jennings Klippenstein Kochinski Krugman Kulinski Levy Lovett Marshall McKay Miller (Stephanie) Moore Morgan Nagle Oliver Pakman Pfeiffer Piker Rather Reich (Robert) Reid Seder Sharpton Smith Stewart Thorn Vietor Withers Wise Wynn Welles Zuckerberg Intellectuals Addams Allen Anderson Benedict Benjamin Ben-Moshe Beveridge Black Blackwell Bornstein Brand Brandeis Butler Carpenter de Condorcet Cornell Davis (Mike) Dewey DiAngelo Douglas (Kelly) Douglas (William) Du Bois Dyson Ellis Fredrickson Friedan Gilmore Hammonds Helms Hirschfeld hooks Jeffries Karenga Keller Kendi McIntosh Merriam Meyers Mills Money Moore Oastler Ostrowski Painter Patterson Peled-Elhanan Rawls Reich (Wilhelm) Roberts Rothstein Saini Sanger Seuss Shaw Stanley Stein TallBear Wachowskis (Lana/Lilly) Wells Welsing West Whedon Wilderson III Zuboff Politicians Albanese Ardern Attlee Boric Brandt Bryan Casar Crockett da Silva Debs Drees Frost Gorbachev Harris Hawkins Hessel Hunter Jackson Jayapal Johnson Kennedy (John F.) Kennedy (Ted) Khanna La Follette La Guardia Lai Layton Lee (Barbara) Lee (Summer) Lewis Lyuh Mamdani Manley Markey McGovern Merkley Mottley Murayama Murphy (Emily) Murphy (Chris) Nader Nehru Norris Norton Obrador Ocasio-Cortez Omar Petro Pocan Pressley Raskin Roosevelt (Franklin) Roosevelt (Theodore) Sánchez Sanders Tlaib Trudeau Tsai Turner Wallace Walz Warren Weaver Wilson (Harold) Yamamoto Yavlinsky Zapatero Literature Looking Backward (1888) Equality (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) Man and Superman (1903) The Universal Kinship (1906) The Open Conspiracy (1928) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) Sexuality in the Cultural Struggle (1936) Beveridge Report (1942) Rules for Radicals (1971) Humanist Manifesto II (1973) Woman Hating (1974) The Handmaid's Tale (1985) Black Athena (1987–2006) The Racial Contract (1997) War Against the Weak (2003) The Audacity of Hope (2006) The Invention of the Jewish People (2008) The New Jim Crow (2010) The Speech (2011) Our Revolution (2016) White Rage (2016) The Color of Law (2017) Inferior (2017) Not All Dead White Men (2018) White Fragility (2018) Invisible Women (2019) How to Be an Antiracist (2019) Race After Technology (2019) Superior (2019) Nice Racism (2021) Organizations Amadeu Antonio Foundation ACLU ASHA BLMGNF CGS Brennan Center for Justice Color of Change Democracy Alliance Ella Baker Center for Human Rights Equality and Human Rights Commission ENAR Fabian Society " Coefficients " FIRM Ford Foundation ILGA InCAR IPPA MacArthur Foundation Movement for Black Lives No one is illegal NWRO New SDS OSF Our Revolution PFAW Progressive Alliance Progressive International Progressive League Progressive Majority ProgressNow Red Flare RWJF SftP Tides Foundation Media CTXT HuffPost Jacobin Jezebel Lucifer Mother Jones MSNBC The Nation New Statesman The Progressive Salon Searchlight The Young Turks Rational Wiki By region Japan South Korea Taiwan United States Related Accelerationism Communitarianism Counterculture of the 1960s Critical theory Democratic capitalism Democratic socialism Red–green alliance Social democracy Left-libertarianism Libertarian socialism Left-wing populism Liberalism Classical radicalism Social liberalism In United States New Left Pink tide Progress Studies Progressive Era Technocracy Unitarian Universalism Woke Politics portal v t e Progressivism in the United States is a left-leaning political philosophy and reform movement. Into the 21st century, it advocates policies that are generally considered social democratic and part of the American Left . It has also expressed itself within center-right politics, such as New Nationalism and progressive conservatism . It reached its height early in the 20th century.

Middle / working class and reformist in nature, it arose as a response to the vast changes brought by modernization , such as the growth of large corporations, pollution , and corruption in American politics. Historian Alonzo Hamby describes American progressivism as a "political movement that addresses ideas, impulses, and issues stemming from modernization of American society. Emerging at the end of the nineteenth century, it established much of the tone of American politics throughout the first half of the century." [ 1 ] Progressive economic policies incorporate the socioeconomic principles and views of social democracy and political progressivism . These views are often rooted in the concept of social justice and have the goal of improving the human condition through government regulation , social protections , and the maintenance of public goods .

[ 2 ] It is based on the idea that capitalist markets left to operate with limited government regulation are inherently unfair, favoring big business , large corporations , and the wealthy . Specific economic policies that are considered progressive include progressive taxes , income redistribution aimed at reducing inequalities of wealth , a comprehensive package of public services , universal health care , resisting involuntary unemployment , public education , social security , minimum wage laws, antitrust laws , legislation protecting labor rights , and the rights of labor unions . While the modern progressive movement may be characterized as largely secular in nature, the historical progressive movement was by comparison to a significant extent rooted in and energized by religion.

[ 3 ] Progressive Era [ edit ] Main article: Progressive Era Historians debate the exact contours, but they generally date the Progressive Era in response to the excesses of the Gilded Age from the 1890s to either World War I in 1917 or the onset of the Great Depression in the United States in 1929.

[ 4 ] Many of the core principles of the progressive movement focused on the need for efficiency in all areas of society, and for greater democratic control over public policy. Purification to eliminate waste and corruption was a powerful element as well as the progressives' support of worker compensation, improved child labor laws, minimum wage legislation, a limited workweek, graduated income tax and allowing women the right to vote.

[ 4 ] Arthur S. Link and Vincent P. De Santis argue that the majority of progressives wanted to purify politics.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] For some Progressives, purification meant taking the vote away from blacks in the South.

[ 7 ] Large corporations and monopolies: trust busting vs. regulation [ edit ] The Bosses of the Senate , a cartoon by Joseph Keppler depicting corporate interests—from steel , copper, oil , iron, sugar , tin, and coal to paper bags, envelopes and salt—as giant money bags looming powerfully over the tiny, weak U.S. Senators [ 8 ] Most progressives hoped that by regulating large corporations they could liberate human energies from the restrictions imposed by industrial capitalism . Nonetheless, the progressive movement was split over which of the following solutions should be used to regulate corporations. Many progressives argued that industrial monopolies were unnatural economic institutions which suppressed the competition which was necessary for progress and improvement.

[ 9 ] United States antitrust law prohibits anti-competitive behavior ( monopoly ) and unfair business practices . Presidents such as Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft supported trust-busting . During their presidencies, the otherwise-conservative Taft brought down 90 trusts in four years while Roosevelt took down 44 in seven and a half years in office.

[ 10 ] Progressives, such as Benjamin Parke De Witt, argued that, in a modern economy, large corporations and even monopolies were both inevitable and desirable. He argued that with their massive resources and economies of scale, large corporations offered the United States advantages which smaller companies could not offer. However, these large corporations might abuse their great power. The federal government should allow these companies to exist, but otherwise regulate them for the public interest. President Roosevelt generally supported this idea and incorporated it as part of his " New Nationalism ".

[ 11 ] Efficiency [ edit ] Many progressives such as Louis Brandeis hoped to make American governments better able to serve the people's needs by making governmental operations and services more efficient and rational. Rather than making legal arguments against ten-hour workdays for women, he used "scientific principles" and data produced by social scientists documenting the high costs of long working hours for both individuals and society.

[ 12 ] The progressives' quest for efficiency was sometimes at odds with the progressives' quest for democracy. Taking power out of the hands of elected officials and placing that power in the hands of professional administrators reduced the voice of the politicians and in turn reduced the voice of the people. Centralized decision-making by trained experts and reduced power for local wards made government less corrupt but more distant and isolated from the people it served. Progressives who emphasized the need for efficiency typically argued that trained independent experts could make better decisions than the local politicians. In his influential Drift and Mastery (1914) stressing the "scientific spirit" and "discipline of democracy", Walter Lippmann called for a strong central government guided by experts rather than public opinion.

[ 13 ] One example of progressive reform was the rise of the city manager system in which paid, professional engineers ran the day-to-day affairs of city governments under guidelines established by elected city councils . Many cities created municipal "reference bureaus" which did expert surveys of government departments looking for waste and inefficiency. After in-depth surveys, local and even state governments were reorganized to reduce the number of officials and to eliminate overlapping areas of authority between departments. City governments were reorganized to reduce the power of local ward bosses and to increase the powers of the city council. Governments at every level began developing budgets to help them plan their expenditures rather than spending money haphazardly as needs arose and revenue became available. Governor Frank Lowden of Illinois showed a "passion for efficiency" as he streamlined state government.

[ 14 ] Governmental corruption [ edit ] Corruption represented a source of waste and inefficiency in the government.

William Simon U'Ren in Oregon, Robert M. La Follette in Wisconsin and others worked to clean up state and local governments by passing laws to weaken the power of machine politicians and political bosses. In Wisconsin, La Follette pushed through an open primary system that stripped party bosses of the power to pick party candidates.

[ 15 ] The Oregon System included a "Corrupt Practices Act", a public referendum and a state-funded voter's pamphlet, among other reforms which were exported to other states in the Northwest and Midwest. Its high point was in 1912, after which they detoured into a disastrous third party status.

[ 16 ] Education [ edit ] Main article: History of education in the United States Early progressive thinkers such as John Dewey and Lester Ward placed a universal and comprehensive system of education at the top of the progressive agenda, reasoning that if a democracy were to be successful, its leaders, the general public, needed a good education.

[ 17 ] Progressives worked hard to expand and improve public and private education at all levels. They believed that modernization of society necessitated the compulsory education of all children, even if the parents objected. Progressives turned to educational researchers to evaluate the reform agenda by measuring numerous aspects of education, later leading to standardized testing . Many educational reforms and innovations generated during this period continued to influence debates and initiatives in American education for the remainder of the 20th century. One of the most apparent legacies of the Progressive Era left to American education was the perennial drive to reform schools and curricula, often as the product of energetic grass-roots movements in the city.

[ 18 ] Since progressivism was and continues to be "in the eyes of the beholder", progressive education encompasses very diverse and sometimes conflicting directions in educational policy. Such enduring legacies of the Progressive Era continue to interest historians. Progressive Era reformers stressed "object teaching", meeting the needs of particular constituencies within the school district, equal educational opportunity for boys and girls and avoiding corporal punishment.

[ 19 ] David Gamson examines the implementation of progressive reforms in three city school districts— Denver, Colorado ; Seattle, Washington and Oakland, California —during 1900–1928. Historians of educational reform during the Progressive Era tend to highlight the fact that many progressive policies and reforms were very different and at times even contradictory. At the school district level, contradictory reform policies were often especially apparent, though there is little evidence of confusion among progressive school leaders in Denver, Seattle and Oakland. District leaders in these cities, including Frank B. Cooper in Seattle and Fred M. Hunter in Oakland, often employed a seemingly contradictory set of reforms. Local progressive educators consciously sought to operate independently of national progressive movements as they preferred reforms that were easy to implement and were encouraged to mix and blend diverse reforms that had been shown to work in other cities.

[ 20 ] The reformers emphasized professionalization and bureaucratization. The old system whereby ward politicians selected school employees was dropped in the case of teachers and replaced by a merit system requiring a college-level education in a normal school (teacher's college).

[ 21 ] The rapid growth in size and complexity the large urban school systems facilitated stabilized employment for women teachers and provided senior teachers greater opportunities to mentor younger teachers. By 1900, most women in Providence, Rhode Island , remained as teachers for at least 17.5 years, indicating teaching had become a significant and desirable career path for women.

[ 22 ] Social work [ edit ] United States federal government World War II era poster against prostitution Progressives set up training programs to ensure that welfare and charity work would be undertaken by trained professionals rather than warm-hearted amateurs.

[ 23 ] Jane Addams of Chicago's Hull House typified the leadership of residential, community centers operated by social workers and volunteers and located in inner city slums . The purpose of the settlement houses was to raise the standard of living of urbanites by providing adult education and cultural enrichment programs.

[ 24 ] Anti-prostitution [ edit ] During this era of massive reformation among all social aspects, elimination of prostitution was vital for the progressives, especially the women.

[ 25 ] The anti-prostitution movement involved three main groups: Christians, Progressive Era feminists, and physicians. Many individuals active in the anti-prostitution movement shared some of the same perspectives from each of these groups. Jane Addams, one of the most notable of early American social workers, wrote a book addressing prostitution. According to her argument in A New Conscience and an Ancient Evil , [ 26 ] the reason why women resorted to prostitution was due to the inadequate salaries they received. However, she also mentions the absence of family oversight of female modesty, as young women migrated from rural to urban areas. Although most prostitutes were born in America, the public believed that women were being brought into the United States and later sold into prostitution. The opposition against prostitution could have been a reflection of concerns regarding the influx of immigrants, the growth of cities, the development of industries, and the erosion of established moral standards.

[ 27 ] Enactment of child labor laws [ edit ] Main article: Child labor laws in the United States A poster highlighting the situation of child labor in the United States in the early 20th century Child labor laws were designed to prevent the overuse of children in the newly emerging industries. The goal of these laws was to give working class children the opportunity to go to school and mature more institutionally, thereby liberating the potential of humanity and encouraging the advancement of humanity. Factory owners generally did not want this progression because of lost workers. Parents relied on the income of children to keep the family solvent. Progressives enacted state and federal laws against child labor, but these were overturned by the US Supreme Court. A proposed constitutional amendment was opposed by business and Catholics; it passed Congress but was never ratified by enough states. Child labor was finally outlawed by the New Deal in the 1930s.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Support for the goals of organized labor [ edit ] Labor unions grew steadily until 1916, then expanded fast during the war. In 1919, a wave of major strikes alienated the middle class and the strikes were lost which alienated the workers. In the 1920s, the unions were in the doldrums. In 1924, they supported Robert M. La Follette 's Progressive Party , but he only carried his base in Wisconsin. The American Federation of Labor under Samuel Gompers after 1907 began supporting the Democrats , who promised more favorable judges as the Republicans appointed pro-business judges.

Theodore Roosevelt and his third party also supported such goals as the eight-hour work day , improved safety and health conditions in factories, workers' compensation laws and minimum wage laws for women.

[ 30 ] Prohibition [ edit ] Most progressives, especially in rural areas, adopted the cause of prohibition .

[ 31 ] They saw the saloon as political corruption incarnate and bewailed the damage done to women and children. They believed the consumption of alcohol limited mankind's potential for advancement.

[ 32 ] Progressives achieved success first with state laws then with the enactment of the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1919. The golden day did not dawn as enforcement was lax, especially in the cities where the law had very limited popular support and where notorious criminal gangs such as the Chicago gang of Al Capone made a crime spree based on illegal sales of liquor in speakeasies. The "experiment" (as President Herbert Hoover called it) also cost the federal and local treasuries large sums of taxes. The 18th amendment was repealed by the Twenty-first Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1933.

[ 33 ] Eugenics [ edit ] Part of a series on Eugenics in the United States States States California Minnesota North Carolina Oregon Law Court cases Buck v. Bell Skinner v. Oklahoma Madrigal v. Quilligan Poe v. Lynchburg Training School & Hospital Stump v. Sparkman Doe ex. rel. Tarlow v. District of Columbia History Institutions American Birth Control League American Eugenics Society Eugenics Record Office Race Betterment Foundation Human Betterment Foundation Society for Biodemography and Social Biology Pioneer Fund Human Betterment League Heredity Commission AASPIM General Jukes family Average Young American Male (1921) The Relf Sisters Oneida stirpiculture Selective Reproduction of Slaves Virginia Sterilization Act of 1924 Literature Books The Kallikak Family Eugenics manifesto The Bell Curve The Passing of the Great Race The Rising Tide of Color Journals Annals of Eugenics Proponents Academics Harry H. Laughlin Joseph DeJarnette David Starr Jordan Edwin Katzen-Ellenbogen Charles Goethe Charles Benedict Davenport Gertrude Crotty Davenport Frederick Osborn Madison Grant Politicians Guy W. Bailey Wallace H. Kuralt. Sr.

Related Scientific racism Social degeneration theory Social purity movement Feeble-minded Racial nationalism " Race suicide " Sterilization of Latinas Sterilization of Native American women United States portal Category Index v t e Some progressives sponsored eugenics as a solution to excessively large or under-performing families, hoping that birth control would enable parents to focus their resources on fewer, better children while others, like Margaret Sanger advocated it.

[ 34 ] Progressives also advocated for compulsory sterilization of those deemed "unfit".

[ 34 ] Progressive leaders such as Herbert Croly and Walter Lippmann indicated their classical liberal concern over the danger posed to the individual by the practice of eugenics.

[ 35 ] Progressive politician William Jennings Bryan opposed eugenics on the grounds of his anti-evolution activism.

[ 36 ] In a paper titled "The Progressives: Racism and Public Law", American legal scholar Herbert Hovenkamp (MA, PhD, JD) wrote: When examining the Progressives on race, it is critical to distinguish the views that they inherited from those that they developed. The rise of Progressivism coincided with the death of scientific racism , which had been taught in American universities since the early nineteenth century and featured prominently in the scientific debate over Darwin’s theory of evolution. Eugenics, which attempted to use genetics and mathematics to validate many racist claims, was its last gasp. The most notable thing about the Progressives is that they were responsible for bringing scientific racism to an end.

[ 37 ] Purifying the electorate [ edit ] Progressives repeatedly warned that illegal voting was corrupting the political system. They especially identified big-city bosses, working with saloon keepers and precinct workers, as the culprits who stuffed the ballot boxes. The solution to purifying the vote included prohibition (designed to close down the saloons), voter registration requirements (designed to end multiple voting), and literacy tests (designed to minimize the number of ignorant voters).

[ 38 ] All of the Southern states used devices to disenfranchise black voters during the Progressive Era .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Typically, the progressive elements in those states pushed for disenfranchisement, often fighting against the conservatism of the Black Belt whites.

[ 41 ] A major reason given was that whites routinely purchased black votes to control elections, and it was easier to disenfranchise blacks than to go after powerful white men.

[ 42 ] In the Northern states , progressives such as Robert M. La Follette and William Simon U'Ren argued that the average citizen should have more control over his government. The Oregon System of " Initiative, Referendum, and Recall " was exported to many states, including Idaho, Washington and Wisconsin.

[ 43 ] Many progressives such as George M. Forbes, president of Rochester 's Board of Education, hoped to make government in the United States more responsive to the direct voice of the American people, arguing: [W]e are now intensely occupied in forging the tools of democracy, the direct primary, the initiative, the referendum, the recall, the short ballot, commission government. But in our enthusiasm we do not seem to be aware that these tools will be worthless unless they are used by those who are aflame with the sense of brotherhood. ... The idea [of the social centers movement is] to establish in each community an institution having a direct and vital relation to the welfare of the neighborhood, ward, or district, and also to the city as a whole.

[ 44 ] Philip J. Ethington seconds this high view of direct democracy , saying that "initiatives, referendums, and recalls, along with direct primaries and the direct election of US Senators, were the core achievements of 'direct democracy' by the Progressive generation during the first two decades of the twentieth century".

[ 45 ] Women marching for the right to vote, 1912 Progressives fought for women's suffrage to purify the elections using supposedly purer female voters.

[ 46 ] Progressives in the South supported the elimination of supposedly corrupt black voters from the election booth. Historian Michael Perman says that in both Texas and Georgia "disfranchisement was the weapon as well as the rallying cry in the fight for reform". In Virginia, "the drive for disfranchisement had been initiated by men who saw themselves as reformers, even progressives".

[ 47 ] While the ultimate significance of the progressive movement on today's politics is still up for debate, Alonzo L. Hamby asks: What were the central themes that emerged from the cacophony [of progressivism]? Democracy or elitism? Social justice or social control? Small entrepreneurship or concentrated capitalism? And what was the impact of American foreign policy? Were the progressives isolationists or interventionists? Imperialists or advocates of national self-determination? And whatever they were, what was their motivation? Moralistic utopianism? Muddled relativistic pragmatism? Hegemonic capitalism? Not surprisingly many battered scholars began to shout 'no mas!' In 1970, Peter Filene declared that the term 'progressivism' had become meaningless.

[ 48 ] Municipal administration [ edit ] The progressives typically concentrated on city and state government, looking for waste and better ways to provide services as the cities grew rapidly. These changes led to a more structured system, power that had been centralized within the legislature would now be more locally focused. The changes were made to the system to effectively make legal processes, market transactions, bureaucratic administration and democracy easier to manage, putting them under the classification of "Municipal Administration". There was also a change in authority for this system as it was believed that the authority that was not properly organized had now given authority to professionals, experts and bureaucrats for these services. These changes led to a more solid type of municipal administration compared to the old system that was underdeveloped and poorly constructed.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] The progressives mobilized concerned middle class voters as well as newspapers and magazines to identify problems and concentrate reform sentiment on specific problems. Many Protestants focused on the saloon as the power base for corruption as well as violence and family disruption, so they tried to get rid of the entire saloon system through prohibition. Others such as Jane Addams in Chicago promoted settlement houses .

[ 54 ] Early municipal reformers included Hazen S. Pingree (mayor of Detroit in the 1890s) [ 55 ] and Tom L. Johnson in Cleveland, Ohio. In 1901, Johnson won election as mayor of Cleveland on a platform of just taxation, home rule for Ohio cities and a 3-cent streetcar fare.

[ 56 ] Columbia University President Seth Low was elected mayor of New York City in 1901 on a reform ticket.

[ 57 ] Conservation [ edit ] Main article: Environmental history of the United States During the term of the progressive Republican President Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909) and influenced by the ideas of philosopher-scientists such as George Perkins Marsh , William John McGee , John Muir , John Wesley Powell and Lester Frank Ward , [ 58 ] the largest government-funded conservation-related projects in United States history were undertaken.

National parks and wildlife refuges [ edit ] Further information: Antiquities Act , National Park Service Organic Act , and National Wildlife Refuge On March 14, 1903, President Roosevelt created the first National Bird Preserve, the beginning of the Wildlife Refuge system, on Pelican Island, Florida . In all, by 1909, the Roosevelt administration had created an unprecedented 42 million acres (170,000 km 2 ) of United States National Forests , 53 National Wildlife Refuges and 18 areas of "special interest" such as the Grand Canyon .

Reclamation [ edit ] In addition, Roosevelt approved the Newlands Reclamation Act of 1902 which gave subsidies for irrigation in 13 (eventually 20) Western states. Another conservation-oriented bill was the Antiquities Act of 1906 that protected large areas of land by allowing the president to declare areas meriting protection to be national monuments . The Inland Waterways Commission was appointed by Roosevelt on March 14, 1907, to study the river systems of the United States, including the development of water power, flood control and land reclamation.

[ 59 ] National politics [ edit ] In the early 20th century, politicians of the Democratic and Republican parties, Lincoln–Roosevelt League Republicans (in California) and Theodore Roosevelt 's Progressive ("Bull Moose") Party all pursued environmental, political and economic reforms. Chief among these aims was the pursuit of trust busting, the breaking up very large monopolies and support for labor unions, public health programs, decreased corruption in politics and environmental conservation.

[ 60 ] The progressive movement enlisted support from both major parties and from minor parties as well. One leader, the Democratic William Jennings Bryan , had won both the Democratic Party and the Populist Party nominations in 1896. At the time, the great majority of other major leaders had been opposed to populism. When Roosevelt left the Republican Party in 1912, he took with him many of the intellectual leaders of progressivism, but very few political leaders.

[ 61 ] The Republican Party then became notably more committed to business-oriented and efficiency-oriented progressivism, typified by Herbert Hoover and William Howard Taft .

[ 62 ] Culture [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Liberalism in the United States Schools Classical Conservative Economic Modern Neoclassical Progressive Third Way Principles Civil rights Due process Economic freedom Economic progressivism Egalitarianism Equal opportunity Environmentalism Fiscal conservatism Freedom of the press Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Free market Harm Principle Individualism Internationalism Legal egalitarianism Mixed economy Republicanism Rule of law Separation of church and state Social equality Social justice Social welfare Unalienable rights Welfare state History American Revolutionary War Civil rights movement Fair Deal Gilded Age Great Society Jacksonian democracy Jeffersonian democracy New Deal New Deal coalition Progressive Era Young America movement Intellectuals Abbott Addams Carson Commager Dewey Douglass Dworkin Emerson Frank (Thomas) Franklin Friedan Friedman Galbraith Garrison Hofstadter Ingersoll Ireland James Jefferson King (Coretta) King (Martin) Krugman Maddow McCarthy McGovern Mott Murray Nozick Nussbaum Paine Pinker Rawls Reich Rorty Rush Schlesinger Sharpton Skinner Smith Sontag Stanton Steinem Sumner Trilling Trotter Thoreau Truth Vidal Ward Wells Wellstone Politicians Abzug Adams Aguilar Anthony Baker Biden Booker Brown Bryan Buttigieg Carter Chisholm Clark Cleveland Clinton (Bill) Clinton (Hillary) Clyburn Cuomo Dean Dukakis Eisenhower Farmer Frank Gillibrand Glasser Gompers Gore Hamer Harris Hays Hoyer Huerta Humphrey Jackson (Andrew) Jackson (Jesse) Javits Jefferson Johnson Jordan Kefauver Kennedy (John) Kennedy (Joseph) Kennedy (Robert) Kennedy (Ted) Kerry King (Coretta) King (Martin) La Follette La Guardia Lewis Lincoln Lindsay Madison Markey McCarthy McGovern Milk Mondale Murphy Murray Nelson Newsom O'Neill Obama Pelosi Powell Pritzker Randolph Reid Reuther Rockefeller Roosevelt (Eleanor) Roosevelt (Franklin) Roosevelt (Theodore) Rush Schumer Shapiro Shriver Smith Stevenson Truman Van Buren Wallace Walz Wellstone Wilson Yarborough Commentators Boghossian Bonnell Bouie Carville Chait Coates Cohen Colbert Croly Dowd Friedman Gay Goldberg Haidt Hayes Howe Huffington Kimmel Klein Maddow Maher Marshall Meyers Moore Moyers Noah O'Brien O'Donnell Olbermann Oliver Pakman Polgreen Singal Smith Stewart Sullivan Thompson Withers Yglesias Jurists Blackmun Brandeis Brennan Breyer Cardozo Darrow Douglas Dworkin Ginsburg Harlan Houston K. B. Jackson Kagan T. Marshall Sotomayor Souter Stevens Tribe Warren Literature A Summary View of the Rights of British America (1774) Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms (1775) Common Sense (1775-1776) The American Crisis (1776-1783) United States Declaration of Independence (1776) United States Bill of Rights (1789) Rights of Man (1791) The Age of Reason (1793) Agrarian Justice (1797) Jefferson Bible (1804-1820) Essays: First Series (1841) Essays: Second Series (1844) Resistance to Civil Government (1849) The Vital Center (1946) A Nation of Immigrants (1958) A Theory of Justice (1971) The Imperial Presidency (1973) Movements Mercantilism Age of Enlightenment American Revolution Abolitionism Classical liberalism Progressivism Labor rights Women's suffrage Social liberalism Cold War liberal Civil rights movement Second-wave feminism LGBT rights Environmentalism Neoliberalism Third Way Net neutrality in the United States Third-wave feminism Modern liberalism in the United States Internet privacy Occupy Wallstreet Fourth-wave feminism Black Lives Matter The Resistance Parties Anti-Federalist Party Democratic Party Democratic-Republican Party Liberal Republican Party National Democratic Party People's Party Bull Moose Party Progressive Party (1924) Progressive Party (1948) Republican Party ( historically, factions ) Half-Breeds Radical Republicans Rockefeller Republicans Roosevelt Republicans Moderate Republicans Mugwumps Rhode Island Suffrage Party Whig Party (factions) Think tanks Center for American Progress Center for Budget and Policy Priorities Roosevelt Institute Other organizations AFL–CIO American Civil Liberties Union American Constitution Society American Humanist Association Americans United for Separation of Church and State Brennan Center For Justice Equal Justice Works Human Rights Campaign NAACP National Organization for Women People for the American Way NARAL Southern Christian Leadership Conference Southern Center for Human Rights SNCC National Urban League Media The American Prospect The Atlantic CNN HuffPost Last Week Tonight with John Oliver Mother Jones MSNBC NPR The Daily Show The Nation The New Republic The New York Times The Problem with Jon Stewart Rolling Stone Salon Sojourners Talking Points Memo ThinkProgress The Washington Post Vox (website) See also Liberal bias in academia Liberal bias in the media The Liberal Imagination (1950) Modern liberalism in the United States American Left Liberalism portal United States portal v t e Upton Sinclair 's The Jungle exposed Americans to the horrors of the Chicago meatpacking plants.

The foundation of the progressive tendency was indirectly linked to the unique philosophy of pragmatism which was primarily developed by John Dewey and William James .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Equally significant to progressive-era reform were the crusading journalists known as muckrakers . These journalists publicized to middle class readers economic privilege, political corruption and social injustice. Their articles appeared in McClure's Magazine and other reform periodicals. Some muckrakers focused on corporate abuses .

Ida Tarbell exposed the activities of the Standard Oil Company . In The Shame of the Cities (1904), Lincoln Steffens dissected corruption in city government. In Following the Color Line (1908), Ray Stannard Baker criticized race relations. Other muckrakers assailed the Senate , railroad companies, insurance companies and fraud in patent medicine .

[ 65 ] Novelists criticized corporate injustices.

Theodore Dreiser drew harsh portraits of a type of ruthless businessman in The Financier (1912) and The Titan (1914). In The Jungle (1906), socialist Upton Sinclair repelled readers with descriptions of Chicago's meatpacking plants and his work led to support for remedial food safety legislation. Leading intellectuals also shaped the progressive mentality. In Dynamic Sociology (1883), Lester Frank Ward laid out the philosophical foundations of the progressive movement and attacked the laissez-faire policies advocated by Herbert Spencer and William Graham Sumner .

[ 66 ] In The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899), Thorstein Veblen attacked the "conspicuous consumption" of the wealthy. Educator John Dewey emphasized a child-centered philosophy of pedagogy known as progressive education which affected schoolrooms for three generations.

[ 67 ] In the 21st century [ edit ] See also: American left , Left-wing populism , Social liberalism , Social democracy , and Democratic socialism Modern progressivism can be seen as encompassing many notable differences from the historical progressivism of the 19th–20th centuries. Some viewpoints of modern progressivism highlight these perceived differences like those of Princeton economics professor Thomas C. Leonard who viewed historical progressivism in The American Conservative as being "[a]t a glance, ... not much here for 21st-century progressives to claim kinship with. Today's progressives emphasize racial equality and minority rights, decry U.S. imperialism, shun biological ideas in social science, and have little use for piety or proselytizing." Ultimately, both historical progressivism and the modern movement share the notion that the free markets lead to economic inequalities that must be ameliorated in order to best protect the American working class.

[ 68 ] Mitigating income inequality [ edit ] Politician Bernie Sanders (pictured at podium) is widely recognized for contributing to a progressive shift within the Democratic Party since the 2010s.

Income inequality in the United States has been on the rise since 1970.

[ 69 ] Progressives argue that lower union rates, weak policy, globalization and other drivers have caused the gap in income.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] The rise of income inequality has led progressives to draft legislation including, but not limited to, reforming Wall Street , reforming the tax code, reforming campaign finance , closing loopholes and keeping domestic work.

[ 73 ] Wall Street reform [ edit ] Progressives began to demand stronger Wall Street regulation after they perceived deregulation and relaxed enforcement as leading to the 2008 financial crisis . The Occupy Wall Street movement, launched in downtown Manhattan, was one high-profile reaction to the financial shenanigans. Passing the Dodd-Frank financial regulatory act in 2010 provided increased oversight on financial institutions and the creation of new regulatory agencies, but many progressives argue its broad framework allows for financial institutions to continue to take advantage of consumers and the government.

[ 74 ] Among others, Bernie Sanders has argued for reimplementing Glass-Steagall , which regulated banking more strictly, and for breaking up financial institutions where market-share is concentrated in a select few 'too big to fail' corporations.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Health care reform [ edit ] Main article: Healthcare reform in the United States In 2009, the Congressional Progressive Caucus (CPC) outlined five key healthcare principles they intended to pass into law. The CPC mandated a nationwide public option, affordable health insurance, insurance market regulations, an employer insurance provision mandate and comprehensive services for children.

[ 77 ] In March 2010, Congress passed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , generally referred to as Obamacare, which was intended to increase the affordability and efficiency of the United States healthcare system. Although considered a partial success by some progressives, many argued that it did not go far enough in achieving healthcare reform as exemplified with the Democrats' failure in achieving a national public option.

[ 78 ] In recent decades, single-payer healthcare has become an important goal in healthcare reform for progressives. In the 2016 Democratic Party primaries , progressive presidential candidate Bernie Sanders raised the issue of a single-payer healthcare system, citing his belief that millions of Americans are still paying too much for health insurance and arguing that millions more do not receive the care they need.

[ 79 ] In November 2016, an effort was made to implement a single-payer healthcare system in the state of Colorado, known as ColoradoCare (Amendment 69). Senator Sanders held rallies in Colorado in support of Amendment 69 leading up to the vote.

[ 80 ] Despite high-profile support, Amendment 69 failed to pass, with just 21.23% of voting Colorado residents voting in favor and 78.77% against.

[ 81 ] Minimum wage [ edit ] Adjusted for inflation, the minimum wage peaked in 1968 at around $9.90 an hour in 2020 dollars.

[ 82 ] Progressives believe that stagnating wages perpetuate income inequality and that raising the minimum wage is a necessary step to combat inequality.

[ 72 ] If the minimum wage grew at the rate of productivity growth in the United States, it would have reached $21.72 an hour in 2012, nearly three times as much as the current $7.25 an hour.

[ 83 ] Popular progressives such as Senator Bernie Sanders and Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez have endorsed a federally mandated wage increase to $15 an hour.

[ 84 ] The movement has already seen success with its implementation in California with the passing of bill to raise the minimum wage $1 every year until reaching $15 an hour in 2021.

[ 85 ] New York workers are lobbying for similar legislation as many continue to rally for a minimum wage increase as part of the Fight for $15 movement.

[ 86 ] Environmental justice [ edit ] U.S. representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez from New York, an advocate of action on climate change and author of the Green New Deal Modern progressives advocate strong environmental protections and measures to reduce or eliminate pollution. One reason for this is the strong link between economic injustice and adverse environmental conditions as groups that are economically marginalized tend to be disproportionately affected by the harms of pollution and environmental degradation .

[ 87 ] Social justice [ edit ] Main articles: LGBT rights movement , Identity politics , Racial justice , and Gender equality In the 21st century progressives in the United States are advocating for the implementation of legislation that will promote a more equal society and help reduce the gaps between diverse populations in the American society, including the gaps between populations of different races, gender gaps and socio-economic gaps. Progressives support the promotion of criminal justice reform to rectify systemic injustices, and the eradication of discriminatory practices in areas such as employment and housing.

Definition [ edit ] See also: Center-left politics This article is part of a series on Modern liberalism in the United States Schools Progressivism Social liberalism American Left Principles Egalitarianism Empiricism Equal opportunity Environmentalism Harm principle Internationalism Mixed economy Social democracy Social equality Social justice Welfare state History Progressive Era Square Deal New Deal coalition New Deal Fair Deal Civil rights movement Great Society New Democrats Third Way Intellectuals Abbott Addams Berle Carson Commager Croly Dewey Du Bois Dworkin Friedan Fukuyama Galbraith Harrington Hofstadter Hook Howe Kazin King Jr.

Krugman Lippmann Nussbaum Rawls Reich Rorty Schlesinger Skinner Sontag Trilling Vidal Politicians Abzug Aguilar Anderson Bayh Bentsen Biden Brooke Brown (Jerry) Brown (Pat) Bryan Buttigieg Case Carter Chase Smith Chisholm Church Clark Clinton (Bill) Clinton (Hillary) Clyburn Conyers Cuomo (Andrew) Cuomo (Mario) Dean Franken Goodell Gore Halpern Harris Hatfield Heinz Hill Hochul Hoyer Humphrey Jackson (Henry) Jackson (Jesse) Javits Jeffords Jeffries Johnson (Hiram) Johnson (Lyndon B.) Jordan Kefauver Kennedy (Joe) Kennedy (John) Kennedy (Robert) Kennedy (Ted) Kerry La Follette La Follette Jr.

La Guardia Lewis Lieu Long Markey Mansfield Mathias McCarthy (Eugene) Milk Mondale Murphy Murray Muskie Nelson (Bill) Nelson (Gaylord) Newsom Norris O'Malley O'Neill Obama Ocasio-Cortez Pelosi Powell Reid Rockefeller Romney (George) Roosevelt (Franklin) Roosevelt (Theodore) Sanders Schumer Shaheen Shapiro Specter Truman Wallace (Henry) Walz Warren Waters Weicker Wellstone Wilson Yarborough Jurists Blackmun Brandeis Brennan Breyer Douglas Ginsburg (Ruth Bader) Hughes Jackson (Ketanji Brown) Kagan Marshall (Thurgood) Sotomayor Souter Stevens Warren (Earl) Williams Activists Armstrong Biden (Jill) Chavez Du Bois Emhoff Ford Friedan Gompers Hamer Ireland Jackson (Jesse) King King Jr.

Lerner MacFarlane McIlrath Miranda Murray Obama (Michelle) Randolph Reuther Roosevelt (Eleanor) Sharpton Steinem Stewart Trotter Parties Active Democratic Party (1930s–present) Defunct Progressive Party 1912–1920 1924–1934 1948–1955 ) Rockefeller Republicans (1930s–1970s) Think tanks Center for American Progress Center for Budget and Policy Priorities Demos Economic Policy Institute Roosevelt Institute Urban Institute Other organizations AFL-CIO ACLU American Constitution Society American Humanist Association Americans United for Separation of Church and State Brennan Center for Justice Congress of Racial Equality Congressional Progressive Caucus Equal Justice Works Fair Fight Action Human Rights Campaign NAACP NARAL NOW Our Revolution People for the American Way Southern Christian Leadership Conference Southern Center for Human Rights SNCC National Urban League Media Journals The American Prospect The Atlantic Mother Jones The Nation The New Republic Rolling Stone Sojourners TV channels MSNBC Websites AlterNet Daily Kos Firedoglake HuffPost Salon Talking Points Memo ThinkProgress The Young Turks Other The Problem with Jon Stewart See also 4B movement Liberal bias in academia Liberal bias in the media Liberal theorists Liberalism in the United States Liberalism portal United States portal v t e With the rise in popularity of progressives such as Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez , Bernie Sanders , and Elizabeth Warren , the term progressive began to carry greater cultural currency, particularly in the 2016 Democratic primaries . While answering a question from CNN moderator Anderson Cooper regarding her willingness to shift positions during an October 2015 debate, Hillary Clinton referred to herself as a "progressive who likes to get things done", drawing the ire of a number of Sanders supporters and other critics from her left.

[ 88 ] Senator John Fetterman has moderated his foreign and domestic positions that have arisen in late 2023 such as the war in Gaza and the increased illegal immigration on the southern border creating doubts about his progressivism.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] Questions about the precise meaning of the term have persisted within the Democratic Party and without since the election of Donald Trump in the 2016 United States presidential election , with some candidates using it to indicate their affiliation with the left flank of the party.

Progressive parties [ edit ] Following the first progressive movement of the early 20th century, two later short-lived parties have also identified as progressive.

Progressive Party, 1912 [ edit ] Main article: Bull Moose Party The first political party named the Progressive Party was formed for the 1912 presidential election to elect Theodore Roosevelt .

[ 91 ] It was formed after Roosevelt lost his bid to become the Republican candidate to William Howard Taft , and became defunct by 1920.

Progressive Party, 1924 [ edit ] Main article: Progressive Party (United States, 1924-1934) In 1924, Wisconsin Senator Robert M. La Follette ran for president on the Progressive Party ticket. La Follette won the support of labor unions , German Americans, and socialists by his crusade. He carried only Wisconsin , and the party vanished elsewhere.

[ 92 ] In Wisconsin, it remained a force until the 1940s.

Progressive Party, 1948 [ edit ] Main article: Progressive Party (United States, 1948-1955) A third party was initiated in 1948 by former Vice President Henry A. Wallace as a vehicle for his campaign for president of the United States . He saw the two parties as reactionary and war-mongering, and attracted support from left-wing voters who opposed the Cold War policies that had become a national consensus. Most liberals , New Dealers , and especially the Congress of Industrial Organizations , denounced the party because in their view it was increasingly controlled by Communists. It faded away after winning 2% of the vote in 1948.

[ 93 ] Farmer–Labor Parties [ edit ] Main article: Farmer–Labor Party See also [ edit ] Democratic socialism Left-wing populism Lincoln–Roosevelt League Oregon Progressive Party Progressive Citizens of America Vermont Progressive Party References [ edit ] ^ Alonzo L. Hamby, "Progressivism: A Century of Change and Rebirth", in Progressivism and the New Democracy , ed. Sidney M. Milkis and Jerome M. Mileur ( University of Massachusetts Press , 1999), (p.?) 40 also notes that "a plethora of scholarship in the last half of the 1950s left the old consensus [about progressives] in shreds while producing a plethora of alternative views that defy rational synthesis." ^ "The Origins and Evolution of Progressive Economics" .

^ Trodd, Zoe (2017).

"Social Progressivism and Religion in America" .

Social Progressivism and Religion in America .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Religion .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199340378.013.462 .

ISBN 9780199340378 .

^ a b Nugent, Walter (2010).

Progressivism: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-531106-8 .

Progressivism emerged as a response to the excesses of the Gilded Age ... . [Progressives] fought for worker's compensation, child labor laws, minimum wage and maximum hours legislation; they enacted anti-trust laws, improved living conditions in urban slums, instituted the graduated income tax, won women the right to vote, and laid the groundwork for Roosevelt's New Deal.

^ Link, Arthur S. (1954).

Woodrow Wilson and the Progressive Era: 1913–1917 .

^ De Santis, Vincent P. (1999).

The Shaping of Modern America, 1877–1920 . p. 171. "[P]rogressives strove to purify politics".

^ Franklin, J. (1 March 1999). "Blacks and the Progressive Movement: Emergence of a New Synthesis".

OAH Magazine of History .

13 (3): 20– 23.

doi : 10.1093/maghis/13.3.20 .

JSTOR 25163288 .

^ Published in Puck (23 January 1889) ^ Charles R. Geisst, Monopolies in America: Empire builders and their enemies from Jay Gould to Bill Gates (Oxford University Press, 2000) pp 47-91; online .

^ Kolasky, William.

"Theodore Roosevelt and William Howard Taft: Marching Toward Armageddon" (PDF) .

Antitrust, Vol. 25, No. 2, Spring 2011 . the American Bar Association . Retrieved 5 October 2012 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Benjamin Parke De Witt, The Progressive Movement (1915) pp. 129–132.

online .

^ The Americans: Reconstruction to the 21st Century (Evanston: McDougall Littell, 2006), 308 ^ J. Michael Hogan (2003).

Rhetoric and reform in the Progressive Era . Michigan State U. Press. p. xv.

ISBN 978-0-87013-637-5 .

^ William Thomas Hutchinson (1957).

Lowden of Illinois: the life of Frank O. Lowden . U. of Chicago Press. pp. 305 vol 1.

^ Smith, Kevin B. (2011).

Governing States and Localities . Washington, D.C.: CQ Press. pp.

189– 90.

ISBN 978-1-60426-728-0 .

^ Carlos A. Schwantes (1996).

The Pacific Northwest: An Interpretive History . U of Nebraska Press. pp. 347–.

ISBN 978-0803292284 .

^ Ravitch, Diane; Left Back: A Century of Failed School Reforms; Simon & Schuster ^ William J. Reese, Power and the Promise of School Reform: Grassroots Movements during the Progressive Era (1986) [ page needed ] ^ Murphey, Kathleen A. (1 October 1999).

"Common School or 'One Best System'? Tracking School Reform in Fort Wayne, Indiana, 1853-75" .

Historical Studies in Education : 188– 211.

doi : 10.32316/hse/rhe.v11i2.1623 .

^ Gamson, David (2003). "District Progressivism: Rethinking Reform in Urban School Systems, 1900–1928".

Paedagogica Historica .

39 (4): 417– 34.

doi : 10.1080/00309230307479 .

S2CID 145478829 .

^ The politicians still picked the school janitors.

^ Victoria-María MacDonald, "The Paradox of Bureaucratization: New Views on Progressive Era Teachers and the Development of a Woman's Profession," History of Education Quarterly 1999 39(4): 427–53 ^ Mina Carson, Settlement Folk: Social Thought and the American Settlement Movement, 1885–1930 (1990) ^ Judith Ann Trolander, "Hull-House and the Settlement House Movement: A Centennial Reassessment," Journal of Urban History 1991 17(4): 410–20 ^ Connelly, Mark Thomas (1980).

The Response to Prostitution in the Progressive Era . The University of South Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0-8078-1424-6 .

^ Addams, Jane (2002).

A new conscience and an ancient evil . University of Illinois Press.

^ Major, Kara (2004).

"Criminalizing seduction: prostitution, moral reform, and the new york anti-seduction law of 1848" .

Digital Georgetown .

hdl : 10822/1051351 . Retrieved 2023-04-23 .

^ Walter I. Trattner, Crusade for the Children: A History of the National Child Labor Committee and Child Labor Reform in America (1970) ^ Hugh D. Hindman, Child Labor: An American History (2002). 431 pp.

^ Julie Greene, Pure and Simple Politics: The American Federation of Labor and Political Activism, 1881–1917 (1998) ^ James H. Timberlake, Prohibition and the Progressive Movement, 1900–1920 (1970) ^ Norman H. Clark, Deliver Us from Evil: An Interpretation of American Prohibition (1976) ^ Daniel Okrent, Last Call: The Rise and Fall of Prohibition (2011) excerpt and text search Archived 2019-04-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Thomas, Leonard (2005).

"Retrospectives: Eugenics and Economics in the Progressive Era" .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

19 (4): 207– 224.

doi : 10.1257/089533005775196642 .

^ Cohen, Nancy (2002).

The Reconstruction of American Liberalism, 1865–1914 . Chapel Hill, North Carolina: The University of North Carolina Press. p.

243 .

ISBN 978-0807853542 .

^ Paul, Diane B. (2009), Radick, Gregory; Hodge, Jonathan (eds.), "Darwin, social Darwinism and eugenics" , The Cambridge Companion to Darwin , Cambridge Companions to Philosophy (2 ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

219– 245, doi : 10.1017/ccol9780521884754.010 , ISBN 978-0-521-88475-4 , retrieved 2022-03-10 ^ Hovenkamp, Herbert (Nov 2017).

"The Progressives: Racism and Public Law" .

Penn Carey Law:Legal Scholarship Repository .

^ Alexander Keyssar (2009).

The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the United States . Basic Books, 2nd ed. pp.

103– 30.

ISBN 9780465010141 .

^ Catherine Cocks; et al. (2009).

Historical Dictionary of the Progressive Era . Scarecrow Press. p. 112.

ISBN 9780810862937 .

^ David W. Southern, The Progressive Era and Race: Reaction and Reform, 1900–1917 (2005) ^ Michael Perman (2010).

Pursuit of Unity: A Political History of the American South . Univ of North Carolina Press. p. 174.

ISBN 9780807899250 .

^ Charles P. Henry (1999).

Ralph Bunche: Model Negro Or American Other?

. NYU Press. pp.

96– 98.

ISBN 9780814735824 .

^ "4. Shall the People Rule?" , La Follette campaign literature , Wisconsin Historical Society, La Follette has ever sought to give the people greater power over their affairs. He has favored and now favors the direct election of senators ...

^ Quoted in Sidney M. Milkis and Jerome M. Mileur, "Progressivism and the New Democracy," (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press , 1999) 19–20 ^ Philip J. Ethington, "The Metropolis and Multicultural Ethics: Direct Democracy versus Deliberative Democracy in the Progressive Era," in Progressivism and the New Democracy, ed. Sidney M. Milkis and Jerome M. Mileur (Amherst: Massachusetts University Press, 1999), 193 ^ Kraditor, Aileen S.

(1965).

The Ideas of the Woman Suffrage Movement . Columbia University Press.

^ Michael Perman.

Struggle for Mastery: Disfranchisement in the South, 1888–1908 . (University of North Carolina Press, 2001), pp. 63, 85, 177, 186–87; quotes on pp. 223, 298 ^ Quoted in Sidney M. Milkis and Jerome M. Mileur, "Progressivism and the New Democracy," (Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press , 1999) 42 ^ Joseph L. Tropea, "Rational Capitalism and Municipal Government: The Progressive Era." Social Science History (1989): 137–58 ^ Michael H. Ebner and Eugene M. Tobin, eds., The Age of Urban Reform, (1977) ^ Bradley Robert Rice, Progressive cities: the commission government movement in America, 1901–1920 (1977) ^ Martin J. Schiesl, The politics of efficiency: municipal reform in the Progressive Era 1880–1920 (1972) ^ Kenneth Fox, Better city government: innovation in American urban politics, 1850–1937 (1977) ^ John D. Buenker, ed.

Encyclopedia of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era (2005) ^ Melvin G. Holli, Reform in Detroit: Hazen S. Pingree and Urban Politics (1969) ^ Murdock, Eugene C. (1994).

Tom Johnson of Cleveland . Wright State University Press.

ISBN 9781882090051 .

^ L. E. Fredman, "Seth Low: Theorist of Municipal Reform," Journal of American Studies 1972 6(1): 19–39 ^ Ross, John R. (March 1975).

"Ross, John R.; Man Over Nature – Origins of the Conservation Movement" .

American Studies .

16 (1). Journals.ku.edu . Retrieved 2012-05-14 .

^ "Conservation Commissions and Conferences under the Roosevelt Administration 1901–1909" . Theodore Roosevelt Association. Archived from the original on 2012-04-26 . Retrieved 2011-11-19 .

^ Buenker and Burnham (2006) [ full citation needed ] ^ Lewis Gould, Four hats in the ring: the 1912 election and the birth of modern American Politics (2008) ^ Hoff Wilson, Joan (1975).

Herbert Hoover: Forgotten Progressive . Little, Brown.

ISBN 9780316944168 .

^ Westbrook, Robert Brett (1991).

John Dewey and American Democracy . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 9780801425608 .

^ Commager, Henry Steele (1952).

The American Mind . Yale University Press.

^ Filler, Louis (1976).

The Muckrakers . Pennsylvania State University Press.

ISBN 9780271012124 .

^ Henry Steele Commager, ed., Lester Frank Ward and the Welfare State (1967) ^ Buenker and Buenker, eds.

Encyclopedia of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era.

(2005) ^ Thomas C., Leonard (29 September 2016).

" 'The Dark Heart of Progressivism' by Matthew Harwood (Interview with Princeton economics professor)" .

The American Conservative . Retrieved 2019-06-18 .

^ Kim, Jongsung; Tebaldi, Edinaldo (Fall 2013).

"Trends and Sources of Income Inequality in the United States" .

Journal of Business & Economic Studies .

19 (2): 1– 13.

^ Western, Bruce; Rosenfeld, Jake (August 2011). "Unions, Norms, and the Rise in U.S. Wage Inequality".

American Sociological Review .

76 (4): 513– 537.

doi : 10.1177/0003122411414817 .

S2CID 18351034 .

^ Roser, Max; Cuaresma, Jesus Crespo (March 2016).

"Why is Income Inequality Increasing in the Developed World?" (PDF) .

Review of Income and Wealth .

62 (1): 1– 27.

doi : 10.1111/roiw.12153 .

S2CID 153341589 .

^ a b Garry, Patrick M. (17 February 2016).

"Conservatism and the Real Problems of Income Inequality" .

Intercollegiate Studies Institute . Archived from the original on January 8, 2020 . Retrieved January 8, 2020 .

^ Cooper, Daniel H.; Lutz, Byron F.; Palumbo, Michael G. (1 December 2015).

"The Role of Taxes in Mitigating Income Inequality Across the U.S. States" (PDF) .

National Tax Journal .

68 (4): 943– 974.

doi : 10.17310/ntj.2015.4.03 .

S2CID 157588016 .

ProQuest 1794901698 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 April 2019 . Retrieved 14 March 2021 .

^ Pollin, Robert (May 2013). "Fighting for Wall Street Regulation: Who Said It Was Easy?".

New Labor Forum .

22 (2): 88– 91.

doi : 10.1177/1095796013482455 .

S2CID 155745898 .

^ "5 Reasons Glass-Steagall Matters – Bernie Sanders" .

Bernie Sanders . 2015-11-16. Archived from the original on 2017-05-20 . Retrieved 2016-11-19 .

^ "Reforming Wall Street – Bernie Sanders" .

Bernie Sanders . Archived from the original on 2018-12-21 . Retrieved 2016-11-19 .

^ "Congressional Progressive Caucus : Health Care Reform : CPC Releases Health Care Principles" .

cpc-grijalva.house.gov . Archived from the original on 2019-01-12 . Retrieved 2016-10-27 .

^ Rigby, E.; Clark, J. H.; Pelika, S. (1 January 2014). "Party Politics and Enactment of 'Obamacare': A Policy-Centered Analysis of Minority Party Involvement".

Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law .

39 (1): 57– 95.

doi : 10.1215/03616878-2395181 .

PMID 24193613 .

^ Hill, Brent Budowsky, columnist, The (2015-06-29).

"Sanders calls for single-payer healthcare" .

The Hill . Retrieved 2016-10-27 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Bernie Sanders at CU Boulder: 'Stand tall and vote yes on Amendment 69' " . Retrieved 2016-10-27 .

^ Williams, Wayne (November 8, 2016).

"Colorado Election Results" .

sos.state.co.us . Colorado State Department . Retrieved December 18, 2016 .

^ "5 facts about the minimum wage" .

Pew Research Center . 2015-07-23 . Retrieved 2016-11-20 .

^ Schmitt, John (March 2012).

"The Minimum Wage is Too Damn Low" (PDF) . Center for Economic and Policy Research.

^ "A Living Wage" .

Our Revolution . Archived from the original on 2019-08-13 . Retrieved 2016-11-20 .

^ "California "Fair Wage Act of 2016" $15 Minimum Wage Initiative (2016)" .

BallotPedia .

^ "Fight for $15" .

Fight for $15 . Retrieved 2016-11-20 .

^ US EPA, OA (November 3, 2014).

"Environmental Justice" .

US EPA . Archived from the original on October 12, 2008.

^ "Hillary Clinton on flip-flop charge: 'I'm a progressive, but I'm a progressive who likes to get things done' " .

The Week . 13 October 2015 . Retrieved 12 December 2017 .

^ Newsweek staff. (20 December 2023). "John Fetterman Faces Rebellion From Democratic Voters".

Newsweek Magazine website Retrieved 23 December 2023.

^ Rachel Dobkin. (22 December 2023). "John Fetterman Now Embraced by Conservatives".

Newsweek Magazine website Retrieved 23 December 2023.

^ "Transforming American Democracy: TR and The Bull Moose Campaign of 1912 | Miller Center" .

millercenter.org . 2017-02-13 . Retrieved 2020-11-14 .

^ Thelen, David Paul (1976).

Robert M. La Follette and the Insurgent Spirit . Little, Brown.

OCLC 565078133 .

[ page needed ] ^ Thomas W. Devine (2013).

Henry Wallace's 1948 Presidential Campaign and the Future of Postwar Liberalism . U North Carolina Press. pp.

195– 201, 211– 12.

ISBN 9781469602035 .

Further reading [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] Buenker, John D., John C. Burnham, and Robert M. Crunden.

Progressivism (1986) short overview Buenker, John D. and Joseph Buenker, eds.

Encyclopedia of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era . Sharpe Reference, 2005. xxxii + 1256 pp. in three volumes.

ISBN 0-7656-8051-3 . 900 articles by 200 scholars Buenker, John D., ed.

Historical Dictionary of the Progressive Era (1988) online Cocks, Catherine, Peter C. Holloran and Alan Lessoff.

Historical Dictionary of the Progressive Era (2009) Chambers, John Whiteclay II.

The Tyranny of Change: America in the Progressive Era, 1890–1920 (2000), textbook excerpt and text search Archived 2022-12-29 at the Wayback Machine Crunden, Robert M.

Ministers of Reform: The Progressives' Achievement in American Civilization, 1889–1920 (1982) excerpt and text search Archived 2022-12-29 at the Wayback Machine Dawley, Alan.

Changing the World: American Progressives in War and Revolution (2003) excerpt and text search Archived 2021-07-11 at the Wayback Machine Diner, Steven J.

A Very Different Age: Americans of the Progressive Era (1998) excerpt and text search Archived 2022-12-29 at the Wayback Machine Flanagan, Maureen.

America Reformed: Progressives and Progressivisms, 1890s–1920s (2007).

Gilmore, Glenda Elizabeth.

Who Were the Progressives?

(2002) Gould, Lewis L.

America in the Progressive Era, 1890–1914 (2000) excerpt and text search Archived 2022-12-29 at the Wayback Machine Gould, Lewis L. ed., The Progressive Era (1974), essays by scholars Hays, Samuel P.

The Response to Industrialism, 1885–1914 (1957), old but influential short survey Hofstadter, Richard The Age of Reform (1954), Pulitzer Prize, but now sadly outdated Jensen, Richard. "Democracy, Republicanism and Efficiency: The Values of American Politics, 1885–1930," in Byron Shafer and Anthony Badger, eds, Contesting Democracy: Substance and Structure in American Political History, 1775–2000 (U of Kansas Press, 2001) pp. 149–80; online version Archived 2012-08-05 at archive.today Johnston, Robert D. "Re-Democratizing the Progressive Era: The Politics of Progressive Era Political Historiography," Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era (2002) 1#1 pp. 68–92 Kennedy, David M. ed., Progressivism: The Critical Issues (1971), readings Kloppenberg, James T.

Uncertain victory: social democracy and progressivism in European and American thought, 1870–1920 1986 online at ACLS e-books Leuchtenburg, William E.

"Progressivism and Imperialism: The Progressive Movement and American Foreign Policy, 1898–1916," The Mississippi Valley Historical Review, Vol. 39, No. 3. (Dec., 1952), pp. 483–504.

JSTOR Archived 2017-11-13 at the Wayback Machine Lears, T. J. Jackson.

Rebirth of a Nation: The Remaking of Modern America, 1877-1920 (2009) excerpt and text search Archived 2021-07-11 at the Wayback Machine Link, Arthur S.

Woodrow Wilson and the Progressive Era: 1913–1917 (1954), standard scholarly survey; online Mann, Arthur. ed., The Progressive Era (1975), readings from scholars Lasch, Christopher .

The True and Only Heaven: Progress and its Critics (1991) excerpt and text search Archived 2022-07-12 at the Wayback Machine McGerr, Michael.

A Fierce Discontent: The Rise and Fall of the Progressive Movement in America, 1870–1920 (2003) excerpt and text search Archived 2021-07-11 at the Wayback Machine Mowry, George.

The Era of Theodore Roosevelt and the Birth of Modern America, 1900–1912.

(1954) general survey of era; online Noggle, Burl. "The Twenties: A New Historiographical Frontier," The Journal of American History, Vol. 53, No. 2. (Sep., 1966), pp. 299–314.

in JSTOR Perry, Elisabeth Israels and Karen Manners Smith, eds.

The Gilded Age & Progressive Era: A Student Companion (2006) Piott, Steven.

American Reformers 1870–1920 (2006). 240 pp. biographies of 12 leaders online review Archived 2022-12-29 at the Wayback Machine Rodgers, Daniel T.

Atlantic Crossings: Social Politics in a Progressive Age (2000). stresses links with Europe online edition Archived 2015-05-02 at the Wayback Machine Schutz, Aaron.

Social Class, Social Action, and Education: The Failure of Progressive Democracy.

(2010) introduction Archived 2010-06-09 at the Wayback Machine Stromquist, Shelton.

Reinventing "the People": The Progressive Movement, the Class Problem and the Origins of Modern Liberalism (2006) excerpt and text search Archived 2022-12-29 at the Wayback Machine Thelen, David P. "Social Tensions and the Origins of Progressivism," Journal of American History 56 (1969), 323–341 JSTOR Archived 2016-12-21 at the Wayback Machine Wiebe, Robert.

The Search For Order, 1877–1920 (1967) highly influential interpretation Young, Jeremy C.

The Age of Charisma: Leaders, Followers, and Emotions in American Society, 1870-1940 (2017) excerpt and text search Archived 2021-07-11 at the Wayback Machine National politics [ edit ] Blum, John Morton The Republican Roosevelt.

(1954). Series of essays that examine how TR did politics Brands, H.W.

T.R.: The Last Romantic (2019) excerpt Clements, Kendrick A.

The Presidency of Woodrow Wilson (1992) online Coletta, Paolo.

The Presidency of William Howard Taft (1973) online Cooper, John Milton The Warrior and the Priest: Woodrow Wilson and Theodore Roosevelt.

(1983), influential dual biography online Edwards, Barry C. "Putting Hoover on the Map: Was the 31st President a Progressive?." Congress & the Presidency 41#1 (2014) pp 49–83 online Archived 2018-05-07 at the Wayback Machine Gould, Lewis L.

The Presidency of Theodore Roosevelt (1991) online Harrison, Robert.

Congress, Progressive Reform, and the New American State (2004) excerpt and text search Archived 2022-12-29 at the Wayback Machine Hofstadter, Richard .

The American Political Tradition (1948), ch. 8–10 on Bryan, Roosevelt and Wilson.

excerpt and text search Archived 2021-11-12 at the Wayback Machine Link, Arthur Stanley.

Woodrow Wilson and the Progressive Era, 1910–1917 (1972), standard history; online Morris, Edmund Theodore Rex . (2001), very well written biography of Theodore Roosevelt covers 1901–1909 excerpt and text search Mowry, George E.

Theodore Roosevelt and the Progressive Movement . (2001) standard history of 1912 movement; online Sanders, Elizabeth.

Roots of Reform: Farmers, Workers and the American State, 1877–1917 (1999) excerpt and text search Archived 2022-12-29 at the Wayback Machine Walworth, Arthur (1958).

Woodrow Wilson, Volume I, Volume II . Longmans, Green.

;  904pp; full scale scholarly biography; winner of Pulitzer Prize; online 2nd ed. 1965 External links [ edit ] Media related to Progressivism in the United States at Wikimedia Commons "The Fifty Most Influential Progressives of the Twentieth Century" — Part I , Part II , Part III , slideshows by The Nation v t e Modern liberalism in the United States Variants Progressivism Social liberalism Social democracy Christian democracy Distributism Social market economy American Left Core principles Egalitarianism Equal opportunity Economic progressivism Environmentalism Internationalism Mixed economy Social equality Social justice Welfare state History 1950s 1960s and 1970s Civil rights movement Classical liberalism Cold War Fair Deal Great Society Liberal coalition Liberal Republicans Neoconservatism New Deal New Democrats Third Way New Left Progressive Era Vietnam War Significant figures Edith Abbott Jane Addams Louis Brandeis Cesar Chavez Henry Steele Commager William O. Douglas W. E. B. Du Bois Betty Ford Betty Friedan John Kenneth Galbraith Ruth Bader Ginsburg Samuel Gompers Fannie Lou Hamer Richard Hofstadter Patricia Ireland Jesse Jackson Alfred Kazin Coretta Scott King Martin Luther King Jr.

Paul Krugman Michael Lerner Rachel Maddow Thurgood Marshall Pauli Murray John Rawls Walter Reuther Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Al Sharpton Susan Sontag Sonia Sotomayor Gloria Steinem Lionel Trilling William Monroe Trotter Gore Vidal Earl Warren Significant politicians Bella Abzug Joe Biden William Jennings Bryan Pete Buttigieg Jimmy Carter Bill Clinton Hillary Clinton John Conyers Mario Cuomo Howard Dean Michael Dukakis Barney Frank Al Gore Kamala Harris Hubert Humphrey Jacob Javits Lyndon B. Johnson Barbara Jordan Estes Kefauver John F. Kennedy Robert F. Kennedy Ted Kennedy John Kerry Robert M. La Follette Fiorello H. La Guardia John Lewis John Lindsay Eugene McCarthy George McGovern Harvey Milk Walter Mondale Tip O'Neill Barack Obama Nancy Pelosi Adam Clayton Powell Jr.

Nelson Rockefeller Eleanor Roosevelt Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Harry S. Truman Henry A. Wallace Tim Walz Elizabeth Warren Paul Wellstone Woodrow Wilson Ralph Yarborough Major political parties and political organizations Democratic Party (since the 1930s) Progressive Party ( 1912 , 1924 , 1948 ) Rockefeller Republicans (1930s–1970s) American Solidarity Party ( economic progressivism ) Liberalism portal Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐w4h7b
Cached time: 20250816104947
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.006 seconds
Real time usage: 1.267 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6899/1000000
Revision size: 72299/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 357842/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10372/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 29/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 381925/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.521/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7573579/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  891.294      1 -total
 51.01%  454.654      1 Template:Reflist
 18.71%  166.783      4 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.79%  113.991      1 Template:Progressivism_sidebar
 11.08%   98.711     21 Template:Cite_book
  9.53%   84.904     13 Template:Cite_journal
  8.44%   75.224      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  6.88%   61.341      1 Template:Short_description
  5.67%   50.524      4 Template:Fix
  5.16%   45.979     11 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2035730:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816104947 and revision id 1299008967. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Progressivism_in_the_United_States&oldid=1299008967 " Categories : Progressivism in the United States History of the United States by topic Political history of the United States Progressive Era in the United States Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2021 Webarchive template wayback links All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from August 2023 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template archiveis links Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 01:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Progressivism in the United States 11 languages Add topic

