Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 List 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Academy of sciences 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Ido Bahasa Indonesia Latina Lietuvių Nederlands Русский Shqip Slovenčina Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Academy of Sciences ) National academy or learned society This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Academy of sciences" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main building of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in Stockholm The Finnish Academy of Science and Letters along the Mariankatu street in Helsinki The Keck Center of the National Academies in Washington, D.C.

, one of several facilities where the National Academy of Sciences maintains offices Slovak Academy of Sciences (Presidium Building) Entrance of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences Ungern-Sternberg palace on Toompea , nowadays the main building of Estonian Academy of Sciences The main building of the Academy of Athens, located in central Athens , Greece An academy of sciences is a type of learned society or academy (as special scientific institution) dedicated to sciences that may or may not be state funded. Some state funded academies are national , or royal (i.e. United Kingdom's Royal Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge ) as a form of honor.

The other type of academies are Academy of Arts or combination of both (e.g., American Academy of Arts and Sciences ).

Academy of Letters is another related expression, encompassing literature.
In non-English-speaking countries, the range of academic fields of the members of a national Academy of Science often includes scholarly disciplines which would not normally be classed as "science" in English. Many languages use a broad term for systematized learning which includes both natural sciences and social sciences and fields such as literary studies, linguistics, history, or art history. (Often these terms are calques from Latin scientia (the etymological source of English science ) and, accordingly, derivatives of the verb 'know', such as German Wissenschaft , Swedish vetenskap , Hungarian tudomány , Estonian teadus or Finnish tiede .) Accordingly, for example the Austrian Academy of Sciences ( Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften ), the Hungarian Academy of Sciences ( Magyar Tudományos Akadémia ), or the Estonian Academy of Sciences ( Eesti Teaduste Akadeemia ) also cover the areas of social sciences and humanities.

As the engineering sciences have become more varied and advanced, there is a recent trend in many advanced countries to organize the National Academy of Engineering (or National Academy of Engineering Sciences), separate from the national academy of sciences.

Academies of science play an important role in science diplomacy efforts.

[ 1 ] Academies are increasingly organized in regional or even international academies. The Interacademy Partnership for example is a global network consisting of over 140 national, regional and global member academies of science, engineering and medicine.

[ 2 ] Pan-Europe academies include the Academia Europaea and the European Academy of Sciences and Arts . Additionally, there are many regional associations such as ALLEA in Europe, NASAC as the Network of African Science Academies, IANAS in Latin America, and AASSA in Asia. 
The International Science Council brings together international scientific unions and associations as well as national and regional scientific organizations such as academies and research councils from the natural sciences, social sciences and the humanities.

Apart from national academies of science, there are now increasingly also national young academies.

[ 3 ] National young academies usually select members for a limited term, normally 4–5 years, after which members become academy alumni. Young academies typically engage with issues important to young scientists. These include, for example, science education or the dialog between science and society. Most young academies are affiliated with a senior Academy of Sciences or with a network of senior academies. The Global Young Academy , which itself is a science academy (e.g. full member of Interacademy Partnership ) often serves as a facilitator of the growing global network of young academies. Since its creation, more than 35 national young academies have been established. In 2019, there were 41 national young academies.

List [ edit ] Main category: National academies of sciences See also: List of national academies World Developing world – The World Academy of Sciences (TWAS) Academy – World Academy of Art and Science International Science Council Europe Academia Europaea European Academy of Sciences and Arts ASEAN – ASEAN Academy of Engineering and Technology Afghanistan – Academy of Sciences of Afghanistan Albania – Academy of Sciences of Albania Argentina – National Academy of Sciences of Argentina Armenia – National Academy of Sciences of Armenia Austria – Austrian Academy of Sciences Australia – Australian Academy of Science Azerbaijan – National Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan Bangladesh – Bangladesh Academy of Sciences Belarus – National Academy of Sciences of Belarus Belgium – Royal Academies for Science and the Arts of Belgium Brazil – Brazilian Academy of Sciences Bulgaria – Bulgarian Academy of Sciences Canada Royal Society of Canada Canadian Academy of Engineering China Chinese Academy of Sciences Chinese Academy of Engineering Chinese Academy of Social Sciences Costa Rica – Academia Nacional de Ciencias (Costa Rica) Croatia – Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts Czech Republic – Czech Academy of Sciences Denmark – Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters Estonia – Estonian Academy of Sciences Finland Finnish Society of Sciences and Letters [ 4 ] Finnish Academy of Science and Letters [ 4 ] France – French Academy of Sciences Georgia Georgian National Academy of Sciences Abkhazian Regional Academy of Sciences Germany Academy of Sciences Leopoldina in Germany German National Academy of Sciences Leopoldina Union of Regional German Academies of Sciences and Humanities : Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur Academy of Sciences and Humanities in Hamburg Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities Heidelberg Academy for Sciences and Humanities Saxon Academy of Sciences and Humanities acatech Ghana – Ghana Academy of Arts and Sciences Greece – Academy of Athens Hong Kong Hong Kong Academy of Sciences Hong Kong Academy of Engineering Hong Kong Academy of the Humanities Hungary – Hungarian Academy of Sciences India Indian Academy of Sciences Indian National Science Academy National Academy of Sciences, India Indonesia Indonesian Institute of Sciences Indonesian Academy of Sciences Iran – Academy of Sciences of Iran Italy Lincean Academy Accademia Pontaniana Accademia Cosentina Accademia Nazionale delle Scienze (detta dei XL) Accademia Nazionale Virgiliana di Scienze Lettere ed Arti Istituto Lombardo Accademia di Scienze e Lettere Israel – Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities Japan Science Council of Japan Japan Academy Kazakhstan – National Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan – National Academy of Sciences of the Kyrgyz Republic Latvia – Latvian Academy of Sciences Lebanon – Lebanese Academy of Sciences Liechtenstein - Naturwissenschaftliches Forum Lithuania – Lithuanian Academy of Sciences Malaysia – Akademi Sains Malaysia Mexico – Mexican Academy of Sciences Moldova – Academy of Sciences of Moldova Mongolia – Mongolian Academy of Sciences Montenegro Montenegrin Academy of Sciences and Arts Doclean Academy of Sciences and Arts Morocco – Hassan II Academy of Sciences and Technologies Netherlands – Royal Netherlands Academy of Sciences New Zealand – Royal Society of New Zealand Nigeria – Nigerian Academy of Science North Korea – Academy of Sciences of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea [ 5 ] North Macedonia – Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts Norway Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters Royal Norwegian Society of Science and Letters Norwegian Academy of Technological Sciences Pakistan – Pakistan Academy of Sciences Philippines - National Academy of Science and Technology Poland Polish Academy of Sciences Polish Academy of Learning Portugal Lisbon Academy of Sciences Lisbon Geographic Society Romania – Romanian Academy Russia – Russian Academy of Sciences San Marino – International Academy of Sciences San Marino Serbia – Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts Singapore – Singapore National Academy of Science Slovakia – Slovak Academy of Sciences Slovenia – Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts South Africa Academy of Science of South Africa Royal Society of South Africa Suid-Afrikaanse Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns South Korea – National Academy of Sciences, Republic of Korea Soviet Union – Soviet Academy of Sciences Spain – Spanish Royal Academy of Sciences Sri Lanka – National Academy of Sciences of Sri Lanka Sweden – Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences Switzerland – Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences Taiwan – Academia Sinica Thailand – Royal Institute of Thailand Turkey – Turkish Academy of Sciences Ukraine – National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine United Kingdom Royal Society Royal Academy of Engineering Academy of Medical Sciences British Academy Scotland – Royal Society of Edinburgh United States National Academies U.S. National Academy of Sciences U.S. National Academy of Engineering U.S.

National Academy of Medicine formerly the Institute of Medicine National Research Council American Academy of Arts and Sciences State-specific California – California Academy of Sciences Missouri – Academy of Science, St. Louis New York – New York Academy of Sciences Pennsylvania - Pennsylvania Academy of Science [ 6 ] Vatican City – Pontifical Academy of Sciences Jordan and the Islamic world – Islamic World Academy of Sciences (IAS) See also [ edit ] Science portal National academy References [ edit ] ^ Hassan, Mohamed (10 March 2015).

"Academies of Science as Key Instruments of Science Diplomacy" .

Science & Diplomacy .

4 (1).

^ "About IAP" .

www.interacademies.org . Retrieved 2021-06-01 .

^ "National Young Academies" .

Global Young Academy . Retrieved 2019-08-24 .

^ a b Hiilamo, Elli-Alina (29 July 2019).

"Pitäisikö Suomen vastata Unkarin kritiikkiin? Tutkija toivoo EU:n reagoivan 'härskiin mustamaalaukseen', ettei Suomen uskottavuus kärsisi" .

Helsingin Sanomat (in Finnish) . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .

^ Hoare, James E. (2012).

"Academy of Sciences" .

Historical Dictionary of Democratic People's Republic of Korea . Lanham: Scarecrow Press. p. 36.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7987-4 .

^ "wisconsinacademy.org" .

www.wisconsinacademy.org . Retrieved 2020-11-15 .

v t e Asian Academies of Sciences Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus East Timor Egypt India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Turkmenistan Turkey United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Taiwan v t e European Academies of Sciences Albania Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Kosovo Latvia Lithuania Macedonia Moldova Netherlands Norway Poland Romania Portugal Russia Serbia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom Vatican City Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐zd88r
Cached time: 20250814221450
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.422 seconds
Real time usage: 0.572 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1150/1000000
Revision size: 14030/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 49306/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 836/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 45837/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.290/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15214433/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  466.787      1 -total
 22.05%  102.930      1 Template:Reflist
 20.71%   96.689      9 Template:Lang
 14.34%   66.956      1 Template:Asian_Academies_of_Sciences
 14.12%   65.925      1 Template:Refimprove
 13.98%   65.264      2 Template:Navbox
 13.77%   64.289      1 Template:Cite_journal
 13.20%   61.625      1 Template:Short_description
 13.08%   61.053      1 Template:Ambox
  6.86%   32.043      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:858214:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221450 and revision id 1282362129. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Academy_of_sciences&oldid=1282362129 " Category : Academies of sciences Hidden categories: CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing Estonian-language text Articles containing Finnish-language text This page was last edited on 25 March 2025, at 23:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Academy of sciences 24 languages Add topic

