Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Origins 3 Historical development Toggle Historical development subsection 3.1 Early attempts to break Jim Crow 3.2 Racism in the United States and defenses of Jim Crow 3.3 World War II and post-war era 4 Decline and removal Toggle Decline and removal subsection 4.1 Brown v. Board of Education 4.2 Integrating collegiate sports 4.3 Public arena 4.4 End of legal segregation 5 Influence and aftermath Toggle Influence and aftermath subsection 5.1 African American life 5.2 Interracial marriage 5.3 Jury trials 5.4 Later court cases 5.5 Felony disenfranchisement 5.6 International 6 Remembrance 7 See also 8 Footnotes 9 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 9.1 Sports 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Jim Crow laws 51 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Čeština Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 贛語 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Setswana Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Yorùbá 中文 Ghanaian Pidgin Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Laws enforcing racial segregation in the U.S.

"Jim Crow" redirects here. For other uses, see Jim Crow (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Racial segregation Jim Crow sign, anti-Hispanic Overview Anti-miscegenation laws Crime of apartheid Allegations Caste Xenophobia Environmental / Institutional racism Ethnic nationalism Forced displacement Housing discrimination Exclusionary zoning Redlining Historical examples Australia Canada Pass system Separate schools Indian hospitals Fascist Italy French colonial empire Code Noir Indigénat Greek–Turkish population exchange Jewish ghettos in Europe Pale of Settlement Partition of India Portugal & Spain Nazi Germany Nuremberg Laws Rhodesia South Africa Bantustans Pass laws United Kingdom United States Black Codes Jim Crow laws Separate but equal Contemporary examples Anti-Romanyism Italy Romania Slovenia Roma walls Bosnia–Herzegovina Schools Cyprus Gulf states Saudi Arabia UAE South Asian labourers India Uthapuram Muslims Israel Palestinian enclaves Hafrada West Bank settlement law / barriers Malaysia Mauritania Morocco Myanmar Northern Ireland Sudan United States Academies Housing Schools Residential Xinjiang Yemen Related Citizenship Statelessness Forced assimilation Gender apartheid Income inequality One-drop rule Race Ethnicity Racial discrimination Category Commons v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on the Nadir of American race relations A French news illustration of the 1906 Atlanta race massacre Historical background Reconstruction era Voter suppression Disfranchisement Redeemers Compromise of 1877 Jim Crow laws Segregation Anti-miscegenation laws Convict leasing Practices Common actions Expulsions of African Americans Lynchings Lynching postcards Sundown town Whitecapping Vigilante groups Black Legion Indiana White Caps Ku Klux Klan Red Shirts Lynchings Andrew Richards Michael Green Nevlin Porter and Johnson Spencer Eliza Woods Amos Miller George Meadows Joe Vermillion Jim Taylor Joe Coe People's Grocery Ephraim Grizzard Alfred Blount Samuel J. Bush Stephen Williams Frazier B. Baker and Julia Baker John Henry James Sam Hose George Ward David Wyatt Marie Thompson Watkinsville Ed Johnson William Burns Walker family Laura and L. D. Nelson King Johnson John Evans Jesse Washington Newberry Six Anthony Crawford Ell Persons Jim McIlherron George Taylor John Hartfield 1920 Duluth James Harvey and Joe Jordan Joe Pullen Massacres and riots Opelousas massacre Rock Springs massacre Thibodaux massacre Spring Valley Race Riot of 1895 Phoenix election riot Wilmington insurrection of 1898 Pana riot Robert Charles riots Evansville race riot Atlanta Massacre of 1906 Springfield race riot of 1908 Johnson–Jeffries riots 1912 racial conflict in Forsyth County 1917 Chester race riot East St. Louis riots Elaine massacre Red Summer Chicago race riot of 1919 Washington race riot of 1919 Ocoee massacre Tulsa race massacre Perry race riot Rosewood massacre Reactions Anti-lynching movement Atlanta Compromise Back to Africa movement Exodusters movement Great Migration Niagara Movement NAACP Silent Parade Related topics Black genocide Civil rights movement (1865–1896) Civil rights movement (1896–1954) Mass racial violence in the United States v t e The Jim Crow laws were state and local laws introduced in the Southern United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries that enforced racial segregation , " Jim Crow " being a pejorative term for black people .

[ 1 ] The last of the Jim Crow laws were generally overturned in 1965 .

[ 2 ] Formal and informal racial segregation policies were present in other areas of the United States as well, even as several states outside the South had banned discrimination in public accommodations and voting.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Southern laws were enacted by white-dominated state legislatures ( Redeemers ) to disenfranchise and remove political and economic gains made by African Americans during the Reconstruction era .

[ 5 ] Such continuing racial segregation was also supported by the successful Lily-white movement .

[ 6 ] In practice, Jim Crow laws mandated racial segregation in all public facilities in the states of the former Confederate States of America and in some others, beginning in the 1870s. Jim Crow laws were upheld in 1896 in the case of Plessy v. Ferguson , in which the Supreme Court laid out its " separate but equal " legal doctrine concerning facilities for African Americans.

Public education had essentially been segregated since its establishment in most of the South after the Civil War in 1861–1865. Companion laws excluded almost all African Americans from the vote in the South and deprived them of any representative government.

Although in theory the "equal" segregation doctrine governed public facilities and transportation too, facilities for African Americans were consistently inferior and underfunded compared to facilities for white Americans ; sometimes, there were no facilities for the black community at all.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Far from equality, as a body of law, Jim Crow institutionalized economic, educational, political and social disadvantages and second-class citizenship for most African Americans living in the United States.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] After the NAACP (National Association for the Advancement of Colored People) was founded in 1909, it became involved in a sustained public protest and campaigns against the Jim Crow laws, and the so-called "separate but equal" doctrine.

In 1954, segregation of public schools (state-sponsored) was declared unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court in the landmark case Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] In some states, it took many years to implement this decision, while the Warren Court continued to rule against Jim Crow legislation in other cases such as Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States (1964).

[ 13 ] In general, the remaining Jim Crow laws were generally overturned by the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 . Southern state anti-miscegenation laws were generally overturned in the 1967 case of Loving v. Virginia .

Etymology The earliest known use of the phrase "Jim Crow law" can be dated to 1884 in a newspaper article summarizing congressional debate.

[ 14 ] The term appears in 1892 in the title of a New York Times article about Louisiana requiring segregated railroad cars.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The origin of the phrase "Jim Crow" has often been attributed to " Jump Jim Crow ", a song-and-dance caricature of black people performed by white actor Thomas D. Rice in blackface , first performed in 1828. As a result of Rice's fame, Jim Crow had become by 1838 a pejorative expression meaning "Negro". When southern legislatures passed laws of racial segregation directed against African Americans at the end of the 19th century, these statutes became known as Jim Crow laws.

[ 15 ] Origins Main article: Disfranchisement after the Reconstruction era In January 1865, an amendment to the Constitution abolishing slavery in the United States was proposed by Congress and ratified as the Thirteenth Amendment on December 18, 1865.

[ 17 ] Cover of an early edition of " Jump Jim Crow " sheet music ( c.

1832 ) Freedmen voting in New Orleans , 1867 During the Reconstruction era of 1865–1877, federal laws provided civil rights protections in the U.S. South for freedmen , African Americans who were former slaves, and the minority of black people who had been free before the war. In the 1870s, Democrats gradually regained power in the Southern legislatures [ 18 ] as violent insurgent paramilitary groups, such as the Ku Klux Klan , White League , and Red Shirts disrupted Republican organizing, ran Republican officeholders out of town, and lynched black voters as an intimidation tactic to suppress the black vote.

[ 19 ] Extensive voter fraud was also used. In one instance, an outright coup or insurrection in coastal North Carolina led to the violent removal of democratically elected Republican party executive and representative officials, who were either hunted down or hounded out.

Gubernatorial elections were close and had been disputed in Louisiana for years, with increasing violence against black Americans during campaigns from 1868 onward.

[ 20 ] The Compromise of 1877 to gain Southern support in the presidential election resulted in the government withdrawing the last of the federal troops from the South. White Democrats had regained political power in every Southern state.

[ 21 ] These Southern, white, " Redeemer " governments legislated Jim Crow laws, officially segregating the country's population. Jim Crow laws were a manifestation of authoritarian rule specifically directed at one racial group.

[ 22 ] Black people were still elected to local offices throughout the 1880s in local areas with large black populations, but their voting was suppressed for state and national elections. States passed laws to make voter registration and electoral rules more restrictive, with the result that political participation by most black people and many poor white people began to decrease.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Between 1890 and 1910, ten of the eleven former Confederate states , beginning with Mississippi , passed new constitutions or amendments that effectively disenfranchised most black people and tens of thousands of poor white people through a combination of poll taxes , literacy and comprehension tests, and residency and record-keeping requirements.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Grandfather clauses temporarily permitted some illiterate white people to vote but gave no relief to most black people.

Voter turnout dropped dramatically through the South as a result of these measures. In Louisiana, by 1900, black voters were reduced to 5,320 on the rolls, although they comprised the majority of the state's population. By 1910, only 730 black people were registered, less than 0.5% of eligible black men. "In 27 of the state's 60 parishes, not a single black voter was registered any longer; in 9 more parishes, only one black voter was." [ 25 ] The cumulative effect in North Carolina meant that black voters were eliminated from voter rolls during the period from 1896 to 1904. The growth of their thriving middle class was slowed. In North Carolina and other Southern states, black people suffered from being made invisible in the political system: "[W]ithin a decade of disfranchisement, the white supremacy campaign had erased the image of the black middle class from the minds of white North Carolinians." [ 25 ] In Alabama , tens of thousands of poor whites were also disenfranchised, although initially legislators had promised them they would not be affected adversely by the new restrictions.

[ 26 ] Those who could not vote were not eligible to serve on juries and could not run for local offices. They effectively disappeared from political life, as they could not influence the state legislatures, and their interests were overlooked. While public schools had been established by Reconstruction legislatures for the first time in most Southern states, those for black children were consistently underfunded compared to schools for white children, even when considered within the strained finances of the postwar South where the decreasing price of cotton kept the agricultural economy at a low.

[ 27 ] Like schools, public libraries for black people were underfunded, if they existed at all, and they were often stocked with secondhand books and other resources.

[ 8 ] [ 28 ] These facilities were not introduced for African Americans in the South until the first decade of the 20th century.

[ 29 ] Throughout the Jim Crow era, libraries were only available sporadically.

[ 30 ] Prior to the 20th century, most libraries established for African Americans were school-library combinations.

[ 30 ] Many public libraries for both European-American and African-American patrons in this period were founded as the result of middle-class activism aided by matching grants from the Carnegie Foundation .

[ 30 ] In some cases, progressive measures intended to reduce election fraud, such as the Eight Box Law in South Carolina , acted against black and white voters who were illiterate, as they could not follow the directions.

[ 31 ] While the separation of African Americans from the white general population was becoming legalized and formalized during the Progressive Era (1890s–1920s), it was also becoming customary. Even in cases in which Jim Crow laws did not expressly forbid black people from participating in sports or recreation, a segregated culture had become common.

[ 15 ] In the Jim Crow context, the presidential election of 1912 was steeply slanted against the interests of African Americans.

[ 32 ] Most black Americans still lived in the South, where they had been effectively disfranchised, so they could not vote at all. While poll taxes and literacy requirements banned many poor or illiterate people from voting, these stipulations frequently had loopholes that exempted European Americans from meeting the requirements. In Oklahoma , for instance, anyone qualified to vote before 1866, or related to someone qualified to vote before 1866 (a kind of " grandfather clause "), was exempted from the literacy requirement; but the only men who had the franchise before that year were white or European-American. European Americans were effectively exempted from the literacy testing, whereas black Americans were effectively singled out by the law.

[ 33 ] Woodrow Wilson was a Democrat elected from New Jersey, but he was born and raised in the South, and was the first Southern-born president of the post- Civil War period. He appointed Southerners to his Cabinet . Some quickly began to press for segregated workplaces, although the city of Washington, D.C., and federal offices had been integrated since after the Civil War. In 1913, Secretary of the Treasury William Gibbs McAdoo – an appointee of the President – was heard to express his opinion of black and white women working together in one government office: "I feel sure that this must go against the grain of the white women. Is there any reason why the white women should not have only white women working across from them on the machines?" [ 34 ] The Wilson administration introduced segregation in federal offices, despite much protest from African-American leaders and white progressive groups in the north and midwest.

[ 35 ] He appointed segregationist Southern politicians because of his own firm belief that racial segregation was in the best interest of black and European Americans alike.

[ 36 ] At the Great Reunion of 1913 at Gettysburg , Wilson addressed the crowd on July 4, the semi-centennial of Abraham Lincoln 's declaration that " all men are created equal ": How complete the union has become and how dear to all of us, how unquestioned, how benign and majestic, as state after state has been added to this, our great family of free men!

[ 37 ] In sharp contrast to Wilson, a Washington Bee editorial wondered if the "reunion" of 1913 was a reunion of those who fought for "the extinction of slavery" or a reunion of those who fought to "perpetuate slavery and who are now employing every artifice and argument known to deceit" to present emancipation as a failed venture.

[ 37 ] Historian David W. Blight observed that the "Peace Jubilee" at which Wilson presided at Gettysburg in 1913 "was a Jim Crow reunion, and white supremacy might be said to have been the silent, invisible master of ceremonies".

[ 37 ] In Texas , several towns adopted residential segregation laws between 1910 and the 1920s. Legal strictures called for segregated water fountains and restrooms.

[ 37 ] The exclusion of African Americans also found support in the Republican Lily-white movement .

[ 38 ] Historical development Early attempts to break Jim Crow Sign for the "colored" waiting room at a bus station in Durham, North Carolina , May 1940 The Civil Rights Act of 1875 , introduced by Charles Sumner and Benjamin Butler , stipulated a guarantee that everyone, regardless of race, color, or previous condition of servitude, was entitled to the same treatment in public accommodations, such as inns, public transportation, theaters, and other places of recreation. This Act had little effect in practice.

[ 39 ] An 1883 Supreme Court decision ruled that the act was unconstitutional in some respects, saying Congress was not afforded control over private persons or corporations. With white southern Democrats forming a solid voting bloc in Congress, due to having outsize power from keeping seats apportioned for the total population in the South (although hundreds of thousands had been disenfranchised), Congress did not pass another civil rights law until 1957.

[ 40 ] In 1887, Rev.

William Henry Heard lodged a complaint with the Interstate Commerce Commission against the Georgia Railroad and Banking Company for discrimination, citing its provision of different cars for white and black/colored passengers.  The company successfully appealed for relief on the grounds it offered "separate but equal" accommodation.

[ 41 ] In 1890, Louisiana passed a law requiring separate accommodations for colored and white passengers on railroads. Louisiana law distinguished between "white", "black" and "colored" (that is, people of mixed European and African ancestry). The law had already specified that black people could not ride with white people, but colored people could ride with white people before 1890. A group of concerned black, colored and white citizens in New Orleans formed an association dedicated to rescinding the law. The group persuaded Homer Plessy to test it; he was a man of color who was of fair complexion and one-eighth "Negro" in ancestry.

[ 42 ] In 1892, Plessy bought a first-class ticket from New Orleans on the East Louisiana Railway. Once he had boarded the train, he informed the train conductor of his racial lineage and took a seat in the whites-only car. He was directed to leave that car and sit instead in the "coloreds only" car. Plessy refused and was immediately arrested. The Citizens Committee of New Orleans fought the case all the way to the United States Supreme Court. They lost in Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), in which the Court ruled that "separate but equal" facilities were constitutional. The finding contributed to 58 more years of legalized discrimination against black and colored people in the United States.

[ 42 ] In 1908, Congress defeated an attempt to introduce segregated streetcars into the capital.

[ 43 ] Racism in the United States and defenses of Jim Crow 1904 caricature of "White" and "Jim Crow" rail cars by John T. McCutcheon . Despite Jim Crow's legal pretense that the races be "separate but equal" under the law, non-whites were given inferior facilities and treatment.

[ 44 ] White Southerners encountered problems in learning free labor management after the end of slavery, and they resented African Americans, who represented the Confederacy 's Civil War defeat: "With white supremacy being challenged throughout the South, many whites sought to protect their former status by threatening African Americans who exercised their new rights." [ 45 ] White Southerners used their power to segregate public spaces and facilities in law and reestablish social dominance over black people in the South.

One rationale for the systematic exclusion of African Americans from southern public society was that it was for their own protection. An early 20th-century scholar suggested that allowing black people to attend white schools would mean "constantly subjecting them to adverse feeling and opinion", which might lead to "a morbid race consciousness".

[ 46 ] This perspective took anti-black sentiment for granted, because bigotry was widespread in the South after slavery became a racial caste system.

Justifications for white supremacy were provided by scientific racism and negative stereotypes of African Americans . Social segregation, from housing to laws against interracial chess games, was justified as a way to prevent black men from having sex with white women and in particular the rapacious Black Buck stereotype.

[ 47 ] World War II and post-war era In 1944, Associate justice Frank Murphy introduced the word " racism " into the lexicon of U.S. Supreme Court opinions in Korematsu v. United States , 323 U.S. 214 (1944).

[ 48 ] In his dissenting opinion, Murphy stated that by upholding the forced relocation of Japanese Americans during World War II, the Court was sinking into "the ugly abyss of racism". This was the first time that "racism" was used in Supreme Court opinion (Murphy used it twice in a concurring opinion in Steele v Louisville & Nashville Railway Co 323 192 (1944) issued that day).

[ 49 ] Murphy used the word in five separate opinions, but after he left the court, "racism" was not used again in an opinion for two decades. It next appeared in the landmark decision of Loving v. Virginia , 388 U.S.

1 (1967).

Educational segregation in the US prior to Brown .  All the states of the "South" or with the longest histories of slavery (in red) segregated schools by law statewide.

Numerous boycotts and demonstrations against segregation had occurred throughout the 1930s and 1940s. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) had been engaged in a series of litigation cases since the early 20th century in efforts to combat laws that disenfranchised black voters across the South. Some of the early demonstrations achieved positive results, strengthening political activism, especially in the post-World War II years. Black veterans were impatient with social oppression after having fought for the United States and freedom across the world. In 1947 K. Leroy Irvis of Pittsburgh 's Urban League, for instance, led a demonstration against employment discrimination by the city's department stores. It was the beginning of his own influential political career.

[ 50 ] After World War II, people of color increasingly challenged segregation, as they believed they had more than earned the right to be treated as full citizens because of their military service and sacrifices. The civil rights movement was energized by a number of flashpoints, including the 1946 police beating and blinding of World War II veteran Isaac Woodard while he was in U.S. Army uniform. In 1948 President Harry S. Truman issued Executive Order 9981 , ending racial discrimination in the armed services.

[ 51 ] That same year, Silas Herbert Hunt enrolled in the University of Arkansas , effectively starting the desegregation of education in the South.

[ 52 ] As the civil rights movement gained momentum and used federal courts to attack Jim Crow statutes, the white-dominated governments of many of the southern states countered by passing alternative forms of resistance.

[ 53 ] Decline and removal Historian William Chafe has explored the defensive techniques developed inside the African American community to avoid the worst features of Jim Crow as expressed in the legal system, unbalanced economic power, and intimidation and psychological pressure. Chafe says "protective socialization by black people themselves" was created inside the community in order to accommodate white-imposed sanctions while subtly encouraging challenges to those sanctions. Known as "walking the tightrope", such efforts at bringing about change were only slightly effective before the 1920s.

However, this did build the foundation for later generations to advance racial equality and de-segregation. Chafe argued that the places essential for change to begin were institutions, particularly black churches, which functioned as centers for community-building and discussion of politics. Additionally, some all-black communities, such as Mound Bayou, Mississippi and Ruthville, Virginia served as sources of pride and inspiration for black society as a whole. Over time, pushback and open defiance of the oppressive existing laws grew, until it reached a boiling point in the aggressive, large-scale activism of the 1950s civil rights movement.

[ 54 ] Brown v. Board of Education Main article: Brown v. Board of Education In the landmark case Brown v. Board of Education (1954), the U.S. Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren ruled unanimously that public school segregation was unconstitutional.

The NAACP Legal Defense Committee (a group that became independent of the NAACP) – and its lawyer, Thurgood Marshall – brought the landmark case Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka , 347 U.S.

483 (1954) before the U.S. Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] In its pivotal 1954 decision, the Warren Court unanimously (9–0) overturned the 1896 Plessy decision.

[ 11 ] The Supreme Court found that legally mandated ( de jure ) public school segregation was unconstitutional. The decision had far-reaching social ramifications.

[ 55 ] Integrating collegiate sports Racial integration of all-white collegiate sports teams was high on the Southern agenda in the 1950s and 1960s. Involved were issues of equality, racism, and the alumni demand for the top players needed to win high-profile games.  The Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) of flagship state universities in the Southeast took the lead. First they started to schedule integrated teams from the North. Finally, ACC schools – typically under pressure from boosters and civil rights groups – integrated their teams.

[ 56 ] With an alumni base that dominated local and state politics, society and business, the ACC schools were successful in their endeavor – as Pamela Grundy argues, they had learned how to win: The widespread admiration that athletic ability inspired would help transform athletic fields from grounds of symbolic play to forces for social change, places where a wide range of citizens could publicly and at times effectively challenge the assumptions that cast them as unworthy of full participation in U.S. society. While athletic successes would not rid society of prejudice or stereotype – black athletes would continue to confront racial slurs...[minority star players demonstrated] the discipline, intelligence, and poise to contend for position or influence in every arena of national life.

[ 57 ] Public arena In 1955, Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat on a city bus to a white man in Montgomery, Alabama .  This was not the first time this happened – for example, Parks was inspired by 15-year-old Claudette Colvin doing the same thing nine months earlier [ 58 ] – but the Parks act of civil disobedience was chosen, symbolically, as an important catalyst in the growth of the post-1954 civil rights movement ; activists built the Montgomery bus boycott around it, which lasted more than a year and resulted in desegregation of the privately run buses in the city. Civil rights protests and actions, together with legal challenges, resulted in a series of legislative and court decisions which contributed to undermining the Jim Crow system.

[ 59 ] End of legal segregation President Johnson signs the Civil Rights Act of 1964 .

The decisive action ending segregation came when Congress in bipartisan fashion overcame Southern filibusters to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 .  A complex interaction of factors came together unexpectedly in the period 1954–1965 to make the momentous changes possible. The Supreme Court had taken the first initiative in Brown v. Board of Education (1954), declaring segregation of public schools unconstitutional. Enforcement was rapid in the North and border states, but was deliberately stopped in the South by the movement called Massive Resistance , sponsored by rural segregationists who largely controlled the state legislatures. Southern liberals, who counseled moderation, were shouted down by both sides and had limited impact. Much more significant was the civil rights movement, especially the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) headed by Martin Luther King Jr.

It largely displaced the old, much more moderate NAACP in taking leadership roles. King organized massive demonstrations, that seized massive media attention in an era when network television news was an innovative and universally watched phenomenon.

[ 60 ] SCLC, student activists and smaller local organizations staged demonstrations across the South. National attention focused on Birmingham , Alabama, where protesters (mostly young teenagers), faced off against Commissioner of Public Safety Bull Connor , Connor arrested 900 on one day alone. The next day Connor unleashed billy clubs, police dogs, and high-pressure water hoses to disperse and punish the young demonstrators with a brutality that horrified the nation. The brutality undermined the image of a modernizing progressive urban South. President John F. Kennedy , who had been calling for moderation, threatened to use federal troops to restore order in Birmingham. The result in Birmingham was compromise by which the new mayor opened the library, golf courses, and other city facilities to both races, against the backdrop of church bombings and assassinations.

[ 61 ] In summer 1963, there were 800 demonstrations in 200 southern cities and towns, with over 100,000 participants, and 15,000 arrests. In Alabama in June 1963, Governor George Wallace escalated the crisis by defying court orders to admit the first two black students to the University of Alabama .

[ 62 ] Kennedy responded by sending Congress a comprehensive civil rights bill, and ordered Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy to file federal lawsuits against segregated schools, and to deny funds for discriminatory programs. Martin Luther King launched a huge march on Washington in August 1963, bringing out 200,000 demonstrators in front of the Lincoln Memorial , at the time the largest political assembly in the nation's history. The Kennedy administration now gave full-fledged support to the civil rights movement, but powerful southern congressmen blocked any legislation.

[ 63 ] After Kennedy was assassinated, President Lyndon B. Johnson called for immediate passage of Kennedy's civil rights legislation as a memorial to the martyred president. Johnson formed a coalition with Northern Republicans that led to passage in the House, and with the help of Republican Senate leader Everett Dirksen with passage in the Senate early in 1964. For the first time in history, the southern filibuster was broken and the Senate finally passed its version on June 19 by vote of 73 to 27.

[ 64 ] The Civil Rights Act of 1964 was the most powerful affirmation of equal rights ever made by Congress. It guaranteed access to public accommodations such as restaurants and places of amusement, authorized the Justice Department to bring suits to desegregate facilities in schools, gave new powers to the Civil Rights Commission ; and allowed federal funds to be cut off in cases of discrimination. Furthermore, racial, religious and gender discrimination was outlawed for businesses with 25 or more employees, as well as apartment houses. The South resisted until the last moment, but as soon as the new law was signed by President Johnson on July 2, 1964, it was widely accepted across the nation. There was only a scattering of diehard opposition, typified by restaurant owner Lester Maddox in Georgia.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] In January 1964, President Lyndon Johnson met with civil rights leaders. On January 8, during his first State of the Union address , Johnson asked Congress to "let this session of Congress be known as the session which did more for civil rights than the last hundred sessions combined." On June 21, civil rights workers Michael Schwerner , Andrew Goodman , and James Chaney disappeared in Neshoba County, Mississippi , where they were volunteering in the registration of African American voters as part of the Freedom Summer project. The disappearance of the three activists captured national attention and the ensuing outrage was used by Johnson and civil rights activists to build a coalition of northern and western Democrats and Republicans and push Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964 .

[ 69 ] On July 2, 1964, Johnson signed the historic Civil Rights Act of 1964.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] It invoked the Commerce Clause [ 69 ] to outlaw discrimination in public accommodations (privately owned restaurants, hotels, and stores, and in private schools and workplaces). This use of the Commerce Clause was upheld by the Warren Court in the landmark case Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States 379 US 241 (1964).

[ 71 ] By 1965, efforts to break the grip of state disenfranchisement by education for voter registration in southern counties had been underway for some time, but had achieved only modest success overall. In some areas of the Deep South, white resistance made these efforts almost entirely ineffectual. The murder of the three voting-rights activists in Mississippi in 1964 and the state's refusal to prosecute the murderers, along with numerous other acts of violence and terrorism against black people, had gained national attention. Finally, the unprovoked attack on March 7, 1965 , by county and state troopers on peaceful Alabama marchers crossing the Edmund Pettus Bridge en route from Selma to the state capital of Montgomery , persuaded the President and Congress to overcome Southern legislators' resistance to effective voting rights enforcement legislation. President Johnson issued a call for a strong voting rights law and hearings soon began on the bill that would become the Voting Rights Act.

[ 72 ] The Voting Rights Act of 1965 ended legally sanctioned state barriers to voting for all federal, state and local elections. It also provided for federal oversight and monitoring of counties with historically low minority voter turnout. Years of enforcement have been needed to overcome resistance, and additional legal challenges have been made in the courts to ensure the ability of voters to elect candidates of their choice. For instance, many cities and counties introduced at-large election of council members, which resulted in many cases of diluting minority votes and preventing election of minority-supported candidates. After passage of the act, Martin Luther King, Jr., began to turn his attentions to a fledgling Poor People's Campaign . His ill-fated proposal for an Economic Bills of Rights was met with hostility from southern Democrats as well as northern and southern Republicans in Congress.

[ 73 ] In 2013, the Roberts Court , in Shelby County v. Holder , removed the requirement established by the Voting Rights Act that Southern states needed Federal approval for changes in voting policies.  Several states immediately made changes in their laws restricting voting access.

[ 74 ] Influence and aftermath African American life An African American man drinking at a "colored" drinking fountain in a streetcar terminal in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma, 1939 The Jim Crow laws and the high rate of lynchings in the South were major factors that led to the Great Migration during the first half of the 20th century. Because opportunities were very limited in the South, African Americans moved in great numbers to cities in Northeastern, Midwestern, and Western states to seek better lives.

African American athletes faced much discrimination during the Jim Crow era with white opposition leading to their exclusion from most organized sporting competitions.

The boxers Jack Johnson and Joe Louis (both of whom became world heavyweight boxing champions ) and track and field athlete Jesse Owens (who won four gold medals at the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin) gained prominence during the era. In baseball, a color line instituted in the 1880s had informally barred black people from playing in the major leagues , leading to the development of the Negro leagues , which featured many famous players. A major breakthrough occurred in 1947, when Jackie Robinson was hired as the first African American to play in Major League Baseball; he permanently broke the color bar. Baseball teams continued to integrate in the following years, leading to the full participation of black baseball players in the Major Leagues in the 1960s.

[ citation needed ] Interracial marriage Main article: Anti-miscegenation laws in the United States See also: Interracial marriage in the United States Although sometimes counted among Jim Crow laws of the South, statutes such as anti-miscegenation laws were also passed by other states. Anti-miscegenation laws were not repealed by the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , but were declared unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court (the Warren Court ) in a unanimous ruling Loving v. Virginia (1967).

[ 69 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] Chief Justice Earl Warren wrote in the court opinion that "the freedom to marry, or not marry, a person of another race resides with the individual, and cannot be infringed by the State." [ 76 ] Jury trials The Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution grants criminal defendants the right to a trial by a jury of their peers. While federal law required that convictions could only be granted by a unanimous jury for federal crimes, states were free to set their own jury requirements. All but two states, Oregon and Louisiana, opted for unanimous juries for conviction. Oregon and Louisiana, however, allowed juries of at least 10–2 to decide a criminal conviction. Louisiana's law was amended in 2018 to require a unanimous jury for criminal convictions, effective in 2019. Prior to that amendment, the law had been seen as a remnant of Jim Crow laws, because it allowed minority voices on a jury to be marginalized. In 2020, the Supreme Court found, in Ramos v. Louisiana , that unanimous jury votes are required for criminal convictions at state levels, thereby nullifying Oregon's remaining law, and overturning previous cases in Louisiana.

[ 77 ] Later court cases In 1971, the U.S. Supreme Court (the Burger Court ), in Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education , upheld desegregation busing of students to achieve integration.

Interpretation of the Constitution and its application to minority rights continues to be controversial as Court membership changes. Observers such as Ian F. Lopez believe that in the 2000s, the Supreme Court has become more protective of the status quo.

[ 78 ] Felony disenfranchisement Mississippi Today discusses the present-day Jim Crow legacy of felony disenfranchisement, and states that part of Mississippi's 1890 constitution was not erased by the Civil Rights Movement during the 1960s.  The article states the constitutional felony disenfranchisement clause "takes away – for life – the right to vote upon conviction for several low-level crimes, like theft and bribery, that the 1890 drafters felt would be mostly committed by Black people." [ 79 ] International In 2017, Ford Foundation Professor of Law James Whitman contended that, during sessions culminating in the Nuremberg Laws , Nazi officials such as Franz Gürtner and Bernhard Lösener discussed a memorandum by Heinrich Krieger, a former graduate student at the University of Arkansas . Krieger had published an article on "Principles of Indian [Native American] law" (1935) in the Washington Law Review , focusing on the Dawes Act and Indian Reorganization Act . The memorandum, based on research into the history of United States immigration and Jim Crow laws, became the basis for Krieger's Race Law in the United States (1936). Scholars such as Michael Livingston , while lauding Whitman's analysis of the memorandum and his comparisons between U.S. and German state-sponsored eugenics legislation, demanded more evaluation and evidence for any additional contentions.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] In 2023, Darren Walker , president of the Ford Foundation endowment for Whitman's chair, observed that "Henry Ford, our founder, was among the twentieth century's most virulent American antisemites. And yet, to me, our past confers a special obligation to engage, not to retreat—no matter the complications or the consequences." [ 82 ] [ 83 ] Remembrance Ferris State University in Big Rapids, Michigan , houses the Jim Crow Museum of Racist Memorabilia , an extensive collection of everyday items that promoted racial segregation or presented racial stereotypes of African Americans , for the purpose of academic research and education about their cultural influence.

[ 84 ] See also Civil rights movement portal Law portal United States portal Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Black Codes in the United States Casta Convict leasing Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction era Group Areas Act Indian Act Israeli apartheid Jim Crow economy List of Jim Crow law examples by state Lynching Mass racial violence in the United States Native Lands Act 1865 Natives Land Act, 1913 Pass law Racial segregation in the United States Racism in the United States Second-class citizen Sharecropping Sundown town The New Jim Crow Timeline of the civil rights movement White Australia policy Footnotes ^ Fremon, David (2000).

The Jim Crow Laws and Racism in American History . Enslow.

ISBN 0766012972 .

^ Schmermund, Elizabeth (2016).

Reading and Interpreting the Works of Harper Lee . Enslow Publishing, LLC. pp. 27–.

ISBN 978-0-7660-7914-4 .

^ Bubar, Joe (March 9, 2020).

"The Jim Crow North" , Upfront Magazine - Scholastic . Retrieved June 7, 2021.

^ Discrimination in Access to Public Places: A Survey of State and Federal Accommodations Laws , 7 N.Y.U. Rev.L. & Soc.Change 215, 238 (1978).

^ Bartlett, Bruce (2008).

Wrong on Race: The Democratic Party's Buried Past . St. Martin's Press. pp. 24–.

ISBN 978-0-230-61138-2 .

^ Heersink, Boris; Jenkins, Jeffery A. (April 2020).

"Whiteness and the Emergence of the Republican Party in the Early Twentieth-Century South" .

Studies in American Political Development .

34 (1): 71– 90.

doi : 10.1017/S0898588X19000208 .

ISSN 0898-588X .

S2CID 213551748 .

^ a b Perdue, Theda (October 28, 2011).

"Legacy of Jim Crow for Southern Native Americans" .

C-SPAN . Retrieved November 27, 2018 .

^ a b c Lowery, Malinda Maynor (2010).

Lumbee Indians in the Jim Crow South: Race, Identity, and the Making of a Nation . Univ of North Carolina Press. pp.

0– 339.

ISBN 9780807833681 . Retrieved November 27, 2018 .

^ Wolfley, Jeanette (1990).

"Jim Crow, Indian Style: The Disenfranchisement of Native Americans" (PDF) .

Indian Law Review .

16 (1): 167– 202.

doi : 10.2307/20068694 .

hdl : 1903/22633 .

JSTOR 20068694 . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 12, 2019 . Retrieved November 27, 2018 .

^ a b "Brown v. Board of Education" .

Landmark Supreme Court Cases . Retrieved September 29, 2019 .

^ a b c "Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka" .

Oyez . Retrieved September 29, 2019 .

^ a b "Two Landmark Decisions in the Fight for Equality and Justice" .

National Museum of African American History and Culture . October 11, 2017 . Retrieved September 29, 2019 .

^ "Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States" .

Oyez . Retrieved September 29, 2019 .

^ "Congressional" .

Sioux City Journal . December 18, 1884. p. 2.

^ a b c Woodward, C. Vann , and McFeely, William S. (2001), The Strange Career of Jim Crow . p. 7.

^ "Louisiana's 'Jim Crow' Law Valid" .

The New York Times . New York. December 21, 1892. p. 1.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 6, 2011 .

New Orleans, Dec 20. – The Supreme Court yesterday declared constitutional the law passed two years ago and known as the 'Jim Crow' law, making it compulsory on railroads to provide separate cars for black people.

^ Jaynes, Gerald D. (2005).

Encyclopedia of African American Society . Sage. pp. 864–.

ISBN 978-0-7619-2764-8 .

^ Milewski, Melissa (2017).

Litigating Across the Color Line: Civil Cases Between Black and White Southerners from the End of Slavery to Civil Rights . Oxford University Press. pp. 47–.

ISBN 978-0-19-024919-9 .

^ Harriot, Michael (2021). "Reconstruction". In Kendi, Ibram X.

; Blain, Keisha N.

(eds.).

Four Hundred Souls: A Community History of African America, 1619–2019 . New York: One World. pp.

234– 238.

ISBN 978-0-593-13404-7 .

^ Perman, Michael (2009).

Pursuit of Unity: A Political History of the American South . Univ of North Carolina Press. pp. 138–.

ISBN 978-0-8078-3324-7 .

^ Woodward, C. Vann , and McFeely, William S.

The Strange Career of Jim Crow . 2001, p. 6.

^ Parker, Christopher Sebastian; Towler, Christopher C. (May 11, 2019).

"Race and Authoritarianism in American Politics" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

22 (1): 503– 519.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-050317-064519 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

^ a b Perman, Michael .

Struggle for Mastery: Disfranchisement in the South, 1888–1908 . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001, Introduction.

^ a b Kousser, J. Morgan, The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction and the Establishment of the One-Party South , New Haven: Yale University Press, 1974.

^ a b Richard H. Pildes, "Democracy, Anti-Democracy, and the Canon", 2000, pp. 12, 27 . Retrieved March 10, 2008.

^ Glenn Feldman, The Disfranchisement Myth: Poor Whites and Suffrage Restriction in Alabama , Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2004, pp. 135–36.

^ Reese, W. (2010).

History, Education, and the Schools . Springer. p. 145.

ISBN 978-0230104822 .

^ Buddy, J., & Williams, M. (2005). "A dream deferred: school libraries and segregation", American Libraries , 36(2), 33–35.

^ Battles, D. M. (2009).

The History of Public Library Access for African Americans in the South, or, Leaving Behind the Plow.

Lanham, Md.: Scarecrow Press.

^ a b c Fultz, M. (2006). "Black Public Libraries in the South in the Era of De Jure Segregation".

Libraries & The Cultural Record , 41(3), 338.

^ Holt, Thomas (1979).

Black over White: Negro Political Leadership in South Carolina during Reconstruction . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

^ Dittmer, John (1980).

Black Georgia in the Progressive Era, 1900–1920 . University of Illinois Press. pp. 108–.

ISBN 978-0-252-00813-9 .

^ Tomlins, Christopher L.

The United States Supreme Court: The Pursuit of Justice . 2005, p. 195.

^ King, Desmond.

Separate and Unequal: Black Americans and the US Federal Government . 1995, p. 3.

^ Berkin, Carol ; Christopher Miller; Robert Cherny; James Gormly (2011).

Making America: A History of the United States . Cengage Learning. pp. 578–.

ISBN 978-0-495-90979-8 .

^ Schulte Nordholt, J. W.

[ nl ] , and Rowen, Herbert H.

, Woodrow Wilson: A Life for World Peace . 1991, pp. 99–100.

^ a b c d Blight, David W.

(2001), Race and Reunion: The Civil War in American Memory , pp. 9–11.

^ Heersink, Boris; Jenkins, Jeffery A. (January 6, 2020).

"Whiteness and the Emergence of the Republican Party in the Early Twentieth-Century South" .

Studies in American Political Development .

34 (1): 71– 90.

doi : 10.1017/S0898588X19000208 .

ISSN 0898-588X .

S2CID 213551748 .

^ "Colored Methodists Indignant Over the Expulsion of Their Senior Bishop From a Florida Railway Car", The New York Times , 30 March 1882: "Colored men of spirit and culture are resisting the conductors, who attempt to drive them into the 'Jim Crow cars,' and they sometimes succeed." ^ "Constitutional Amendments and Major Civil Rights Acts of Congress Referenced in Black Americans in Congress" .

History, Art & Archives . US House of Representatives . Retrieved January 27, 2018 .

^ New York Times , 30 July 1887: "No 'Jim Crow' Cars": "The answer further avers that the cars provided for the colored passengers are equally as safe, comfortable, clean, well ventilated, and cared for as those provided for whites. The difference, it says, if any, relates to matters aesthetical only." ^ a b "Plessy v. Ferguson" .

Know Louisiana . Louisiana Endowment for the Humanities. Archived from the original on July 30, 2018 . Retrieved January 27, 2018 .

^ Congress rejected by a majority of 140 to 59 a transport bill amendment proposed by James Thomas Heflin (Ala.) to introduce racially segregated streetcars to the capital's transport system.

The New York Times , 23 February 1908: " 'Jim Crow Cars' Denied by Congress".

^ John McCutheon. The Mysterious Stranger and Other Cartoons by John T. McCutcheon, New York, McClure, Phillips & Co. 1905.

^ Gates, Henry Louis and Appiah, Anthony .

Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience . 1999, p. 1211.

^ Murphy, Edgar Gardner .

The Problems of the Present South . 1910, p. 37.

^ Cashin, Sheryll (June 6, 2017).

Loving: Interracial Intimacy in America and the Threat to White Supremacy . 2017 Beacon Press.

ISBN 978-0807058275 .

^ "Full text of Korematsu v. United States opinion" .

Findlaw .

^ Steele v. Louisville , Findlaw.

^ "Former Pa. House speaker K. Leroy Irvis dies" .

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Archived from the original on March 19, 2022 . Retrieved January 27, 2018 .

^ Taylor, Jon E. (2013).

Freedom to Serve: Truman, Civil Rights, and Executive Order 9981 . Routledge. p. 159.

ISBN 978-0-415-89449-4 .

^ Buckelew, Richard A.

"Silas Herbert Hunt" .

Encyclopedia of Arkansas History and Culture . Butler Center . Retrieved June 4, 2018 .

^ Bartley, Numan V., The Rise of Massive Resistance: Race and Politics in the South during the 1950s (LSU Press, 1999).

^ Chafe, William H.

, "Presidential Address: 'The Gods Bring Threads to Webs Begun'." Journal of American History 86.4 (2000): 1531–51.

Online ^ Patterson, James T.

, Brown v. Board of Education: A Civil Rights Milestone and Its Troubled Legacy (2002).

^ Martin, Charles H., "The Rise and Fall of Jim Crow in Southern College Sports: The Case of the Atlantic Coast Conference".

North Carolina Historical Review , 76.3 (1999): 253–84.

online ^ Pamela Grundy, Learning to win: Sports, education, and social change in twentieth-century North Carolina (University of North Carolina Press, 2003), p. 297, online Archived December 15, 2018, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "The Other Rosa Parks: Now 73, Claudette Colvin Was First to Refuse Giving Up Seat on Montgomery Bus" .

Democracy Now!

.

^ "Jim Crow Laws and Racial Segregation" .

VCU Libraries Social Welfare History Project . Virginia Commonwealth University. January 20, 2011 . Retrieved January 27, 2018 .

^ Allison, Graham , Framing the South: Hollywood, television, and race during the Civil Rights Struggle (2001).

^ McWhorter, Diane , Carry Me Home: Birmingham, Alabama: The Climactic Battle of the Civil Rights Revolution (2001), online free to borrow ^ Carter, Dan T.

The politics of rage: George Wallace, the origins of the new conservatism, and the transformation of American politics (LSU Press, 2000).

^ Robert E. Gilbert, "John F. Kennedy and civil rights for black Americans." Presidential Studies Quarterly 12.3 (1982): 386–99.

Online ^ Pauley, Garth E., "Presidential rhetoric and interest group politics: Lyndon B. Johnson and the Civil Rights Act of 1964." Southern Journal of Communication 63.1 (1997): 1–19.

^ Grantham, Dewey W., The South in Modern America (1994), 228–45.

^ Barrow, David , Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (1989).

^ Theoharis, Jeanne , A More Beautiful and Terrible History: The Uses and Misuses of Civil Rights History (2018).

^ For primary sources see John A. Kirk, ed., The Civil Rights Movement: A Documentary Reader (2020).

^ a b c d "Civil Rights Act of 1964 – CRA – Title VII – Equal Employment Opportunities – 42 US Code Chapter 21" . Archived from the original on December 29, 2011 . Retrieved October 2, 2008 .

^ "LBJ for Kids – Civil rights during the Johnson Administration" .

University of Texas . Archived from the original on July 20, 2012.

^ Lopez, Ian F. Haney (February 1, 2007).

"A nation of minorities: race, ethnicity, and reactionary colorblindness" .

Stanford Law Review .

^ "Introduction To Federal Voting Rights Laws" Archived March 4, 2007, at the Wayback Machine . United States Department of Justice.

^ Patterson, Brown v. Board of Education: A Civil Rights Milestone and Its Troubled Legacy (2002) ^ Newkirk II, Vann R.

(July 10, 2018).

"How a Pivotal Voting Rights Act Case Broke America" .

The Atlantic .

^ Sollors, Werner (2000).

Interracialism black-white intermarriage in American history, literature, and law . New York; Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

26– 34.

ISBN 1-280-65507-0 .

^ a b "Loving v. Virginia" .

Oyez . Retrieved September 29, 2019 .

^ Lopez, German (November 6, 2018).

"Louisiana votes to eliminate Jim Crow jury law with Amendment 2" .

Vox . Retrieved April 20, 2020 .

^ Lopez, Ian F. Haney (February 1, 2007), "A nation of minorities: race, ethnicity, and reactionary colorblindness" , Stanford Law Review ^ "How Mississippi's Jim Crow Laws Still Haunt Black Voters Today" . April 12, 2024.

^ Whitman, James Q. (2017).

Hitler's American model: the United States and the making of Nazi race law . Princeton (N. J.): Princeton University Press. pp.

76– 113.

ISBN 9780691172422 .

^ "The Americans and the Nazis: Who Copied Whom?" .

Athenaeum Review .

^ Walker, Darren (September 15, 2023).

"Rejecting the Rising Tide of Antisemitism" .

Ford Foundation .

^ Walker, Darren (October 23, 2023).

"Holding Fast to Our Shared Humanity" .

Ford Foundation .

^ Carter, Kelley L. (February 5, 2001).

"Relics of Racism: Big Rapids Museum Lets Its Memorabilia Tell the Ugly Story of Jim Crow in America" . Archived from the original on December 24, 2007 . Retrieved March 21, 2008 .

Further reading Alexander, Michelle (2012) [2010].

The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness . New York: New Press.

ISBN 978-1-59558-103-7 .

Ayers, Edward L .

The Promise of the New South: Life After Reconstruction.

New York: Oxford University Press , 1992.

ISBN 0-1950-3756-1 Barnes, Catherine A.

Journey from Jim Crow: The Desegregation of Southern Transit.

New York: Columbia University Press , 1983.

ISBN 0-2310-5380-0 Bartley, Numan V.

The Rise of Massive Resistance: Race and Politics in the South during the 1950s.

Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press , 1969.

Bond, Horace Mann . "The Extent and Character of Separate Schools in the United States." Journal of Negro Education vol. 4 (July 1935), pp. 321–327.

Brown, Nikki L.M., and Barry M. Stentiford, eds.

The Jim Crow Encyclopedia (Greenwood, 2008) Chin, Gabriel, and Karthikeyan, Hrishi.

Preserving Racial Identity: Population Patterns and the Application of Anti-Miscegenation Statutes to Asians, 1910 to 1950 , 9 Asian L.J. 1 (2002) Campbell, Nedra.

More Justice, More Peace: The Black Person's Guide to the American Legal System . Lawrence Hill Books, 2002.

ISBN 1-5565-2468-4 Cole, Stephanie and Natalie J. Ring (eds.), The Folly of Jim Crow: Rethinking the Segregated South . College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press , 2012.

ISBN 1-6034-4582-X Dailey, Jane; Gilmore, Glenda Elizabeth and Simon, Bryant (eds.), Jumpin' Jim Crow: Southern Politics from Civil War to Civil Rights . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press , 2000.

ISBN 0-6910-0192-8 Fairclough, Adam . "'Being in the Field of Education and Also Being a Negro ... Seems ... Tragic': Black Teachers in the Jim Crow South." The Journal of American History vol. 87 (June 2000), pp. 65–91.

Feldman, Glenn.

Politics, Society, and the Klan in Alabama, 1915–1949 . Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press , 1999.

ISBN 0-8173-0984-5 Fireside, Harvey.

Separate and Unequal: Homer Plessy and the Supreme Court Decision That Legalized Racism . New York: Carroll & Graf, 2003.

ISBN 0-7867-1293-7 Foner, Eric .

Reconstruction, America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863–1877 . New York: Harper & Row, 1988.

ISBN 0-0601-5851-4 Gaines, Kevin.

Uplifting the Race: Black Leadership, Politics, and Culture in the Twentieth Century . University of North Carolina Press, 1996.

ISBN 0-8078-2239-6 Gaston, Paul M.

The New South Creed: A Study in Southern Mythmaking . New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1970.

Gates, Henry Louis Jr .

Stony the Road : Reconstruction, White Supremacy, and the Rise of Jim Crow .  New York: Penguin Press, 2019.

ISBN 0-5255-5953-1 Gilmore, Glenda Elizabeth .

Gender and Jim Crow: Women and the Politics of White Supremacy in North Carolina, 1896–1920 . Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press , 1996.

ISBN 0-8078-2287-6 Griffin, John Howard .

Black Like Me . Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1961.

Haws, Robert, ed.

The Age of Segregation: Race Relations in the South, 1890–1945 University Press of Mississippi , 1978.

Hackney, Sheldon .

Populism to Progressivism in Alabama . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1969.

Johnson, Charles S.

Patterns of Negro Segregation . New York: Harper and Brothers, 1943.

Klarman, Michael J .

From Jim Crow to Civil Rights: The Supreme Court and the Struggle for Racial Equality . New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.

ISBN 0-1951-2903-2 Litwack, Leon F .

Trouble in Mind: Black Southerners in the Age of Jim Crow . New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1998.

ISBN 0-3945-2778-X Lopez, Ian F. Haney .

"A nation of minorities": race, ethnicity, and reactionary colorblindness .

Stanford Law Review , February 1, 2007.

Kantrowitz, Stephen.

Ben Tillman & the Reconstruction of White Supremacy (2000) McMillen, Neil R.

Dark Journey: Black Mississippians in the Age of Jim Crow . Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press , 1989.

Medley, Keith Weldon.

We As Freemen: Plessy v. Ferguson . Pelican. March, 2003.

Murray, Pauli .

States' Law on Race and Color .

University of Georgia Press . 2d ed. 1997 (Davison Douglas ed.).

ISBN 978-0-8203-1883-7 Myrdal, Gunnar .

An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy.

New York: Harper and Row, 1944.

Newby, I.A.

Jim Crow's Defense: Anti-Negro Thought in America, 1900–1930.

Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press, 1965.

Oshinsky, David M.

(1996).

Worse than Slavery: Parchman Farm and the Ordeal of Jim Crow Justice . New York: Free Press.

ISBN 0-684-82298-9 .

Percy, William Alexander.

Lanterns on the Levee: Recollections of a Planter's Son.

1941. Reprint, Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press, 1993.

Pye, David Kenneth.

"Complex Relations: An African-American Attorney Navigates Jim Crow Atlanta".

Georgia Historical Quarterly , Winter 2007, vol. 91, issue 4, 453–477.

Rabinowitz, Howard N.

Race Relations in the Urban South, 1856–1890 (1978) Smith, J. Douglas.

Managing: Race, Politics, and Citizenship in Jim Crow Virginia University of North Carolina Press, 2002.

Smith, J. Douglas. "The Campaign for Racial Purity and the Erosion of Paternalism in Virginia, 1922–1930: "Nominally White, Biologically Mixed, and Legally Negro." Journal of Southern History vol. 68 (February 2002), pp. 65–106.

Smith, J. Douglas. "Patrolling the Boundaries of Race: Motion Picture Censorship and Jim Crow in Virginia, 1922–1932." Historical Journal of Film, Radio, and Television 21 (August 2001): 273–91.

Sterner, Richard [ sv ] .

The Negro's Share (1943) detailed statistics Toth, Casey (December 26, 2017).

"Churches once abandoned by Jim Crow are being rediscovered" .

News & Observer .

Wood, Amy Louise and Natalie J. Ring (eds.), Crime and Punishment in the Jim Crow South.

Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2019.

Woodward, C. Vann .

The Strange Career of Jim Crow: A Brief Account of Segregation . New York: Oxford University Press, 1955.

Woodward, C. Vann .

The Origins of the New South: 1877–1913 . Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press, 1951.

online Sports Blackman, Dexter Lee (2016). " "The Negro Athlete and Victory": Athletics and Athletes as Advancement Strategies in Black America, 1890s–1930s".

Sport History Review .

47 (1). Human Kinetics: 46– 68.

doi : 10.1123/shr.2015-0006 .

ISSN 1087-1659 .

Demas, Lane. “Beyond Jackie Robinson: Racial Integration in American College Football and New Directions in Sport History.” History Compass 5.2 (2007): 675–90.

Essington, Amy.

The Integration of the Pacific Coast League: Race and Baseball on the West Coast (U of Nebraska Press, 2018).

Hawkins, Billy.

The new plantation: Black athletes, college sports, and predominantly white NCAA institutions (Palgrave Macmillan, 2013).

Clement, Rufus E. "Racial integration in the field of sports." Journal of Negro Education 23.3 (1954): 222– online Fitzpatrick, Frank.

And the Walls Came Tumbling Down: The Basketball Game That Changed American Sports (2000) Hutchison, Phillip. "The legend of Texas Western: journalism and the epic sports spectacle that wasn't." Critical Studies in Media Communication 33.2 (2016): 154–67.

Lopez, Katherine.

Cougars of Any Color: The Integration of University of Houston Athletics, 1964–1968 (McFarland, 2008).

Martin, Charles H. "Jim Crow in the gymnasium: the integration of college basketball in the American South." International Journal of the History of Sport 10.1 (1993): 68–86.

Miller, Patrick B. " Slouching toward a new expediency: College football and the color line during the depression decade " American Studies 40.3 (1999): 5–30.

Pennington, Richard.

Breaking the Ice: The Racial Integration of Southwest Conference Football (McFarland, 1987).

Romero, Francine Sanders. "'There are only white champions': The rise and demise of segregated boxing in Texas." Southwestern Historical Quarterly 108.1 (2004): 26–41.

online Sacks, Marcy S.

Joe Louis: Sports and Race in Twentieth-Century America (Routledge, 2018).

Spivey, Donald . "The black athlete in big-time intercollegiate sports, 1941–1968." Phylon 44.2 (1983): 116–25.

online Archived March 19, 2022, at the Wayback Machine White, Derrick E. " From desegregation to integration: Race, football, and 'Dixie' at the University of Florida " Florida Historical Quarterly 88.4 (2010): 469–96.

External links Library resources about Jim Crow laws Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Jim Crow laws at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata The Jim Crow Museum of Racist Memorabilia Jim Crow and Reconstruction The History of Jim Crow , Ronald L. F. Davis – A series of essays on the history of Jim Crow.

Archive index at the Wayback Machine Creating Jim Crow – Origins of the term and system of laws.

Racial Etiquette: The Racial Customs and Rules of Racial Behavior in Jim Crow America – The basics of Jim Crow etiquette.

"You Don't Have to Ride Jim Crow!" PBS documentary on first Freedom Ride, in 1947.

List of laws enacted in various states Ferris University page about Jim Crow [1] Voices on Antisemitism Interview with David Pilgrim, founder of Jim Crow Museum] Archived May 6, 2009, at the Wayback Machine from the US Holocaust Memorial Museum Jim Crow Era, History in the Key of Jazz , Gerald Early , Washington University in St. Louis , Missouri (esp. see section "Jim Crow is Born") "Jim Crow Laws" .

National Park Service . Retrieved November 17, 2010 .

Examples of Jim Crow laws Reports of the Death of Jim Crow Prove Greatly Exaggerated.

Bill Morris, The Daily Beast .

Jim Crow Signs at A History of Central Florida Podcast Black Justice – American Civil Liberties Union , 1931 v t e Jim Crow Era Participants Federal government Presidents Grover Cleveland Benjamin Harrison William McKinley Theodore Roosevelt William Howard Taft Woodrow Wilson Warren G. Harding Calvin Coolidge Herbert Hoover Franklin D. Roosevelt Harry S. Truman Dwight D. Eisenhower John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Congress African-American senators African-American representatives Henry Cabot Lodge William E. Chandler George F. Hoar John J. Ingalls Henry W. Blair Benjamin Harrison John Sherman James G. Blaine Joseph B. Foraker US Supreme Court Waite Court (1874–88) Fuller Court (1888–1910) White Court (1910–21) Taft Court (1921–30) Hughes Court (1930–41) Stone Court (1941–46) Vinson Court (1946–53) Warren Court (1953-1969) Federal bureaucracy Home Owners' Loan Corporation National Labor Relations Board Fair Employment Practice Committee State governments Southern United States Alabama Joseph F. Johnston John B. Knox Stouten H. Dent William C. Oates George P. Harrison Frank S. White Arkansas J.E. Williams John N. Tillman Ambrose H. Sevier, Jr.

Florida Georgia Thomas E. Watson M. Hoke Smith Kentucky Carl Day James Hargis Louisiana Murphy J. Foster Ernest Kruttschnitt Maryland Mississippi James Z. George James K. Vardaman Horatio F. Simrall North Carolina Marion Butler Furnifold Simmons Oklahoma South Carolina Benjamin Tillman Robert Smalls Coleman Blease Tennessee Robert Love Taylor Thomas R. Myers Josiah H. Dortch Benjamin J. Lea J.C. Myers Texas Alexander W. Terrell Virginia Alfred P. Thom Allen Caperton Braxton Others African Americans Ku Klux Klan Democratic Party Republican Party Farmers' Alliance Greenback Party Bourbon Democrat Grange Agricultural Wheel Union Labor Party of Arkansas Timeline Prelude Reconstruction Era Civil rights movement (1865–1896) Disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era Nadir of American race relations Arkansas Civil Rights Act of 1868 Tennessee State Constitution of 1870 Blyew v. United States (1871) Chicot County massacre of 1871 Illinois School Laws of 1872 Arkansas Civil Rights Act of 1873 Illinois School Laws of 1874 Vagrancy Law (Mississippi) (1876) Pig Law (Mississippi) (1876) Ex parte Siebold (1879) Exodusters 1880–1889 Strauder v. West Virginia (1880) Virginia v. Rives (1880) Ex parte Virginia (1880) Neal v. Delaware (1881) Civil Rights Cases (1883) United States v. Harris (1883) Danville Massacre (1883) Pace v. Alabama (1883) Ohio Public Accommodations Law of 1884 Iowa Civil Rights Act of 1884 Ex parte Yarbrough (1884) Illinois Civil Rights Act of 1885 Yick Wo v. Hopkins (1887) Thibodaux massacre (1887) Assassination of John M. Clayton (1888) Paragould race riots (1888–1908) Myers Law (Tennessee) (1889) Lea Law (Tennessee) (1889) Dortch Law (Tennessee) (1889) Tennessee implements poll tax (state constitution 1870) (1889) 1890–1899 Louisville, New Orleans, and Texas Railroad v. Mississippi (1890) Lodge Bill (1890) Sevier Law (Arkansas) (1890) Ferguson v. Gies (1890) (Michigan) Lodge Bill (1891) Tillman Act (Arkansas) (1891) Separate Coach Law of 1891 (Arkansas) Southern Horrors (1892) Hampton race riot of 1892 Baltimore Afro-American (1892) Sayre Law (Alabama) (1893) Lea Law (Tennessee) (1893) Dodson v. State (1894)  (Arkansas) Ohio Civil Rights Act of 1894 Mills v. Green (1895) Atlanta Exposition Speech (1895) The Red Record (1895) Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) Gibson v. Mississippi (1896) Smith v. Mississippi (1896) Canfield race riot of 1896 Polk County race riot of 1896 Ohio Anti-Mob Violence Act of 1896 Atkins race riot of 1897 Nevada County race riot of 1897 Williams v. Mississippi (1898) Wilmington insurrection of 1898 Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education (1899) Imperium in Imperio (1899) Little River County race riot of 1899 1900–1909 Carter v. Texas (1900) Robert Charles riots of 1900 Alabama Constitutional Convention of 1901 Up from Slavery (1901) Omaha race riot of 1901 Booker T. Washington dinner at the White House (1901) Louisiana State Penitentiary (1901) The Leopard's Spots (1902) Giles v. Harris (1903) The Souls of Black Folk (1903) Tarrance v. Florida (1903) Brownfield v. South Carolina (1903) Streetcar Segregation Act of 1903 (Arkansas) Bonanza race  riot of 1904 Rogers v. Alabama (1904) Mississippi State Penitentiary (1904) Day Law (Kentucky) (1904) Springfield race riot of 1904 Watkinsville lynching (1905) Niagara Movement (1905) The Clansman (1905) Clyatt v. United States (1905) The Chicago Defender (1905) Springfield race riot of 1906 Chattanooga riot of 1906 Greensburg race riot of 1906 1906 Atlanta race massacre Brownsville Affair (1906) Hodges v. United States (1906) Berea College v. Kentucky (1908) Springfield race riot of 1908 Twining v. New Jersey (1908) National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (1909) 1910–1919 Great Migration (1910) Jack Johnson race riots of 1910 Slocum massacre of 1910 Franklin v. South Carolina (1910) El Dorado race riot of 1910 Pittsburgh Courier (1910) Crumpacker Bill (1911) Universal Negro Improvement Association (1914) United States v. Reynolds (1914) National Urban League (1911) Bailey v. Alabama (1911) Walnut Ridge race riot of 1912 The Birth of a Nation (1915) Guinn v. United States (1915) Association for the Study of African American Life and History (1915) Lynching of Jesse Washington (1916) The Passing of the Great Race (1916) Buchanan v. Warley (1917) Houston riot of 1917 East St. Louis riot of 1917 Philadelphia race riot of 1918 Chester race riot of 1918 Negro World (1918) Red Summer Charleston race riot of 1919 Omaha race riot of 1919 Bisbee riot of 1919 Longview race riot of 1919 Chicago race riot of 1919 Knoxville riot of 1919 Elaine race riot of 1919 Washington, D.C. riot of 1919 "If We Must Die" poem (1919) Thirty Years of Lynching in the United States 1889-1918 (1919) 1920–1929 Harlem Renaissance 1920 Duluth lynchings Ocoee massacre of 1920 Nineteenth Amendment (1920) North Carolina repeals poll tax (1920) Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill (1921) Newberry v. United States (1921) Tulsa race riot of 1921 Rosewood massacre of 1923 Catcher race riot of 1923 Moore v. Dempsey (1923) Racial Integrity Act of 1924 (Virginia) Love v. Griffith (1924) Chandler v. Neff (1924) Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters (1925) Corrigan v. Buckley (1926) Nixon v. Herndon (1927) Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 Rope and Faggot (1929) Jessie De Priest tea at the White House (1929) 1930–1939 Lynching of Thomas Shipp and Abram Smith (1930) Sainte Genevieve race riot of 1930 Scottsboro Boys (1931) Federal Home Loan Bank Board (1932) Nixon v. Condon (1932) Powell v. Alabama (1932) Highlander Folk School Hocutt v. Wilson (1933) (North Carolina) Home Owners' Loan Corporation (1933) National Housing Act of 1934 Costigan-Wagner antilynching bill (1934) Louisiana repeals poll tax (1934) National Labor Relations Board (1935) National Council of Negro Women (1935) Grovey v. Townsend (1935) Norris v. Alabama (1935) Patterson v. Alabama (1935) Harlem riot of 1935 Brown v. Mississippi (1936) Garner v. Mississippi Light & Power (1937) University v. Murray (1936) (Maryland) Breedlove v. Suttles (1937) Florida repeals poll tax (1937) Missouri ex rel. Gaines v. Canada (1938) New Negro Alliance v. Sanitary Grocery Co.

(1938) Hale v. Kentucky (1938) Arkansas referendum on poll tax (1938) Alexandria Library sit-in (1939) Lane v. Wilson (1939) Gone with the Wind (1939) Mills v. Board of Education of Anne Arundel County (1939) 1940–1949 Wagner-Gavagan antilynching bill (1940) Chambers v. Florida (1940) Smith v. Texas (1940) Alston v. School Board of the City of Norfolk, Virginia (1940) Hasqett v. Werner (1941) United States v. Classic (1941) Fair Employment Practice Committee (1941) Executive Order 8802 (1942) Hill v. Texas (1942) "Double V" campaign Congress of Racial Equality Beaumont race riot of 1943 Detroit race riot of 1943 Harlem riot of 1943 Agana race riot of 1944 Smith v. Allwright (1944) Pollock v. Williams (1944) An American Dilemma (1944) Hedgepeth and Williams v. Board of Education (1944) Georgia repeals poll tax (1945) Executive Order 9908 (1946) Civil Rights Congress (1946) Morgan v. Virginia (1946) Boswell Amendment 1946 Georgia lynching President's Committee on Civil Rights (1946) Airport Homes race riots (1946) Columbia race riot of 1946 Mendez v. Westminster (1947) Journey of Reconciliation (1947) Fernwood Park race riot (1947) Patton v. Mississippi (1947) Elmore v. Rice (1947) Southern Conference Educational Fund Levi Pearson v. Clarendon County Board of Education (1947) To Secure These Rights (1947) Executive Order 9980 (1948) Executive Order 9981 (1948) Shelley v. Kraemer (1948) Sipuel v. Board of Regents of the University of Oklahoma (1948) Perez v. Sharp (1948) Elmore v. Rice (1948) Rosana Aubert v. Orleans Parish School Board (1948) Peekskill riots of 1949 Virginia referendum on poll tax (1949) Texas referendum on poll tax (1949) Davis v. Schnell (1949) State of Iowa v. Katz (1949) Englewood race riot (1949) Aftermath Counterculture of the 1960s Civil Rights Movement Black Power movement Aspects General Civil rights movement (1896–1954) Loophole clauses Character clause Grandfather clause Understanding clause Literacy test Poll tax Cumulative poll tax Property qualifications Voting devices Direct primary White primaries Multiple box ballot Eight-box law Secret ballot At-large voting Gerrymandering Moving polling stations Historiography Bibliography of Jim Crow Walter C. Hamm " The Three Phases of Colored Suffrage " (1899) William Alexander Mabry The Disfranchisement of the Negro in the South (1933) V. O. Key, Jr.

Southern Politics in State and Nation (1949) C. Vann Woodward Origins of the New South, 1877-1913 (1951) The Strange Career of Jim Crow (1955) J. Morgan Kousser The Shaping of Southern Politics (1974) Michael Perman Struggle for Mastery (2001) Memory Legacy Great Migration Harlem Renaissance Other topics Sproule v. Fredericks (Tennessee) Lynching Anti-miscegenation laws List of Jim Crow law examples by state Racism Social Darwinism White supremacy Color line Disfranchisement Voter suppression in the United States Historical race concepts Judicial aspects of race in the United States Segregation Racial segregation Miscegenation Military segregation Residential segregation School segregation Housing segregation Public housing Jim Crow Museum of Racist Memorabilia Stereotypes of African Americans The New Jim Crow (2010) Sundown town All-white jury Sharecropping Convict lease Chain gang Category:History of racial segregation in the United States v t e History of the United States Timeline Outline Events Pre-Colonial Geological Pre-Columbian era Colonial Exploration of North America European colonization Native American epidemics Settlement of Jamestown Thirteen Colonies Atlantic slave trade King William's War Queen Anne's War Dummer's War First Great Awakening War of Jenkins' Ear King George's War Prelude to Revolution American Enlightenment French and Indian War Proclamation of 1763 Sugar Act Stamp Act Congress Sons of Liberty Boston Massacre Boston Tea Party Intolerable Acts First Continental Congress Continental Association 1776–1789 American Revolution War Second Continental Congress Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence Treaty of Paris Confederation period Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union Pennsylvania Mutiny Shays' Rebellion Northwest Ordinance Drafting and ratification of the Constitution 1789–1815 Bill of Rights Federalist Era Whiskey Rebellion Quasi-War Jeffersonian era Louisiana Purchase War of 1812 1815–1849 Era of Good Feelings Missouri Compromise Monroe Doctrine Jacksonian era Trail of Tears Nat Turner's slave rebellion Nullification crisis Westward expansion Mexican–American War Seneca Falls Convention First Industrial Revolution Second Great Awakening 1849–1865 Antebellum Era California Gold Rush Greater Reconstruction Prelude to War Compromise of 1850 Fugitive Slave Act Kansas–Nebraska Act Bleeding Kansas Dred Scott decision Election of Lincoln Secession Civil War Emancipation Proclamation Assassination of Abraham Lincoln 1865–1917 Reconstruction era Amendments First transcontinental railroad Ku Klux Klan Enforcement Acts Compromise of 1877 Second Industrial Revolution Gilded Age The Gospel of Wealth Assassination of James A. Garfield Chinese Exclusion Act Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act Haymarket affair Sherman Antitrust Act Progressive Era Spanish–American War Imperialism Assassination of William McKinley Square Deal Nadir of American race relations 1917–1945 World War I Paris Peace Conference First Red Scare Roaring Twenties Prohibition Women's suffrage Tulsa race massacre Second Klan Bath School disaster Harlem Renaissance Great Depression Wall Street crash of 1929 Dust Bowl New Deal World War II Pearl Harbor home front Manhattan Project Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 1945–1964 Strike wave of 1945–1946 Start of Cold War Truman Doctrine Early Cold War North Atlantic Treaty Korean War Ivy Mike McCarthyism Post-war boom Project Mercury Civil Rights Movement Early–mid Cold War Cuban Missile Crisis Assassination of John F. Kennedy 1964–1980 Great Society Space Race Project Gemini Apollo program Mid Cold War Détente Vietnam War Fall of Saigon Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.

Counterculture Second-wave feminism Gay liberation Stonewall riots Watergate scandal Pardon of Richard Nixon Iran hostage crisis Moral Majority 1980–1991 Reagan era Reaganomics Iran–Contra affair Crack epidemic Late Cold War Invasion of Grenada Reagan Doctrine End of the Cold War Space Shuttle program War on drugs Invasion of Panama 1991–2016 Gulf War NAFTA Los Angeles riots WTC bombing Waco siege Republican Revolution Oklahoma City bombing Columbine Bush v. Gore September 11 attacks War on terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Hurricane Katrina Virginia Tech shooting Great Recession Killing of Osama bin Laden Rise in mass shootings Tucson Aurora Sandy Hook Orlando Black Lives Matter Obergefell v. Hodges 2016–present Unite the Right rally Continued rise in mass shootings Las Vegas Parkland El Paso Uvalde COVID-19 pandemic recession George Floyd protests January 6 insurrection Afghanistan withdrawal Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization Support of Ukraine Indictments of Donald Trump Topics American Century Antisemitism Cultural Cinema Music Newspapers Sports Demography Immigration Economy Banking Education Higher education Flag Government Abortion Capital punishment Civil Rights Corruption The Constitution Debt ceiling Direct democracy Foreign policy Law enforcement Postal service Taxation Voting rights Journalism Merchant Marine Military Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard Party Systems First Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth Religion Genocide Slavery Sexual slavery Technology and industry Agriculture Labor Lumber Medicine Railway Groups African American Asian American Chinese American Filipino American Indian American Japanese American Korean American Thai American Vietnamese American European American Albanian American English American Estonian American Finnish American Irish American Italian American Lithuanian American Polish American Serbian American Hispanic and Latino American Mexican American Jewish American Middle Eastern American Egyptian American Iranian American Iraqi American Lebanese American Palestinian American Saudi American Native Americans Cherokee Comanche Women LGBTQ Gay men Lesbians Transgender people Places Territorial evolution Admission to the Union Historical regions American frontier Manifest destiny Indian removal Regions New England The South The West Coast States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Federal District Washington, D.C.

Insular areas American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands Outlying islands Baker Island Howland Island Jarvis Island Johnston Atoll Kingman Reef Midway Atoll Navassa Island Palmyra Atoll Wake Island Cities Urban history Cities List of years Historiography Category Portal v t e African Americans History Timeline Abolitionism African American founding fathers Afrocentrism American Civil War Atlantic slave trade Black Codes Black cowboys Black genocide Black Lives Matter Brown v. Board of Education (1954) Children of the plantation Civil Rights Acts 1964 Voting Rights Act of 1965 1968 Civil rights movement 1865–1896 Civil right movement 1896–1954 Civil rights movement 1954–1968 Montgomery bus boycott Browder v. Gayle (1956) Sit-in movement Freedom Riders Birmingham movement March on Washington Freedom Summer Selma to Montgomery marches Chicago Freedom Movement Post–civil rights era Cornerstone Speech COVID-19 impact Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857) Free Negro Free people of color George Floyd protests Great Migration Second New Exodusters Inauguration of Barack Obama 2009 / Inauguration of Barack Obama 2013 Jim Crow laws Lynching Military history Million Man March Nadir of American race relations The Negro Motorist Green Book Partus sequitur ventrem Plantations Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) Reconstruction Amendments Reconstruction era Redlining Separate but equal Silent Parade Slavery Treatment of slaves Tulsa race massacre Underground Railroad Women's suffrage movement Culture Afrofuturism Art Black mecca Businesses Dance Family structure Film Folktales Hair Harlem Renaissance New Negro Hoodoo Juneteenth Kwanzaa LGBTQ community Literature Music Musical theater Names Negro National Anthem Neighborhoods Newspapers Soul food Stereotypes Middle class Upper class Notable people Ralph Abernathy Maya Angelou Crispus Attucks James Baldwin James Bevel Julian Bond Amelia Boynton James Bradley Carol Moseley Braun Edward Brooke Blanche Bruce Ralph Bunche George Washington Carver Shirley Chisholm Claudette Colvin Frederick Douglass W. E. B. Du Bois Medgar Evers James Farmer Henry Highland Garnet Marcus Garvey Fred Gray Prathia Hall Fannie Lou Hamer Kamala Harris Jimi Hendrix Jesse Jackson Ketanji Brown Jackson Michael Jackson Harriet Jacobs Barbara Jordan Coretta Scott King Martin Luther King Jr.

Bernard Lafayette James Lawson Huddie Ledbetter John Lewis Joseph Lowery Malcolm X Thurgood Marshall Toni Morrison Bob Moses Diane Nash Barack Obama Michelle Obama Rosa Parks Adam Clayton Powell Jr.

Colin Powell Gabriel Prosser Joseph Rainey A. Philip Randolph Hiram Revels Paul Robeson Al Sharpton Fred Shuttlesworth Clarence Thomas Emmett Till Sojourner Truth Harriet Tubman Nat Turner Denmark Vesey C. T. Vivian David Walker Booker T. Washington Ida B. Wells Roy Wilkins Oprah Winfrey Andrew Young Whitney Young Education, science and technology Black studies Black schools Historically black colleges and universities Inventors and scientists Museums Women in computer science in medicine in STEM fields Religion African-American Jews Islam American Society of Muslims Nation of Islam Black church Azusa Street Revival Black Hebrew Israelites Black theology Doctrine of Father Divine Political movements Anarchism Back-to-Africa movement Black power Movement Capitalism Conservatism Leftism Pan-Africanism Populism Raised fist Self-determination Nationalism Socialism Civic and economic groups Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH) Black Panther Party Committee to Eliminate Media Offensive to African People (CEMOTAP) Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) Nashville Student Movement National Black Chamber of Commerce (NBCC) National Council of Negro Women (NCNW) National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) National Urban League (NUL) Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) Thurgood Marshall College Fund United Negro College Fund (UNCF) Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA-ACL) Sports Negro league baseball Baseball color line Black players in professional American football Black NFL quarterbacks Black players in ice hockey Muhammad Ali Arthur Ashe Jack Johnson Joe Louis Jesse Owens Jackie Robinson Serena Williams Athletic associations and conferences Central (CIAA) Mid-Eastern (MEAC) Southern (SIAC) Southwestern (SWAC) Ethnic subdivisions By African descent Fula Gullah Igbo Yoruba Alabama Creole Black Indians Black Seminoles Cherokee Freedmen Choctaw Freedmen Creek Freedmen Black Southerners Blaxicans Great Dismal Swamp maroons Louisiana Creole of color Melungeon Demographics Neighborhoods list U.S. cities with large populations 2000 majorities 2010 majorities Metropolitan areas States and territories Languages Afro-Seminole Creole American Sign Black American Sign English American English African-American English African-American Vernacular English social context Gullah Louisiana Creole By state/city Alabama Arkansas California Los Angeles San Francisco Florida Jacksonville Tallahassee Georgia Atlanta Hawaii Illinois Chicago Indiana Iowa Davenport Kansas Kentucky Lexington Louisiana Maryland Baltimore Massachusetts Boston Michigan Detroit Mississippi Nebraska Omaha New Jersey New York New York City North Carolina Ohio Cleveland Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Philadelphia Puerto Rico South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Austin Dallas–Fort Worth Houston San Antonio Utah Virginia West Virginia Diaspora Africa Gambia Ghana Liberia Sierra Leone America Canada Dominican Republic Haiti Mexico Trinidad and Tobago Israel Europe France Lists African Americans Activists Actors Astronauts Billionaires Journalists Jurists Mathematicians Republicans Singers Sportspeople Spingarn Medal winners US cabinet members US representatives US senators Visual artists Writers African-American firsts Mayors Sports firsts US state firsts Historic places Index of related articles Landmark African-American legislation Lynching victims Monuments Neighborhoods Topics related to the African diaspora Category United States portal v t e Native American topics History Paleo-Indians Lithic stage Archaic period in the Americas Formative stage Classic stage Post-Classic stage Woodland period Trade Age of Discovery European colonization of the Americas Population history of the Indigenous peoples of the Americas Genocide Partus sequitur ventrem Five Civilized Tribes Slavery ownership Indian removal Trail of Tears Indian Territory Native Americans in the American Civil War Native American tribal rolls 1896 Overturned Applications, Five Tribes Baker Roll Dawes Rolls Guion Miller Roll UKB Base Roll Certificate Degree of Indian Blood Cultural assimilation of Native Americans Indian Appropriations Act Racial Integrity Act Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 Jim Crow laws Blood quantum laws Native Americans and World War II American Indian boarding schools gravesites Civil rights movement / Native American Rights Fund Native American rights movement/Red Power movement (1968-1977) Native American civil rights Discrimination Culture Mississippian culture Adena culture Hohokam culture Plains Indians Anishinaabe Iroquois culture Art Food Music Film Indigenous Peoples' Day Mesoamerican literature Fashion Neighborhoods Native American disease and epidemics Native American identity in the United States Pow wow Wars Beaver Wars Anglo-Powhatan Wars Pequot War Kieft's War Peach Tree War Esopus Wars King Philip's War Tuscarora War Yamasee War Dummer's War Pontiac's War Lord Dunmore's War American Revolutionary War Cherokee–American wars Northwest Indian War War of 1812 Creek War Arikara War Seminole Wars / Second Seminole War Osage Indian War American Civil War Texas–Indian wars (1836–1877) / Comanche Wars (1836–1877) / Antelope Hills expedition (1858) / Comanche Campaign (1867–1875) / Red River War (1874–1875) / Buffalo Hunters' War (1876–1877) Cayuse War Apache Wars (1849–1924) / Jicarilla War (1849–1855) / Chiricahua Wars (1860–1886) / Tonto War (1871–1875) / Victorio's War (1879–1880) / Geronimo's War (1881–1886) / Post 1887 Apache Wars period (1887–1924) Yuma War Ute Wars (1850–1923) / Battle at Fort Utah (1850) / Walker War (1853–1854) / Tintic War (1856) / Black Hawk War (1865–1872) / White River War (1879) / Ute War (1887) / Bluff War (1914–1915) / Bluff Skirmish (1921) Posey War (1923) Sioux Wars (1854–1891) / First Sioux War (1854-1856) / Dakota War (1862) / Colorado War (1863–1865) / Powder River War (1865) / Red Cloud's War (1866–1868) / Great Sioux War (1876–1877) / Northern Cheyenne Exodus (1878-1879) / Ghost Dance War (1890–1891) Rogue River Wars (1855–1856) Yakima War (1855–1858) / Puget Sound War (1855–1856) / Coeur d'Alene War (1858) Mohave War (1858–1859) Navajo Wars (1849–1866) Paiute War (1860) Yavapai Wars (1861–1875) Snake War (1864–1869) Hualapai War (1865–1870) Modoc War (1872–1873) Nez Perce War (1877) Bannock War (1878) Crow War (1887) Bannock Uprising (1895) Yaqui Uprising (1896) Battle of Sugar Point (1898) Crazy Snake Rebellion (1909) Last Massacre (1911) Battle of Kelley Creek (1911) Battle of Bear Valley (1918) Education, science and technology Native American studies Religion American Indian Religious Freedom Act Eagle feather law Native American religions Native American people and Mormonism Native American church Smudging Sun Dance Sweat lodge Longhouse Religion Political movements Native American civil rights National Congress of American Indians American Indian Movement (AIM) National Amerindianist American Redman's Party Red Power Movement Occupation of Alcatraz Trail of Broken Treaties Occupation of Wounded Knee Same-sex marriage in tribal nations in the United States Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women ( Red handprint ) Native American recognition in the United States Native American women in politics Tribal sovereignty Land Back Civic and economic groups National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) Native American Rights Fund (NARF) National Congress of American Indians National Indian Youth Council (NIYC) Women of All Red Nations (WARN) The International Indian Treaty Council (IITC) Ethnic subdivisions Black Indians in the United States Indigenous peoples of the Americas Louisiana Creole people Pretendian Demographics List of U.S. communities with Native American majority populations Modern social statistics of Native Americans Reservations Reservation poverty Urban Indian Languages English American English American Indian English Native American Pidgin English Native American languages By state/city List Alaska Arizona California Colorado Florida Hawaii Iowa Maryland Baltimore Michigan Nebraska North Carolina Oklahoma Oregon Virginia Wisconsin Federal and State recognition Indian Country Federally recognized tribe Domestic dependent nations Federal recognition of Native Hawaiians Legal status of Hawaii State recognized tribes Lists Native Americans artists actors Federally recognized tribes Native American War Leaders musicians Native American politicians writers Native American Medal of Honor recipients List of federally recognized tribes by state State-recognized tribes in the United States List of Indian reservations in the United States Massacres Category Portal v t e Segregation in countries by type (in some countries, categories overlap) Religious Partition of India Northern Ireland Israel Serbia Greece and Turkey Partition of Bengal Portugal Saudi Arabia Spain Bahrain Myanmar Ethnic and racial Canada Bahrain Brazil Bulgaria and Romania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia and Hungary Dominican Republic Fiji France Germany Israel Malaysia Portugal Rhodesia Apartheid in South Africa Spain United Kingdom United States Civil War Separate but equal School segregation Brown v. Board of Education Massive resistance Anti-miscegenation laws Gender Islam Afghanistan Iran Saudi Arabia Judaism Sex segregation in public restrooms Separatist feminism Dynamics Auto-segregation Balkanization Ethnic cleansing Ethnic federalism Bantustan Ethnopluralism Ethnocracy Exclusionary zoning Forced migration Internment labor camps Residential segregation in the United States Segregation academy (United States) Social exclusion Related topics Apartheid laws Anti-miscegenation laws Black Codes Corporative federalism Discrimination Ghetto benches Hafrada Jim Crow laws Majority minority Nativism Nuremberg Laws Racism Rankism Religious intolerance Reservation in India Second-class citizen Separate school (Canada) Shunning Social apartheid White Australia policy Xenophobia See also: Pillarisation Category caste gender racial Commons v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National United States Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jim_Crow_laws&oldid=1304613334 " Categories : Jim Crow African-American segregation in the United States Debt bondage Democratic backsliding in the interwar period Democratic backsliding in the United States Discrimination in the United States History of African-American civil rights History of racial segregation in the United States Human rights abuses in the United States Legal history of the United States Native American history Political terminology of the United States Politics and race in the United States Race legislation in the United States Reconstruction Era Repealed United States legislation White supremacy in the United States 1870s establishments in the United States 1960s disestablishments in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from July 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from May 2012 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 03:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jim Crow laws 51 languages Add topic

