Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Family tree 3 Literary award 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Bálint Balassi 30 languages Azərbaycanca Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית Кырык мары Latviešu Magyar Македонски مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Удмурт Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hungarian poet, writer, soldier The native form of this personal name is Balassi Bálint . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

Bálint Balassi Balassi Bálint statue at the Kodály körönd in Budapest Baron Bálint Balassi de Kékkő et Gyarmat ( Hungarian : Gyarmati és kékkői báró Balassi Bálint , Slovak : Valentín Balaša (Valaša) barón z Ďarmôt a Modrého Kameňa ; 20 October 1554 – 30 May 1594) was a Hungarian [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Renaissance lyric poet. He wrote mostly in Hungarian, [ 4 ] but was also proficient in eight more languages: Latin, Italian, German, Polish, Turkish, Slovak, Croatian and Romanian.

[ 4 ] He is the founder of modern Hungarian lyric and erotic poetry .

Life [ edit ] Balassi was born at Zólyom in the Captaincy of Cisdanubia and Mining Towns in the Kingdom of Hungary (today Zvolen, Slovakia). He was educated by the reformer Péter Bornemisza and by his mother, the highly gifted Protestant zealot, Anna Sulyok.

[ 5 ] He went to school in Nuremberg since 1565.

His first work was a translation of Michael Bock 's Wurtzgärtlein für krancke Seelen (Little Herb Garden for Sad Souls), (published in Kraków ), to comfort his father while in Polish exile. On his father's rehabilitation, Bálint accompanied him to court, and was also present at the coronation diet in Pressburg (today's Bratislava ), capital of Royal Hungary in 1572. He then joined the army and fought the Turks as an officer in the fortress of Eger in North-Eastern Hungary. Here he fell violently in love with Anna Losonczi, the daughter of the captain of Temesvár , and evidently, from his verses, his love was not unrequited. But after the death of her first husband she gave her hand to Kristóf Ungnád.

[ 5 ] Naturally Balassi only began to realize how much he loved Anna when he had lost her. He pursued her with gifts and verses, but she remained true to her pique and to her marriage vows , and he could only enshrine her memory in immortal verse.

[ 5 ] In 1574 Bálint was sent to the camp of Gáspár Bekes to assist him against Stephen Báthory ; but his troops were encountered and scattered on the way there, and he himself was wounded and taken prisoner. His not very rigorous captivity lasted for two years, [ 5 ] during which he accompanied Báthory where the latter was crowned as King of Poland . He returned to Hungary soon after the death of his father, János Balassi.

[ citation needed ] In 1584 he married his cousin, Krisztina Dobó, the daughter of the valiant commandant, István Dobó of Eger . This became the cause of many of his subsequent misfortunes. His wife's greedy relatives nearly ruined him by legal processes, and when in 1586 he turned Catholic to escape their persecutions they slandered him, saying that he and his son had embraced Islam.

[ 5 ] His desertion of his wife and legal troubles were followed by some years of uncertainty, but in 1589 he was invited to Poland to serve there in the impending war with Turkey. This did not take place and after a spell in the Jesuit College of Braunsberg , Balassi, somewhat disappointed, returned to Hungary in 1591. In the 15 years war he joined the Army, and died at the siege of Esztergom - Víziváros the same year as the result of a severe leg wound caused by a cannonball.

[ 6 ] He is buried in Hybe in today's Slovakia .

[ citation needed ] Balassi's poems fall into four divisions: hymns, patriotic and martial songs, original love poems, and adaptations from the Latin and German . They are all most original, exceedingly objective and so excellent in point of style that it is difficult even to imagine him a contemporary of Sebestyén Tinódi Lantos and Péter Ilosvay . But his erotics are his best productions. They circulated in manuscript for generations and were never printed until 1874, when Farkas Deák discovered a perfect copy of them in the Radványi library. For beauty, feeling and transporting passion. there is nothing like them in Magyar literature until we come to the age of Mihály Csokonai Vitéz and Sándor Petőfi . Balassi was also the inventor of the strophe which goes by his name. It consists of nine lines a a b c c b d d b , or three rhyming pairs alternating with the rhyming third, sixth and ninth lines.

[ 5 ] Family tree [ edit ] The family tree of the Balassi family: [ 7 ] Ferenc Balassa Orsolya Perényi Balázs Sulyok Imre Balassa Menyhért Balassa Anna Thurzó Zsigmond Balassa János Balassa Anna Sulyok Sára Sulyok István Dobó Krisztina Sulyok György Bocskai Boldizsár Balassa István Balassa Bálint Balassi Ferenc Balassi Damján Dobó Ferenc Dobó Krisztina Dobó Katalin Hagymássy István Bocskai Gábor Haller Ilona Bocskai Miklós Bocskai Kristóf Bánffy Judit Bocskai György Palocsai Horvát Krisztina Bocskai Erzsébet Bocskai Kristóf Báthory Literary award [ edit ] The Balint Balassi Memorial Sword Award is an annual Hungarian literary award founded by Pal Molnar in 1997, and presented to an outstanding Hungarian poet, and to a foreign poet for excellence in translation of Hungarian literature, including the works of Balassi.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Poetry portal Balassi Institute Balint Balassi Memorial Sword Award Pal Molnar , founder of the Balint Balassi Memorial Sword Award References [ edit ] ^ "Bálint Balassi" .

Britannica.com . 2008 . Retrieved 22 July 2009 .

^ Homepage of The Bálint Balassi Memorial Sword Award ^ His biography in the Hungarian Biographical Encyclopedia (in Hungarian) ^ a b István Nemeskürty, Tibor Klaniczay, A history of Hungarian literature , Corvina, 1982, p. 64 ^ a b c d e f One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Bain, Robert Nisbet (1911). " Balassa, Bálint ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 3 (11th ed.). p. 240.

^ Lóránt Czigány: A History of Hungarian Literature / Bálint Balassi ^ Ágnes Kenyeres, ed. (1967). "(A-K)".

Magyar életrajzi lexikon (1000–1990) . Vol. I. Akadémiai Kiadó.

^ "Balassi Kard Művészeti Alapítvány" . Retrieved 18 October 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Homepage of Balassi Sword www.balassi.eu v t e Hungarian literature The list is by chronological order.

Early sources Old Hungarian script Establishing charter of the abbey of Tihany Urgesta Funeral Sermon and Prayer Anonymus (notary of Béla III) Gesta Hungarorum Ákos (chronicler) Simon of Kéza Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum Lamentations of Mary 14th century Minorite Chronicle of Buda John of Küküllő Mark of Kalt Chronicon Pictum 15th century John Vitéz Hussite Bible Andreas Pannonius Janus Pannonius Johannes Thuróczy Codex of Bécs Codex of Munich Zirc Bestiary Buda Chronicle Chronica Hungarorum Epitome rerum Hungarorum Antonio Bonfini Rerum Hungaricarum decades Corvina Library 15th – 16th century Gáspár Heltai Nicolaus Olahus 16th century Sebestyén Tinódi Lantos Tripartitum Érdy Codex Péter Bornemisza Bálint Balassi 16th – 17th century Péter Pázmány 17th century Miklós Zrínyi István Gyöngyösi Nádasdy Mausoleum 17th – 18th century Kelemen Mikes 18th century József Kármán 18th – 19th century Ferenc Kazinczy János Batsányi Mihály Fazekas Sándor Kisfaludy Mihály Csokonai Vitéz Dániel Berzsenyi Károly Kisfaludy Ferenc Kölcsey István Széchenyi József Katona 19th century Mihály Vörösmarty József Bajza János Garay József Eötvös Ede Szigligeti Zsigmond Kemény János Arany Mihály Tompa Sándor Petőfi Imre Madách János Vajda Gergely Csiky 19th – 20th century Mór Jókai Kálmán Mikszáth Elek Benedek Zoltán Ambrus Sándor Bródy Géza Gárdonyi Ferenc Herczeg Ignotus Miklós Bánffy Endre Ady Miksa Fenyő Ferenc Molnár Gyula Krúdy Dezső Szabó Zsigmond Móricz Ferenc Móra Menyhért Lengyel Margit Kaffka Lajos Nagy Gyula Juhász Mihály Babits Károly Kós Géza Gyóni Béla Balázs Árpád Tóth Géza Csáth Dezső Kosztolányi Lajos Kassák Frigyes Karinthy Lajos Áprily Milán Füst József Nyírő Sándor Reményik Lajos Zilahy Tibor Déry Béla Hamvas Sándor Szathmári Áron Tamási János Kodolányi 20th century István Fekete Lőrinc Szabó Sándor Márai László Németh Antal Szerb Gyula Illyés Jolán Földes Sándor Török Jenő Rejtő Attila József Albert Wass Miklós Szentkuthy Mária Szepes Géza Képes Miklós Radnóti István Örkény Géza Ottlik László Kálnoky Sándor Weöres Iván Mándy Ferenc Karinthy János Pilinszky Ágnes Nemes Nagy László Nagy Éva Janikovszky Péter Zsoldos Ervin Lázár Gáspár Nagy 20th – 21st century György Faludy Magda Szabó András Sütő Ferenc Juhász Sándor Kányádi Imre Kertész Gábor Görgey Sándor Csoóri Anna Jókai György Konrád György Moldova István Csukás Tamás Cseh Péter Esterházy György Károly Erno Polgar Contemporary Ágnes Gergely László L. Lőrincz Endre Kukorelly Péter Nádas György Spiró Ádám Nádasdy Miklós Vámos Zsuzsa Rakovszky Béla Markó Lajos Parti Nagy László Krasznahorkai Attila Bartis György Dragomán Category:Hungarian writers Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Latvia Croatia Poland Vatican Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bálint_Balassi&oldid=1279159204 " Categories : Hungarian male poets Hungarian erotica writers Hungarian nobility 1554 births 1594 deaths People from Zvolen 16th-century Hungarian poets Hidden categories: Articles with Hungarian-language sources (hu) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2024 Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing Slovak-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 This page was last edited on 6 March 2025, at 22:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bálint Balassi 30 languages Add topic

