Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The two John Winthrops 2 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 2.1 Architecture 2.2 Gates 3 Traditional social events Toggle Traditional social events subsection 3.1 Stein Club 3.2 Arbella Ball 3.3 Thropstock 4 Alumni 5 Notes 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Winthrop House Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′13″N 71°07′09″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3702°N 71.1192°W ﻿ / 42.3702; -71.1192 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Residential House of Harvard College Winthrop House Residential House at Harvard University Harvard University The open courtyard of Winthrop's Gore Hall (left) faces Memorial Drive and the Charles River , along with Leverett's McKinlock Hall (right) and Lowell House (top) Shield Location 32 Mill Street Coordinates 42°22′13″N 71°07′09″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3702°N 71.1192°W ﻿ / 42.3702; -71.1192 Full name John Winthrop House Established 1931 Named for John Winthrop Sister college Davenport College Freshman dorm Hollis Hall and Holworthy Hall Faculty Deans Stephen Chong and Kiran Gajwani Tutors 20 Website winthrop .harvard .edu John Winthrop House , commonly known as Winthrop House , is one of 12 undergraduate residential Houses at Harvard University , an Ivy League university in Cambridge, Massachusetts , which houses approximately 400 upper class undergraduates.

Winthrop house consists of two buildings, Standish Hall and Gore Hall , flanking the venerable Kaneb Courtyard, originally freshman dormitories built in 1912. In 1931 they were joined as John Winthrop House, one of the seven original Harvard houses in which students reside from sophomore through senior years. Historically, Winthrop was also one of the first Harvard houses open to Catholic and Jewish students. Winthrop House maintains an affiliation with Davenport College at Yale University .

The house's name honors two notable men who shared the name "John Winthrop"—the first governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, as well as his descendant, an 18th-century astronomer who was both a Harvard professor and president of the university. The house shield is from the Winthrop family coat of arms: a lion with three chevrons in the background.  In heraldric language, the blazon of the house shield is "Argent three chevrons Gules overall a lion rampant Sable." The current faculty deans of Winthrop House are Stephen Chong and Kiran Gajwani, who were appointed to replace interim deans Mark Gearan and Mary Herlihy-Gearan. Gearan and Herlihy-Gearan took over for a one-year term following the college's decision to let go of former deans Ronald S. Sullivan Jr.

and Stephanie Robinson in 2019.

The two John Winthrops [ edit ] The first John Winthrop (1588–1649) was a member of the English gentry. In 1630, at the age of 41, Winthrop sold his home and sailed for New England, recording his visions that the New World could be a "city on a hill." He served as leader of the Massachusetts Bay Company , then later became the first governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony , a position he held for over sixteen years.

His great-great-great-grandson John Winthrop (1714–1779) was the Hollis Professor of Mathematicks and Natural Philosophy from the age of 24 until his death at 65. Regarded as the first American astronomer, Winthrop also served briefly as the president of Harvard from 1773 to 1774.

Structure [ edit ] Standish Hall, John Winthrop House, at Harvard University Architecture [ edit ] The two halls which would become Winthrop House were built in the same year and share many attributes. Both are four-story U-shaped buildings surrounding courtyards, with a gated open side facing the Charles River. Their facades are based on Sir Christopher Wren 's late-17th-century garden wing of the Hampton Court Palace .

The present Gore Hall maintains the memory of Christopher Gore , who had bequeathed funds for construction (1841) of a prior Gore Hall at Harvard College , which was demolished about the time the present Gore Hall was built.

[ 1 ] It contains the Winthrop House dining hall in a below-street-level space at its center. In the corresponding spot, Standish Hall contains the Winthrop House Library, which holds the largest private collection of John Singleton Copley portraits. When Standish was still a stand-alone dormitory for freshmen, what is now the library was then its dining hall.

Gates [ edit ] Two gates at opposite ends of the Yellowwood Courtyard, both built in 1914, connect Gore and Standish Halls. The front entrance, facing Mill Street, is the Winthrop Gate. The house shield is welded in the front.

On the river side stands the Fly Club Gate, an English Baroque structure named after one of Harvard's male-only final clubs whose members provided a grant to build it. The panther symbol of the Fly Club is centered within the ironwork above the entry, and inscribed is the dedication: "For Friendships Made in College the Fly Club in Gratitude has Built this Gate." Traditional social events [ edit ] Stein Club [ edit ] Stein Club is a themed event featuring beer and snacks for Winthrop Residents every other Thursday evening.  It is usually held in Winthrop's Junior Common Room.  Winthrop House sells beer steins annually with the house crest on them to be used at the stein clubs, though having one is not required to partake.   Recent Stein Club themes include "Kung Fu," "Comedy Night," "Oktoberfest," "Regatta," and others.  Stein Club is one of the most well attended events held in the house. Although many believe that Edward Kennedy began Winthrop's Stein Club tradition, this is not true. The origin of this apocryphal story is a humorous article that appeared in the Harvard Independent .

Arbella Ball [ edit ] The Winthrop Arbella Ball is the house's annual spring formal dance. It is named after the Arbella, the ship upon which the first John Winthrop ventured to the new World. The ball typically features a live band playing under a beautiful tent before a temporary dance floor set up in the Gore Courtyard, and a reception in the Winthrop Junior Common Room.

Thropstock [ edit ] Thropstock is Winthrop's annual spring carnival, held in late April or early May.  Thropstock typically features blow-up rides and games in the courtyard, a picnic lunch, cotton candy, and live music by Harvard student bands.  Recent performers include Plan B for the Type A's, So Long Princess, and others.

Alumni [ edit ] Winthrop House's most famous former inhabitant was President John F. Kennedy . Harvard University maintains Kennedy's former senior year dorm room in Gore Hall as a private room for guests of the university, especially political notables who visit Harvard Kennedy School .  The room has been renovated and redecorated by the Institute of Politics in order to make it more accommodating to visiting guests.  The study is furnished with a plaque commemorating the late President Kennedy, a leather couch, and a large rug, along with framed photographs of Kennedy.  The Kennedy Suite's bedroom has two twin beds, as well as a shelf of books written by and about President Kennedy.

Other notable Winthrop alumni include Prime Minister of Canada Mark Carney United States Massachusetts Senators Edward Kennedy (D) and Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

(R; He lost his seat to the aforementioned JFK. He was actually a resident of Standish Hall, which is now part of Winthrop House); Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke ; CEO of Goldman Sachs Lloyd Blankfein ; UCLA professor and national security expert Amy Zegart ; Berkeley professor and torture expert John Yoo ; Clinton administration Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin ; United States Representative Barney Frank (D);  conservative African-American activist Alan Keyes ; conservative anti-tax lobbyist Grover Norquist ; Nixon administration cabinet official and Watergate figure Elliot Richardson ; Harvard Law School Professor Charles Nesson ; Minnesota Speaker of the House Paul Thissen ; Beauty and the Geek Season 3 winner Alan "Scooter" Zackheim ; and Comedian and comedy writer B. J. Novak .  During his freshman year, the nuclear weapons pioneer J. Robert Oppenheimer lived in Standish Hall.

[ 2 ] Author James von der Heydt served as Resident Dean of Winthrop House in 2006.

[ 3 ] Gabe Newell briefly lived in Winthrop House prior to leaving the university.

[ 4 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Harvard University (1949).

Education, bricks and mortar: Harvard buildings and their contribution to the advancement of learning . Harvard University. p. 66.

ISBN 9780674238855 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Bird, Kai and Martin Sherwin.

American Prometheus: The Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer .

p.29 ^ Von Der Heydt, James.

"A Jeremiad for an American School" . Retrieved 24 May 2012 .

^ Email from Gabe Newell (gaben@valvesoftware.com) External links [ edit ] Winthrop House Photographic views of Gore Hall, Standish Hall, and Winthrop House, 1913–1957: an inventory v t e Residential houses of Harvard Adams House Cabot House Currier House Dudley House Dunster House Eliot House Kirkland House Leverett House Lowell House Mather House Pforzheimer House Quincy House Winthrop House v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Winthrop_House&oldid=1288184283 " Categories : Harvard Houses 1931 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 May 2025, at 01:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Winthrop House Add languages Add topic

