Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Loss of his work 3 20th-century discoveries 4 Famous quotations 5 Comedies Toggle Comedies subsection 5.1 More-complete plays 5.2 Only fragments available 6 Standard editions 7 See also 8 Notes 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Menander 68 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Athenian comic playwright (c. 342/341 – c. 290 BC) For other uses, see Menander (disambiguation) .

Menander Bust of Menander. Marble, Roman copy of the Imperial era after a Greek original (c. 343–291 BC).

Born 342/41 BC Kephisia , Athens Died c. 290 BC (aged 50 – 52) Education Student of Theophrastus at the Lyceum Genre New Comedy Notable works Dyskolos Samia Menander ( / m ə ˈ n æ n d ər / ; Ancient Greek : Μένανδρος , romanized : Ménandros ; c. 342/341 – c. 290 BC) was a Greek scriptwriter and the best-known representative of Athenian New Comedy .

[ 1 ] He wrote 108 comedies [ 2 ] and took the prize at the Lenaia festival eight times.

[ 3 ] His record at the City Dionysia is unknown.

He was one of the most popular writers and most highly admired poets in antiquity, but his work was considered lost before the early Middle Ages . It now survives only in Latin-language adaptations by Terence and Plautus and, in the original Greek, in highly fragmentary form, most of which were discovered on papyrus in Egyptian tombs during the early to mid-20th-century. In the 1950s, to the great excitement of Classicists , it was announced that a single play by Menander, Dyskolos , had finally been rediscovered in the Bodmer Papyri intact enough to be performed.

Life and work [ edit ] Roman, Republican or Early Imperial , Relief of a seated poet (Menander) with masks of New Comedy , 1st century BC – early 1st century AD, Princeton University Art Museum Menander was the son of well-to-do parents; his father Diopeithes is identified by some with the Athenian general and governor of the Thracian Chersonese known from the speech of Demosthenes De Chersoneso . He presumably derived his taste for comic drama from his uncle Alexis .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] He was the friend, associate, and perhaps pupil of Theophrastus , and was on intimate terms with the Athenian dictator Demetrius of Phalerum .

[ 6 ] He also enjoyed the patronage of Ptolemy Soter , the son of Lagus , who invited him to his court. But Menander, preferring the independence of his villa in the Piraeus and the company of his mistress Glycera , refused.

[ 7 ] According to the note of a scholiast on the Ibis of Ovid , he drowned while bathing, [ 8 ] and his countrymen honored him with a tomb on the road leading to Athens, where it was seen by Pausanias .

[ 9 ] Numerous supposed busts of him survive, including a well-known statue in the Vatican , formerly thought to represent Gaius Marius .

[ 4 ] His rival in dramatic art (and supposedly in the affections of Glycera) was Philemon , who appears to have been more popular. Menander, however, believed himself to be the better dramatist, and, according to Aulus Gellius , [ 10 ] used to ask Philemon: "Don't you feel ashamed whenever you gain a victory over me?" According to Caecilius of Calacte ( Porphyry in Eusebius , Praeparatio evangelica [ 11 ] ) Menander was accused of plagiarism , as his The Superstitious Man was taken from The Augur of Antiphanes , [ 4 ] but reworkings and variations on a theme of this sort were commonplace and so the charge is a complicated one.

How long complete copies of his plays survived is unclear, although 23 of them, with commentary by Michael Psellus , were said to still have been available in Constantinople in the 11th century. He is praised by Plutarch ( Comparison of Menander and Aristophanes ) [ 12 ] and Quintilian ( Institutio Oratoria ), who accepted the tradition that he was the author of the speeches published under the name of the Attic orator Charisius .

[ 13 ] Seated portrait of Menander, Roman fresco from the Casa del Menandro in Pompeii An admirer and imitator of Euripides , Menander resembles him in his keen observation of practical life, his analysis of the emotions, and his fondness for moral maxims, many of which became proverbial: "The property of friends is common," "Whom the gods love die young," "Evil communications corrupt good manners" (from the Thaïs , quoted in 1 Corinthians 15 :33). These maxims (chiefly monostichs) were afterwards collected, and, with additions from other sources, were edited as Menander's One-Verse Maxims , a kind of moral textbook for the use of schools.

[ 4 ] The single surviving speech from his early play Drunkenness is an attack on the politician Callimedon , in the manner of Aristophanes , whose bawdy style was adopted in many of his plays.

[ citation needed ] Menander found many Roman imitators.

Eunuchus , Andria , Heauton Timorumenos and Adelphi of Terence (called by Caesar "dimidiatus Menander") were avowedly taken from Menander, but some of them appear to be adaptations and combinations of more than one play. Thus in the Andria were combined Menander's The Woman from Andros and The Woman from Perinthos , in the Eunuchus , The Eunuch and The Flatterer , while the Adelphi was compiled partly from Menander and partly from Diphilus . The original of Terence's Hecyra (as of the Phormio ) is generally supposed to be, not by Menander, but Apollodorus of Carystus . The Bacchides and Stichus of Plautus were probably based upon Menander's The Double Deceiver and Brotherly-Loving Men , but the Poenulus does not seem to be from The Carthaginian , nor the Mostellaria from The Apparition , in spite of the similarity of titles.

Caecilius Statius , Luscius Lanuvinus, Turpilius and Atilius also imitated Menander. He was further credited with the authorship of some epigrams of doubtful authenticity; the letters addressed to Ptolemy Soter and the discourses in prose on various subjects mentioned by the Suda [ 14 ] are probably spurious.

[ 4 ] Loss of his work [ edit ] Most of Menander's work did not survive the Middle Ages, except as short fragments.

Federico da Montefeltro 's library at Urbino reputedly had "tutte le opere" , a complete works, but its existence has been questioned and there are no traces after Cesare Borgia 's capture of the city and the transfer of the library to the Vatican.

[ 15 ] Until the end of the 19th century, all that was known of Menander were fragments quoted by other authors and collected by Augustus Meineke (1855) and Theodor Kock, Comicorum Atticorum Fragmenta (1888). These consist of some 1650 verses or parts of verses, in addition to a considerable number of words quoted from Menander by ancient lexicographers.

[ 4 ] 20th-century discoveries [ edit ] A papyrus fragment of the Perikeiromene , ll. 976–1008 ( P. Oxy. 211 II 211, 1st or 2nd century AD) This situation changed abruptly in 1907, with the discovery of the Cairo Codex , which contained large parts of the Samia , the Perikeiromene , and the Epitrepontes ; a section of the Heros ; and another fragment from an unidentified play. A fragment of 115 lines of the Sikyonioi had been found in the papier mache of a mummy case in 1906.

In 1959, the Bodmer papyrus was published containing Dyskolos , more of the Samia , and half of the Aspis . In the late 1960s, more of the Sikyonioi was found as filling for two more mummy cases; this proved to be drawn from the same manuscript as the discovery in 1906, which had clearly been thoroughly recycled.

[ 16 ] Other papyrus fragments continue to be discovered and published.

[ 17 ] Menander. Roman copy, after original by Kephisodotos the Younger and Timarchos, sons of Praxiteles, 4th century B.C. Marble.

The Hermitage Museum , St. Petersburg, Russia In 2003, a palimpsest manuscript, in Syriac writing of the 9th century, was found where the reused parchment comes from a very expensive 4th-century Greek manuscript of works by Menander. The surviving leaves contain parts of the Dyskolos and 200 lines of another piece by Menander, so far unpublished, titled Titthe .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Famous quotations [ edit ] In his First Epistle to the Corinthians , Paul the Apostle quotes Menander in the text "Bad company corrupts good character", [ 21 ] which probably comes from his play Thais ; according to 5th century Christian historian Socrates Scholasticus , Menander derived this from Euripides .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] "He who labors diligently need never despair, for all things are accomplished by diligence and labor." — Menander "Ἀνερρίφθω κύβος" ( anerriphtho kybos ), best known in English as " the die is cast " or "the die has been cast", from the mis-translated Latin " iacta alea est " (itself better-known in the order " Alea iacta est "); a correct translation is "let the die be cast" (meaning "let the game be ventured"). The Greek form was famously quoted by Julius Caesar upon committing his army to civil war by crossing the River Rubicon . The popular form "the die is cast" is from the Latin iacta alea est , a mistranslation by Suetonius , 121 AD. According to Plutarch , the actual phrase used by Julius Caesar at the crossing of the Rubicon was a quote in Greek from Menander's play Arrhephoros , with the different meaning "Let the die be cast!".

[ 24 ] See discussion at " the die is cast " and " Alea iacta est ".

He [Caesar] declared in Greek with loud voice to those who were present 'Let the die be cast' and led the army across. ( Plutarch , Life of Pompey , 60.2.9) [ 25 ] Lewis and Short , [ 26 ] citing Casaubon and Ruhnk, suggest that the text of Suetonius should read Jacta alea esto , which they translate as "Let the die be cast!", or "Let the game be ventured!". This matches Plutarch's third-person perfect passive imperative ἀνερρίφθω κύβος ( anerrhiphtho kybos ).

According to Gregory Hayes' Translation of Meditations by Marcus Aurelius, Menander is also known for the quote/proverb: "a rich man owns so many goods he has no place to shit." (Meditations, V:12) [ 27 ] Another well known quote by Menander is "Whom the gods love dies young".

[ 28 ] Comedies [ edit ] Menander's comedies were very different from the Old Comedies of Aristophanes. New Greek Comedies usually would have two lovers, a blocking character, and a helpful servant. They typically ended with a wedding or happy ending. They were much more of a "higher brow" comedy than Old Greek comedy. They were also more realistic.

More-complete plays [ edit ] Aspis ("The Shield"; about half) Dyskolos ("The Grouch" or "Old Cantankerous"; best preserved play) Epitrepontes ("The Arbitration"; most) Misoumenos ("The Hated Man"; about a third) Perikeiromene ("The Girl with her Hair Cut Short" or "Rape of the Locks"; about half) Samia ("The Girl from Samos "; most) Sikyonioi or Sikyonios ("The Sicyonian (s)"; about a third) Only fragments available [ edit ] Adelphoi ("The Brothers") Anatithemene , or Messenia ("The Woman From Messene ") Andria ("The Woman From Andros ") Androgynos ("Hermaphrodite"), or Kres ("The Cretan") Anepsioi ("Cousins") Aphrodisia ("The Erotic Arts"), or Aphrodisios Apistos ("Unfaithful", or "Unbelieving") Arrhephoros (" The Bearer of Ritual Objects "), or Auletris ("The Female Flute-Player") Auton Penthon ("Grieving For Him") Boiotis ("The Woman From Boeotia ") Chalkeia ("The Chalceia Festival"), or Chalkis ("The Copper Pot") Chera ("The Widow") Daktylios ("The Ring") Dardanos ("Dardanus") Deisidaimon ("The Superstitious Man") Demiourgos ("The Demiurge") Didymai ("Twin Sisters") Dis Exapaton ("Double Deceiver") Empimpramene ("Woman On Fire") Encheiridion ("The Dagger") Epangellomenos ("The Man Making Promises") Ephesios ("The Man From Ephesus") Epikleros ("The Heiress") Eunouchos ("The Eunuch") Georgos ("The Farmer") Halieis ("The Fishermen") Heauton Timoroumenos ("Torturing Himself") Heniochos ("The Charioteer") Heros ("The Hero") Hiereia ("The Priestess") Hippokomos ("The Horse-Groom") Homopatrioi ("People Having The Same Father") Hydria ("The Water-Pot") Hymnis ("Hymnis") Hypobolimaios ("The Changeling"), or Agroikos ("The Country-Dweller") Imbrioi ("People From Imbros ") Kanephoros (" The Ritual-Basket Bearer ") Karchedonios ("The Carthaginian Man") Karine ("The Woman From Caria ") Katapseudomenos ("The False Accuser") Kekryphalos ("The Hair-Net") Kitharistes ("The Harp-Player") Knidia ("The Woman From Cnidos ") Kolax ("The Flatterer" or "The Toady") Koneiazomenai ("Women Drinking Hemlock") Kybernetai ("The Helmsmen") Leukadia ("The Woman from Leukas ") Lokroi ("Men From Locris ") Menagyrtes ("The Beggar-Priest of Rhea ") Methe ("Drunkenness") Misogynes ("The Woman-Hater") Naukleros ("The Ship's Captain") Nomothetes ("The Lawgiver" or "Legislator") Olynthia ("The Woman From Olynthos ") Orge ("Anger") Paidion ("Little Child") Pallake ("The Concubine") Parakatatheke ("The Deposit") Perinthia ("The Woman from Perinthos ") Phanion ("Phanion") Phasma ("The Phantom, or Apparition") Philadelphoi ("Brotherly-Loving Men") Plokion ("The Necklace") Poloumenoi ("Men Being Sold", or "Men For Sale") Proenkalon ("The Pregnancy") Progamoi ("People About to Get Married") Pseudherakles ("The Fake Hercules ") Psophodees ("Frightened By Noise") Rhapizomene ("Woman Getting Her Face Slapped") Storfiappos ("The Spinner") Stratiotai ("The Soldiers") Synaristosai ("Women Who Eat Together At Noon"; "The Ladies Who Lunch") Synepheboi ("Fellow Adolescents") Synerosa ("Woman In Love") Thais (" Thaïs ") Theophoroumene ("The Girl Possessed by a God") Thesaurus ("The Treasure") Thettale ("The Woman From Thessaly ") Thrasyleon ("Thrasyleon") Thyroros ("The Doorkeeper") Titthe ("The Wet-Nurse") Trophonios (" Trophonius ") Xenologos ("Enlisting Foreign Mercenaries") Standard editions [ edit ] The standard edition of the least-well-preserved plays of Menander is Kassel-Austin, Poetarum Comicorum Graecorum vol. VI.2 . For the better-preserved plays, the standard edition is now Arnott's 3-volume Loeb. A complete text of these plays for the Oxford Classical Texts series was left unfinished by Colin Austin at the time of his death; [ 29 ] the OCT edition of Harry Sandbach , published in 1972 and updated in 1990, remains in print.

[ 30 ] See also [ edit ] Poseidippus of Cassandreia Apollodorus of Carystus Diphilus of Sinope Philemon (poet) Rhinthon Oxyrhynchus Theatre of ancient Greece Notes [ edit ] ^ Konstan, David (2010).

Menander of Athens . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

3– 6.

ISBN 978-0199805198 .

^ Suidas μ 589 ^ Apollodorus: Chronicle , fr.43 ^ a b c d e f One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Freese, John Henry (1911). " Menander ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 18 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 109–110.

^ 'A Short History of Comedy', [1] Prolegomena De Comoedia , 3 ^ Phaedrus: Fables , 5.1 ^ Alciphron: Letters , 2.3–4 ^ Scholiast on Ibis.591 ^ Pausanias, Description of Greece , 1.2.2 ^ Gellius: Noctes Attica , 17.4 ^ Eusebius: Praeparatio Evangelica , Book 10 , Chapter 3 ^ Plutarch: Moralia , 853–854 ^ Quintilian: Institutio Oratoria , 10.1.69 ^ Suda, M.589 ^ Jacob Burckhardt , The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy , 1860.

Paragraph 8 of this subchapter , but see print editions (such as Irene Gordon's (Mentor 1960) p. 158) for Burckhadt's footnote speculating on future rediscoveries.

^ Menander: Plays and Fragments , tr.

Norma Miller . Penguin 1987, p.15 ^ Sommerstein, Alan (6 December 2012).

"From Mount Sinai to Michigan: the rediscovery of Menander's Epitrepontes (part 4)" .

University of Nottingham .

^ Dieter Harlfinger, Warten auf Menander im Vatikan. 400 griechische Komödienverse in einer syrischen Palimpsest-Handschrift entdeckt , in: Forum Classicum, 2004 Archived 8 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine .  See here for an English translation.

^ F. D’Aiuto: Graeca in codici orientali della Biblioteca Vaticana (con i resti di un manoscritto tardoantico delle commedie di Menandro) , in: Tra Oriente e Occidente. Scritture e libri greci fra le regioni orientali di Bisanzio e l’Italia , a cura di Lidia Perria, Rom 2003 (= Testi e studi bizantino-neoellenici XIV), S. 227–296 (esp. 266–283 and plates 13–14) ^ Miles, Sarah (2014) 'Menander. C. Austin (ed.) Menander. Eleven Plays. (Proceedings of the Cambridge Philological Society, Supplementary Volume 37.) Pp. xviii + 84. Cambridge : The Cambridge Philological
Society, 2013. Paper, Classical review., 64 (02). pp. 409–411.

^ 1 Cor 15:33 ^ Socrates Scholasticus, Ecclesiastical History , Book 3, Chapter 16 ^ intertextual.bible/text/menander-thais-218-1-corinthians-15.33 ^ Perseus Digital Library Plut. Pomp. 60.2 ^ See also Plutarch's Life of Caesar 32.8.4 and Sayings of Kings & Emperors 206c.

^ Online Dictionary: alea , Lewis and Short at the Perseus Project. See bottom of section I.

^ Marcus Aurelius.

"Meditations" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 July 2015.

^ Menander, Monosticha – Sententiae, 425 ^ "Colin Austin obituary" .

The Guardian . 6 September 2010.

Archived from the original on 26 July 2023.

^ OUP Edition of Menander Archived 26 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Menander Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Menander Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Cox, Cheryl Anne. (2002). "Crossing Boundaries Through Marriage in Menander’s Dyskolos ." Classical Quarterly 52: 391–394.

Csapo, E. (1999). "Performance and Iconographic Tradition in the Illustrations of Menander." Syllecta Classica 6: 154–188.

Frost, K. B. (1988).

Exits and Entrances in Menander.

Oxford: Clarendon.

Glazebrook, Allison . (2015). "A Hierarchy of Violence? Sex Slaves, Parthenoi, and Rape in Menander's Epitrepontes." Helios , 42(1): 81–101.

Goldberg, Sander M. (1980).

The Making of Menander’s Comedy.

Berkeley: Univ. of California Press.

Gutzwiller, Kathryn, and Ömer Çelik. (2012). “New Menander Mosaics from Antioch.” American Journal of Archaeology 116:573–623.

Nervegna, Sebastiana. (2013).

Menander in Antiquity: The Contexts of Reception.

Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.

Papaioannou, Sophia and Antonis K. Petrides eds., (2010).

New Perspectives on Postclassical Comedy. Pierides, 2.

Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.

Traill, Ariana. (2008).

Women and the Comic Plot in Menander.

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

Walton, Michael, and Peter D. Arnott. (1996).

Menander and the Making of Comedy.

Westport, CT: Greenwood.

External links [ edit ] Menander at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Works by Menander at Faded Page (Canada) An English translation Archived 7 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine of the Dyskolos .

Dyskolos , translated by G. Theodoridis Perikeiromene , translated by F. G. Allinson Menander: Monosticha / Sententiae / Einzelverse – Sentences from Menander's work in the original Greek and translated in Latin and German SORGLL: Menander, Dyskolos, 711–747; read by Mark Miner v t e Plays by Menander Aspis Dyskolos Epitrepontes Misoumenos Perikeiromene Samia Sikyonioi v t e Classical Athenian drama List of plays Genres Tragedy Comedy Satyr play Writers Aeschylus Sophocles Euripides Aristophanes Menander Structure Architecture List of theatres Skene Analysis Poetics (335 BCE) The Birth of Tragedy (1872) v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Romania Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican 2 3 Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐2rtql
Cached time: 20250817045603
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.688 seconds
Real time usage: 0.874 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3821/1000000
Revision size: 24618/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 200658/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3878/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 79943/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.388/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23665996/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  681.335      1 -total
 20.29%  138.233      1 Template:Reflist
 17.36%  118.309     12 Template:Navbox
 11.87%   80.868      1 Template:Menander
 11.57%   78.844      1 Template:Langx
 10.63%   72.422      1 Template:Cite_book
  8.66%   59.007      1 Template:Ancient_Greece_topics
  8.28%   56.432      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.24%   56.116      1 Template:Short_description
  6.70%   45.628      1 Template:Sisterlinks Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:160570:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045603 and revision id 1298769413. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Menander&oldid=1298769413 " Categories : Ancient Athenian dramatists and playwrights 4th-century BC Athenians 3rd-century BC Athenians 4th-century BC Greek poets 3rd-century BC Greek poets Hellenistic Athens New Comic poets 340s BC births 290s BC deaths Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from February 2025 Use dmy dates from February 2025 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Articles containing Latin-language text Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 15:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Menander 68 languages Add topic

