Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Application Toggle Application subsection 2.1 In United States 2.2 In Europe 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Tender years doctrine 1 language Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historic legal principle in English family law Family law Family Marriage and other unions and status Types of marriages Cohabitation Concubinage Common-law marriage Civil union Domestic partnership Validity of marriages Marriage licence Marriage certificate Prenuptial agreement Matrimonial regime Void and Voidable marriages Annulment Marriageable age Sham marriage Amatonormativity Dissolution of marriages Divorce Adultery Grounds for divorce No-fault divorce Matrimonial Causes Act Legal separation Alimony Parenting plan Residence [UK (EW and NI)] Custody evaluator (US) Parenting coordinator (US) Children's issues Paternity DNA paternity testing Legitimacy Child custody Legal guardian Adoption Tender years doctrine Filial responsibility Contact & visitation CAFCASS [UK (EW)] Grandparent visitation UN Rights of the Child Children's rights Emancipation Foster care Ward Child support Paper abortion List of child abuse cases featuring long-term detention Private international law Private international law Divorce Marriage Hague Convention (adoption) International child abduction Hague Convention (child abduction) Hague Convention (maintenance) Family and criminal code (or criminal law) Bigamy Child abuse CPS (US) Child selling Domestic violence Incest Legality of incest Parental child abduction Parental duties Parents' rights Paternity fraud Paternal rights and abortion Right to family life v t e Caroline Norton, the person who initiated the tender years doctrine The tender years doctrine is a legal principle in family law since the late 19th century. In common law , it presumes that during a child's "tender" years (generally regarded as the age of four and under), the mother should have custody of the child. The doctrine often arises in divorce proceedings.

History [ edit ] Historically, English family law gave custody of the children to the father after a divorce. Until the 19th century, women had few individual rights and obligations, most derived from their fathers or husbands.

In the early nineteenth century, Caroline Norton , a prominent social reformer, campaigned for the right of women to have custody of their children. Norton, who had undergone a divorce and been deprived of her children, worked with politicians. The British Parliament enacted legislation to protect mothers' rights. The Custody of Infants Act 1839 established a presumption of maternal custody for children under the age of seven years; the Act also gave some discretion to the judge in a child custody case, and maintained responsibility for financial support from their former husbands.

[ 1 ] With the Custody of Infants Act 1873 , the Parliament extended the presumption of maternal custody until a child reached sixteen.

[ 2 ] The doctrine spread in many states of the world because of the British Empire . By the end of the 20th century, the doctrine was established in most of the United States and Europe .

[ citation needed ] Application [ edit ] In United States [ edit ] The tender years doctrine was frequently used in the 20th century but is gradually being replaced by the " best interests of the child " doctrine of custody through changes in state statutes.

[ 3 ] Furthermore, several courts have held that the tender years doctrine violates the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution . However, state courts still use the doctrine in many cases, which prompted family court reform similar to criminal justice reform.

[ 4 ] Critics of the family court system, and in particular fathers' rights groups, contend that although the tender years doctrine has formally been replaced by the best interests of the child rule, the older doctrine is still, in practice, how child custody is primarily determined in family courts nationwide. 
Critics maintain that the father must prove the mother to be an unfit parent before he is awarded primary custody, while the mother need not prove the father unfit to win custody herself, contrary to the Equal Protection Clause.

[ 5 ] In Europe [ edit ] Most of the states in the EU have gradually abolished the tender years doctrine. In those states, the joint custody is the rule after divorce or the parents' separation. The Principles of the European Family Law regarding the parental responsibilities clarifies that the two parents are equal and their parental responsibilities should neither be affected by the dissolution or annulment of the marriage or other formal relationship nor by the legal or factual separation between the parents.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Custody of Infants Act 1873 Custody of Infants Act 1839 Caroline Norton Suitable age and discretion References [ edit ] ^ Wroath, John (1998).

Until They Are Seven, The Origins of Women's Legal Rights . Waterside Press.

ISBN 1-872-870-57-0 .

^ Katz, Sanford (1992).

"That They May Thrive" .

Journal of Contemporary Health Law & Policy .

8 (1): 123 . Retrieved 23 March 2018 .

^ Cynthia A. McNeely (1998).

"LAGGING BEHIND THE TIMES: PARENTHOOD, CUSTODY, AND GENDER BIAS IN THE FAMILY COURT" .

^ C. Gail Vasterling (1989).

"Child Custody Modification Under the Uniform Marriage and Divorce Act: A Statute to End the Tug-of-War?" .

Washington University Law Review . p. 925.

Many courts consider the maternal preference doctrine to be gender discriminatory. The Supreme Court of Alabama, for example, held that "the tender years presumption represents an unconstitutional gender-based classification which discriminates between fathers and mothers in child custody proceedings solely on the basis of sex. " ^ "The tender years doctrine origin history modern usage and criticism" .

baysingerlaw . Retrieved 13 July 2016 .

^ The document is issued by Commission on European Family Law and can be consulted here . See Principle 3:10.

Bibliography [ edit ] Blakesley, Christopher L. 1981.

"Child Custody and Parental Authority in France, Louisiana and Other States of the United States: A Comparative Analysis" Boston College International and Comparative Law Review , Volume 4, Issue 2.

Bookspan, Phyllis T. 1993. "From a Tender Years Presumption to a Primary Parent Presumption: Has Anything Really Changed? … Should It?", Brigham Young University Journal of Public Law 8 (January).

Katz, Sanford N. 1992. "'That They May Thrive' Goal of Child Custody: Reflections on the Apparent Erosion of the Tender Years Presumption and the Emergence of the Primary Caretaker Presumption." Journal of Contemporary Health Law and Policy , Catholic University 8 (spring).

McLain, Lynn. 1997. "Children Are Losing Maryland's 'Tender Years' War." University of Baltimore Law Review 27 (fall).

Pica, Derek A. 1999. "The Tender Years Doctrine: Is It Still the Law?" Advocate (Idaho) 38 (January).

Radke, Lynn E. 1993. "Michigan's New Hearsay Exception: The 'Reinstatement' of the Common Law Tender Years Rule." University of Detroit Mercy Law Review 70 (winter).

Rinella, Lori. 1995. "Children of Tender Years and Contributory Negligence." UMKC Law Review 63 (spring).

Further reading [ edit ] "1839 Custody of Children Act" .

Spartacus Educational . Spartacus Educational Publishers Ltd . Retrieved 3 November 2021 .

Ockerbloom, Mary M.

"Caroline Norton (1808-1877)" .

A Celebration of Women Writers .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tender_years_doctrine&oldid=1302864644 " Categories : Legal doctrines and principles Family law Child custody Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 21:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tender years doctrine 1 language Add topic

