Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Standards 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Baby gate 6 languages العربية Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Svenska தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Protective barrier for young children For the Mina album, see Baby Gate (album) . For the conspiracy theory, see Larries § Babygate .

A baby gate used to stop children accessing the stairs from Rustic Riley [ 1 ] A baby gate or stair gate is a protective barrier designed to prevent babies and toddlers from accessing areas of a home that may not be safe for them, such as stairways and kitchens .

[ 2 ] Baby gates are typically constructed of metal, plastic and/or wood, and can be expanded to fit in a range of doorway widths. They may be designed for use indoors or out, and may be either hardware or pressure-mounted.

Pressure-mounted gates are typically held in place by friction with the walls on either side, while hardware-mounted gates are screwed into the wall studs and swing fully open like a door. There are hardware-mounted gates that can be customized to fit wide and irregularly shaped openings, as well as mesh retractable gates that roll out of the way.

Safety gates are used to help prevent a child from accessing an area of a house, especially the stairway, or to allow an exterior door to be open for ventilation while restricting movement of a child. Pressure gates and hardware mounted gates are available. Pressure gates can be dislodged by children and should not be used at the top of stairs. In some situations, pressure gates at the top of stairs have caused serious injury when a child has run against it or when a parent has fallen trying to step over the gate. Hardware mounted gates are the most secure option and should be installed securely into wall studs.

[ 3 ] A hearth gate is a safety gate used to prevent access to a wood burning stoves and fireplaces.

Baby gates are typically removed once a child is capable of opening or climbing over the gate.

[ 4 ] Standards [ edit ] For safety gates and pet gates , EN 1930 is a standard for indoor use.

[ 5 ] In addition, the EN 71 standard sets requirements for the materials it is made of, and these must be free of harmful substances so that it is safe for the child to suck on it.

[ 5 ] Amongst other things, it is tested to see whether children can get their head, hip or leg through the safety gate or otherwise get stuck or pinched, or whether objects can get stuck in such a way that they pose a choking risk. It is also tested that the gate can withstand children running into it with full force without the gate moving.

[ 5 ] Some products have a flexible configuration such that they can be configured either as playpens, safety gates or room dividers . For playpens , the European Norm EN 12227 is a standard that sets requirements for testing whether clothes or fingers can get caught or crushed. In addition there are stability requirements to ensure that the gate will not give in to pressure, and this is tested with heavy weights to see if the gate easily collapses or falls over.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Childproofing Child care Playpen , furniture a child can play inside without getting into harm Playwork Babysitting Child development References [ edit ] ^ "Rustic Riley Stair Gates" .

Rustic Riley Stair Gates . Retrieved 2024-10-15 .

^ "Baby Gate" . SafetyED. Archived from the original on 2016-03-03 . Retrieved 2009-08-29 .

^ "Common Child Safety Hazards" . IAFCS.org . Retrieved 2012-09-08 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Standard Consumer Safety Specification for Expansion Gates and Expandable Enclosures" . Retrieved 2012-09-30 .

^ a b c d "Safety Standards" .

www.babydan.com . Retrieved 2025-03-22 .

External links [ edit ] International Association for Child Safety ASTM F1004-04 – Standard Consumer Safety Specification for Expansion Gates and Expandable Enclosures Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Baby_gate&oldid=1289298346 " Categories : Child safety Protective barriers Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 May 2025, at 18:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Baby gate 6 languages Add topic

