Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sports sponsored 2 Nickname and mascot 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Division I 3.1.1 Fencing 3.2 Division III 3.2.1 Baseball and softball 3.3 National championships 4 Facilities 5 Rivalries 6 Club teams Toggle Club teams subsection 6.1 Ice hockey 6.2 Taekwondo 6.3 Lacrosse 6.4 Crew (rowing) 6.5 Water polo 6.6 Reviving football at NYU 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents NYU Violets 2 languages Español Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sports teams that represent New York University Athletic teams representing New York University New York University Violets University New York University Conference UAA NCAA Division III Location New York , New York Varsity teams 23 [ 1 ] Basketball arena John A. Paulson Center Baseball stadium Maimonides Park Soccer stadium Home games usually played at Gaelic Park Mascot Bobcat [ 2 ] Nickname Violets [ 2 ] Colors Purple and white [ 3 ] Website gonyuathletics .com NYU Violets is the nickname of the sports teams and other competitive teams at New York University .

[ 2 ] The school colors are purple and white.

[ 4 ] Although officially known as the Violets, the school mascot is a bobcat .

[ 2 ] The Violets compete as a member of NCAA Division III in the University Athletic Association conference. The university sponsors 23 varsity sports, as well as club teams and intramural sports .

Sports sponsored [ edit ] Men's sports Women's sports Baseball Basketball Basketball Cross Country Cross Country Fencing Fencing Golf Golf Soccer Soccer Softball Swimming & Diving Swimming & Diving Tennis Tennis Track & Field† Track & Field† Volleyball Volleyball Wrestling † – Track and field includes both indoor and outdoor Nickname and mascot [ edit ] For more than a century, NYU athletes have worn violet and white colors in competition, which is the root of the nickname Violets.

[ 2 ] In the 1980s, after briefly using a student dressed as a violet for a mascot, the school instead adopted the bobcat as its mascot, from the abbreviation then being used by NYU's Bobst Library computerized catalog.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] NYU long offered a full athletic program, and was in fact a pioneer in the area of intercollegiate sports. When NYU began playing college football in 1873 it was one of the first football teams established in the United States (following Princeton , Rutgers , Columbia and Yale ).

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Additionally, the current governing body for collegiate sports, the NCAA , was formed as the direct result of a meeting convened in New York City by NYU Chancellor Henry MacCracken in December 1905 to improve the safety of football.

[ 5 ] However, in a process somewhat similar to what occurred with NYU's current conference rival Chicago Maroons , athletics were gradually deemphasized at NYU over the passing decades. The school terminated its intercollegiate football program in 1953.

[ 7 ] In 1971 the basketball program was abruptly dropped.

[ 8 ] In 1981, at the urging of then president John Brademas , NYU removed its remaining sports from NCAA Division I to Division III. Still, NYU maintains a significant history of athletic success.

Intercollegiate sports at NYU also had moments of importance beyond anything shown by a scoreboard. In the 1940 season , before a football game between NYU and Missouri in Columbia, Missouri , 2,000 NYU students protested against the " gentlemen's agreement " to exclude African-American athletes (at the University of Missouri 's request).

[ 9 ] At the time, it was the largest protest ever against this practice.

[ 9 ] Division I [ edit ] Since beginning play in 1873, NYU football has had many football players earn recognition for their achievements, most notably 1928 All-American and future Hall-of-Famer Ken Strong .

[ 7 ] The Violets played their games at Ohio Field, which still exists on NYU's former University Heights campus at Bronx Community College .

[ 5 ] The most successful football coach in NYU history was Chick Meehan , who coached the team to seven successful seasons from 1925 to 1931. In 1939, head coach Mal Stevens led NYU to a 5–1 start and the program's only appearance in the AP Poll , before fading to a 5–4 final record. Additionally, the model for the Heisman Trophy is based on 1930s NYU football star Ed Smith .

[ 5 ] Despite some shining moments, however, Time magazine characterized NYU's overall football history as mostly "lean" in 1942, [ 10 ] and NYU permanently dropped the sport as a varsity program after the 1952 season.

[ 5 ] [ 7 ] Dolph Schayes While a member of Division I, the Violets' men's basketball program achieved far greater success than the school's football team. Its best NCAA tournament result was finishing as national runner-up to Oklahoma State (coached by the legendary Henry Iba ) in the 1945 NCAA tournament , with future NBA Hall of Famer Dolph Schayes playing for NYU. NYU returned to the Final Four in 1960 , losing to Ohio State, whose roster featured legends Jerry Lucas and John Havlicek . NYU was even more successful in the years before the advent of the NIT tournament (in 1938) or the NCAA tournament (in 1939). In 1920 NYU won the Amateur Athletic Union national championship tournament , led by the Helms Athletic Foundation Player of the Year , Howard Cann , and the 19–1 NYU team of 1935 was named (retrospectively) by the Helms Foundation and the Premo-Porretta Power Poll as the best team in the nation.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The Violets' most recent post-season accomplishment as a Division I school was finishing as the runner-up to BYU in the 1966 National Invitation Tournament .  Their six appearances in the NCAA basketball tournament are the second-most among teams no longer in Division I (after Oklahoma City University 's 11), and their nine wins are the most among those teams.

NYU maintained a nationally ranked basketball team through the sixties with such stars as Barry Kramer and Satch Sanders going to the NBA. The Violets played most of their games in Madison Square Garden , most notably their duels with UCLA led by Kareem Abdul-Jabbar , but games against less exalted local opponents like Fordham were played in the field house on the NYU campus in University Heights .

Fencing [ edit ] NYU continues to compete at the Division I level in fencing, and the program boasts 30 national championships. The university's men's fencing team won the most NCAA Division I championships or co-championships prior to the NCAA's establishment of coed team competition in 1990. NYU men won 12 NCAA titles between 1947 and 1976, plus an additional eight titles prior to NCAA sponsorship .

Gilbert Eisner , a future national champion, went undefeated in the three years of 1959, 1960, and 1961, and won the NCAA épée championship in 1960 while fencing for NYU.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Also in 1960, future Olympian Eugene Glazer won the NCAA National Championship in foil.

[ 15 ] Singer Neil Diamond was a member of the 1960 NCAA men's championship team.

[ 16 ] Herb Cohen (class of 1962), a future Olympian, went undefeated in 1961 and won both the NCAA foil championship and the NCAA saber championship, and then in 1962 won his second straight NCAA Championship in foil, while being named national Fencer of the Year.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] In 1965, Howard Goodman was the NCAA saber champion.

[ 20 ] In 1967, future Olympian George Masin won the NCAA épée championship.

Martin Lang , a future Olympic fencer, was 55-5 for the team, graduating in 1972.

[ 21 ] Risto Hurme , a future Olympian, won the NCAA épée championship in 1973, 1974, and 1975.

[ 22 ] In 1977, Olympian Hans Wieselgren won the NCAA épée championship.

[ 23 ] The women's fencing team has been national champions ten times, winning the National Intercollegiate Women's Fencing Association (NIWFA) Mildred Stuyvesant-Fish Trophy from 1929 to 1933, in 1938, from 1949 to 1951, and in 1971 when coached by future Olympic coach Michel Sebastiani .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] NIWFA was co-founded by NYU freshmen Julia Jones and Dorothy Hafner in 1928.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Division III [ edit ] Men's volleyball match in the Coles Center NYU, in its relatively short history in NCAA Division III, has won two national team championships (and many league championships). The basketball program has enjoyed a good deal of success since being reinstated on the Division III level in 1983.

[ 8 ] In 1997, the women's basketball team, led by head coach Janice Quinn , won a championship title over the University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire and in 2007 returned to the Final Four. NYU men's basketball and head coach Joe Nesci appeared in the Division III National Championship game in 1994.

In 2007, the men's cross country team, led by head coach Nick McDonough, captured the NCAA Division III team championship at St. Olaf College in Northfield, Minnesota.

Baseball and softball [ edit ] NYU added varsity baseball and softball teams for the 2014–2015 school year.

[ 1 ] NYU had not sponsored varsity baseball since 1974, but it previously produced several major-league players, including Ralph Branca and Eddie Yost .

[ 1 ] Home games were played at Maimonides Park , home of the Minor League Brooklyn Cyclones , and are now played at SIUH Community Park, the home of the Staten Island FerryHawks professional baseball team of the Atlantic League of Professional Baseball. Softball was an entirely new varsity sport for NYU.

[ 1 ] National championships [ edit ] NYU has won five team Division III NCAA national championships: Women's basketball ( 1997 , 2024 , 2025 ) Men's cross country (2007) Women's golf (2019) NYU athletes have won four individual NCAA Division III national championship: Nathan Pike Wrestling 133-Pound Class (2017) [ 29 ] Honore Collins 200-yard IM (2017), 200-yard individual medley (2019), 400-yard individual medley (2019), and 200-yard butterfly (2019) [ 30 ] NYU had won 37 Division I national championships , prior to its move to Division III: Men's basketball (AAU, 1920) Men's fencing (1933, 1935–1938, 1940–942, 1947, 1954, 1957, 1960–1961, 1966–1967, 1970–1971, 1973–1974, 1976) Women's fencing (1929–1933, 1938, 1949–1951, 1971) Men's indoor track (1929, 1932, 1940, 1943, 1947–1948) Facilities [ edit ] The Coles Center The Coles Sports and Recreation Center served as the home base of several of NYU's intercollegiate athletic teams, including basketball , wrestling , and volleyball for over three decades starting in 1981. Coles was closed in February 2016 to make way for NYU's new $1 Billion mixed use development: the John A. Paulson Center, located at 181 Mercer.

[ 31 ] Unlike Coles, Mercer Street will host a combination of expanded athletic facilities, classroom and residential space.

[ 32 ] Many of NYU's varsity teams sometimes play their games at various facilities and fields throughout Manhattan because of the scarcity of space for playing fields in that borough. The soccer teams play their home games at Van Cortlandt Park , and the track and field teams have their home meets at the New Balance Track and Field Center. The golf team does not have a home golf course in Manhattan, but they often practice at the Chelsea Piers Athletic Facility and at various country club courses that have a relationship with the team and university in New York City. The rowing team travels on a daily basis to their boathouse in New Jersey, roughly 10 miles from Washington Square. The tennis team practices and plays home matches at the Stadium Tennis Center , located in the Bronx.

In 2002, NYU opened the Palladium Athletic Facility as the second on-campus recreational facility. This facility's amenities include a rock-climbing wall, a natatorium with a 25-yard by 25-meter swimming pool, basketball courts, weight training, cardiovascular rooms, and a spinning room. Palladium, erected on the site of the famous New York nightclub bearing the same name, is home to the university's swimming and diving teams and water polo teams.

The Baseball team plays its home games at SIUH Community Park , home of the Staten Island FerryHawks .

[ citation needed ] The Tennis team plays at the Stadium Tennis Center.

[ 33 ] Rivalries [ edit ] NYU's rival, dictated by history and geography, has been Columbia University , though it also had a rivalry with Rutgers University , as shown by older fight song lyrics. Rutgers and NYU played 43 times in football from 1890 to 1952, with Rutgers having a 23-18-2 record against the Violets. Eleven of the final 14 NYU home games were played at either Yankee Stadium or the Polo Grounds .

[ 34 ] Rutgers also played NYU 46 times in basketball between 1906 and 1971, though unlike the football rivalry, NYU had a decided edge on Rutgers, winning all but ten of the contests, including 18 straight between 1928 and 1966.

[ 35 ] NYU's annual football game against Fordham University was known as the Manhattan Subway classic.

[ 10 ] Currently, NYU's biggest rivals are in the UAA(University Athletic Association), including teams such as Emory University in Atlanta and Washington University in St.Louis.

Club teams [ edit ] NYU students also compete in several "club" teams (which may or may not compete on an intercollegiate basis) including lacrosse , soccer , water polo , crew , squash , rugby union , table tennis , Quidditch , ice hockey , equestrian , TaeKwonDo , Kendo , ultimate , flag football , climbing , badminton , and Esports . NYU also offers intramural sport teams.

Ice hockey [ edit ] NYU's ice hockey team has been one of its most successful athletic programs, winning 2 National Championships at the ACHA Division II level before making the move up to Division I ACHA in 2017. They currently compete in the Eastern States Collegiate Hockey League , a conference which includes opponents such as Syracuse , Rutgers , and the University of Delaware . Their head coach is Dustin Good.

[ 36 ] Taekwondo [ edit ] NYU's Taekwondo (TKD) team competes in the Eastern Collegiate Taekwondo Conference (ECTC) and in the National Collegiate Taekwondo Association (NCTA). Founded in 1987 by Master Lesly, the team has been a large presence in the Club Sports community at NYU.

[ 37 ] As of 2020, NYU Sport TKD placed first in the ECTC Division II. The coaches for the team include Grandmaster Mark Lesly, Master Erica Linthorst , and Master Andrew Park . The team has been part of the ECTC since 1990 and were represented in the first iteration of the now ECTC All-Star team.

[ 38 ] Lacrosse [ edit ] The first intercollegiate lacrosse game in the United States was played on November 22, 1877 between New York University and Manhattan College . On May 7, 1924, NYU overwhelmed and shutout Harvard at Soldier's Field by a score of 7-0.  Men's lacrosse at NYU was discontinued sometime after 1931 but was revived nearly 60 years later in 1990.  Under head coach Chris Schreiber (Hopkins '86), the team went undefeated in its inaugural season and won its first four games to start the 1991 season, including wins against Rider, Iona and Columbia.  The team currently competes in the NY Metro Conference of the National College Lacrosse League.  In 2010, NYU defeated Columbia twice in the span of 24 hours at the Beltway Bash Tournament at the University of Maryland. In 2015 NYU made an NCLL sweet 16 appearance before falling to Quinnipiac.

Crew (rowing) [ edit ] NYU has hosted a crew team for over a century, tracing its beginnings back to 1902.

[ 39 ] While initially the team was exclusively male, the sport would eventually expand to be coed decades later. Today, the team performs water practices on the Passaic River in Lyndhurst, New Jersey; while using NYU's three athletic facilities for its dry land workouts. They travel to multiple regattas in the fall and spring, including the Head of the Charles and Dad Vails where NYU takes on varsity crews like Yale University , Columbia University , and the University of Pennsylvania .

Water polo [ edit ] NYU Men's and Women's Water Polo Team compete in the New York Division of the Collegiate Water Polo Association, National Collegiate Club/Division III.

Reviving football at NYU [ edit ] Unsuccessful attempts have been made at reviving NYU football at club level, both as an intramural activity and as an intercollegiate sport. From 1964 to 1966, NYU participated with Georgetown and Fordham in NYU's first attempt to play non-Division I football, reviving Georgetown football but not doing the same for NYU.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] The sale of NYU's University Heights campus in 1973 hampered further attempts to create a football team, due to scant recreational space downtown. Nevertheless, as recently as 2003 several students created a football club but struggled to find extra funding to defray expenses, find supporters, or reliable participants for practices and games (held at the East River Park football fields at 6th and FDR).

As of 2025, club football has been revived as a sport at NYU and currently competes in competitions against other east coast college’s flag football teams.

See also [ edit ] List of NYU Violets head football coaches References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "NYU Adding Varsity Baseball and Softball" . gonyuathletics.com. December 11, 2013 . Retrieved June 20, 2014 .

^ a b c d e f "NYU Athletics FAQ" . gonyuathletics.com . Retrieved November 27, 2012 .

^ NYU Athletics Style Guide (PDF) . February 17, 2022 . Retrieved August 23, 2022 .

^ "NYU Athletics Quick Facts 2015–16" (PDF) . October 26, 2015 . Retrieved September 1, 2016 .

^ a b c d e "The Story of NYU Football" . NYU Alumni Connect . Retrieved November 28, 2012 .

^ "1873-1874 Association Foot Ball Summary" . Retrieved November 29, 2012 .

^ a b c "New York University's Football Legacy" . NYU Alumni Connect . Retrieved November 27, 2012 .

^ a b "NYU Holds Out On Sports" .

The Wall Street Journal . May 1, 2010.

^ a b "N.Y.U. Honors Protestors It Punished in '41" .

The New York Times . May 4, 2001.

^ a b "N. Y. U. Drops Football" .

Time Magazine . March 9, 1942. Archived from the original on January 31, 2008 . Retrieved October 2, 2007 .

^ NYU Athletics, NYU Men's Basketball Record Book (PDF) ^ ESPN, ed. (2009).

ESPN College Basketball Encyclopedia: The Complete History of the Men's Game . New York, NY: ESPN Books. p. 544.

ISBN 978-0-345-51392-2 .

^ Bernard Postal; Jesse Silver; Roy Silver (1965).

Encyclopedia of Jews in Sports . Bloch Publishing Company . Retrieved October 28, 2013 .

Gilbert Eisner epee.

^ "NYU Athletics - Hall of Fame" . Gonyuathletics.com . Retrieved October 28, 2013 .

^ "Faces in the Crowd," Sports Illustrated .

^ "The Archivist's Angle: Formidable Fencers at NYU" .

nyu.edu . Retrieved April 11, 2018 .

^ Bob Wechsler.

Day by Day in Jewish Sports History ^ New York University - Violet Yearbook (New York, NY), Class of 1961 , Page 174.

^ " "Fencing" " (PDF) .

usfencingresults.org . Retrieved April 11, 2018 .

^ "NYU Athletics Official Site - Hall of Fame" .

www.gonyuathletics.com . Retrieved April 11, 2018 .

^ "DW Automotive's Marty Lang Inducted into NYU Hall of Fame" .

www.darrellwaltripnews.com . Archived from the original on February 10, 2018 . Retrieved April 11, 2018 .

^ "NYU Athletics Official Site - Hall of Fame" .

www.gonyuathletics.com . Retrieved April 11, 2018 .

^ "NYU Athletics Official Site - Hall of Fame" .

www.gonyuathletics.com . Retrieved April 11, 2018 .

^ "Women's Fencing," Princeton Tigers.

^ "N.Y.U. Captures Women's Fencing," The New York Times , April 4, 1971.

^ "National Intercollegiate Womens Fencing Association" .

www.niwfa.com . Retrieved April 11, 2018 .

^ Julia Jones Pugliese , NIWFA web site (retrieved February 6, 2016) ^ The Woman Fencer – Nick Evangelista, Anita Evangelista ^ "Division III Wrestling Championships Records Book" (PDF) .

NCAA.org . Retrieved March 22, 2018 .

^ "Honore Collins - 2019-20 - Women's Swimming & Diving" .

NYU Athletics .

^ Communications, NYU Web.

"John A. Paulson Center" .

www.nyu.edu . Retrieved April 8, 2024 .

^ "NYU unveils massive Mercer Street student hub" .

Curbed NY . Retrieved November 13, 2017 .

^ "Tennis Visiting Team Guide" .

NYU Athletics . Retrieved April 9, 2024 .

^ "College Football Data Warehouse - Rutgers vs New York (NY)" .

cfbdatawarehouse.com . Archived from the original on October 28, 2012 . Retrieved April 11, 2018 .

^ 2011-12 Rutgers Men's Basketball Media Guide. Peoria, IL: Multi-Ad, pg. 175.

^ "Coaches" .

^ Kirpalani, Bela; Choi, Rebecca (November 4, 2019).

"Taekwondo at NYU Welcomes All" .

Washington Square News . Retrieved November 7, 2023 .

^ "History" .

ectc . Retrieved November 7, 2023 .

^ "History" . March 3, 2017 . Retrieved November 13, 2017 .

^ "HoyaSaxa.com: Georgetown Football History" .

www.hoyasaxa.com . Retrieved April 11, 2018 .

^ "my 175 Facts About NYU" .

nyu.edu . Retrieved April 11, 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to New York University athletics .

Official website v t e New York University University Campuses New York City Abu Dhabi Shanghai Service Archives Press Libraries Bobst Fales Tamiment Centers Paris London Florence Schools Arts Arts and Science Liberal Studies Graduate Arts and Science Business Mathematical Medicine Long Island Medicine Nursing Fine Arts Education Individualized Study Law Dentistry Professional Studies Public Service Engineering Social Work Research Ancient World Academic Freedom Administration of Criminal Law Humanities Justice Law School Scholarship Lynford Lectures Philosophy Real Estate and Urban Policy Rehabilitation Medicine Social Entrepreneurship Transportation Journals Environmental Law Intellectual Property and Entertainment Law International Law and Politics Law and Business Law and Liberty Law Review Annual Survey of American Law Washington Square Review Athletics NYU Violets Men's basketball Coles Sports and Recreation Center Deans' Cup People University president Alumni Faculty Staff Honorary degree recipients Campus at NYC 370 Jay Street Brown Building Casa Italiana Zerilli Marimò Elmer Holmes Bobst Library Fales Library Gould Plaza James B. Duke House La Maison Française Langone Medical Center Puck Building Residence halls Silver Center Skirball Center for the Performing Arts Union Square University Village Washington Mews Washington Square Park Washington Square Village Wunsch Building Coles Sports and Recreation Center Related Eucleian Society Graduate Student Organizing Committee History of NYU NYU Local Philomathean Society The Plague Red Dragon Society Student life Student Senators Council Washington Square News WNYU-FM Category v t e University Athletic Association Brandeis Judges Carnegie Mellon Tartans Case Western Reserve Spartans Chicago Maroons Emory Eagles NYU Violets Rochester Yellowjackets Washington University Bears v t e Liberty League Current full members Bard Raptors Clarkson Golden Knights Hobart and William Smith Statesmen and Herons Ithaca Bombers RPI Engineers RIT Tigers Rochester Yellowjackets St. Lawrence Saints Skidmore Thoroughbreds Union Garnet Chargers Vassar Brewers Current associate members Buffalo State Bengals 1 NYU Violets 5 St. John Fisher Cardinals 4 Wellesley Blue 3 Former full member Hamilton Continentals Former associate members Coast Guard Bears 1 Merchant Marine Mariners 2 Mount Holyoke Lyons 3 Springfield Pride 1 Susquehanna River Hawks 1 WPI Engineers 1 1 football 2 football and men's golf 3 women's golf 4 men's and women's rowing 5 men's and women's golf v t e Eastern Intercollegiate Volleyball Association Current members Charleston Golden Eagles George Mason Patriots Harvard Crimson NJIT Highlanders Penn State Nittany Lions Princeton Tigers Sacred Heart Pioneers Former members Concordia Clippers East Stroudsburg Warriors Juniata Eagles New Haven Chargers New Paltz Hawks NYU Violets Queens Knights Rutgers–Newark Scarlet Raiders St. Francis Brooklyn Terriers Saint Francis Red Flash Springfield Pride Vassar Brewers v t e Sports teams based in New York State Baseball MLB New York Mets New York Yankees IL Buffalo Bisons Rochester Red Wings Syracuse Mets EL Binghamton Rumble Ponies SAL Brooklyn Cyclones Hudson Valley Renegades ALPB Long Island Ducks Staten Island FerryHawks EPBL Plattsburgh Redbirds FL New York Boulders Tri-City ValleyCats ACBL Hampton Whalers NYCBL Cortland Crush Genesee Rapids Hornell Dodgers Olean Oilers Rochester Ridgemen Rome Generals Sherrill Silversmiths Syracuse Salt Cats Syracuse Spartans Wellsville Nitros PGCBL Elmira Pioneers Jamestown Jammers Newark Pilots Watertown Rapids Basketball NBA Brooklyn Nets New York Knicks WNBA New York Liberty G League Long Island Nets Westchester Knicks BSL Jamestown Jackals TBL Albany Patroons ABA Buffalo eXtreme Entertainment Teams Harlem Wizards Esports CDL Cloud9 New York OWL New York Excelsior Football NFL Buffalo Bills AFL Albany Firebirds WFA New York Sharks EFL Watertown Red & Black GDFL Albany Metro Mallers Hockey NHL Buffalo Sabres New York Islanders New York Rangers PWHL New York Sirens AHL Rochester Americans Syracuse Crunch Utica Comets ECHL Adirondack Thunder FPHL Binghamton Black Bears Watertown Wolves NAHL Elmira Aviators Jamestown Rebels Rochester Jr. Americans Soccer MLS New York City FC USLS Brooklyn FC USLC Brooklyn FC (2026) Buffalo Pro Soccer (2027) MLSNP New York City FC II USL1 Westchester SC NISA New York Cosmos (hiatus) USL2 Blackwatch Rush F.A. Euro FC Buffalo Hudson Valley Hammers Long Island Rough Riders Manhattan SC Pathfinder FC Westchester Flames NPSL Buffalo Stallions Cedar Stars FC Flower City Union Kingston Stockade FC New York Shockers WPSL Brooklyn City FC Clarkstown SC Downtown United SC Fox Soccer Academy New York Athletic Club New York Dutch Lions FC New York Shockers SUSA FC United Women's Soccer Albany Rush FC Berlin Rochester Lady Lancers Syracuse Pulse USL W League FC Buffalo Long Island Rough Riders MASL Utica City FC Lacrosse NLL Albany FireWolves Buffalo Bandits Rochester Knighthawks PLL New York Atlas UWLX Long Island Sound WPLL New York Fight Upstate Pride Roller derby WFTDA Assault City Roller Derby Central New York Roller Derby Gotham Roller Derby Hellions of Troy Hudson Valley Horrors Roller Derby Ithaca League of Women Rollers Long Island Roller Rebels Queen City Roller Derby Roc City Roller Derby Suburbia Roller Derby MRDA New York Shock Exchange Rugby league USARL White Plains Wombats NARL New York R.L.F.C.

Rugby union USAR New York Athletic Club RFC Old Blue Team tennis WTT New York Empire College athletics ( NCAA Division I ) Adelphi Panthers ( women's bowling ) Albany Great Danes Army Black Knights Binghamton Bearcats Buffalo Bulls Brockport Golden Eagles ( women's gymnastics ) Clarkson Golden Knights ( men's and women's ice hockey ) Canisius Golden Griffins CCNY Beavers ( women's fencing ) Colgate Raiders Columbia Lions Cortland Red Dragons ( women's gymnastics ) Cornell Big Red Daemen Wildcats ( women's bowling and men's volleyball ) Dominican Chargers ( men's volleyball ) D'Youville Saints ( men's volleyball ) Fordham Rams Hilbert Hawks ( women's bowling ) Hobart Statesmen ( men's lacrosse ) Hofstra Pride Hunter Hawks ( men's and women's fencing ) Ithaca Bombers ( women's gymnastics ) Iona Gaels Le Moyne Dolphins LIU Sharks Manhattan Jaspers Marist Red Foxes Molloy Lions ( women's bowling ) NYU Violets ( men's and women's fencing ) Niagara Purple Eagles Queens Knights ( women's fencing ) RPI Engineers ( men's and women's ice hockey ) Roberts Wesleyan Redhawks ( women's bowling and men's volleyball ) Rochester Yellowjackets ( men's squash ) RIT Tigers ( men's and women's ice hockey ) St. Bonaventure Bonnies St. John's Red Storm St. Lawrence Saints ( men's and women's ice hockey ) St. Thomas Aquinas Spartans ( men's volleyball ) Siena Saints Stony Brook Seawolves Syracuse Orange Union Garnet Chargers ( men's and women's ice hockey ) Vassar Brewers ( men's and women's fencing ) Wagner Seahawks Yeshiva Maccabees ( men's and women's fencing ) College athletics ( NCAA Division II ) Adelphi Panthers Daemen Wildcats Dominican Chargers Dowling Golden Lions D'Youville Saints Mercy Mavericks Molloy Lions NYIT Bears (Suspended) Pace Setters Queens Knights Roberts Wesleyan Redhawks Saint Rose Golden Knights St. Thomas Aquinas Spartans Staten Island Dolphins College athletics ( NCAA Division III ) Alfred Saxons Alfred State Pioneers Bard Raptors Baruch Bearcats Brockport Golden Eagles Brooklyn Bulldogs Buffalo State Bengals Canton Roos Cazenovia Wildcats CCNY Beavers Clarkson Golden Knights Cobleskill Fighting Tigers Cortland Red Dragons Delhi Broncos Elmira Soaring Eagles Farmingdale Rams Fredonia Blue Devils Geneseo Knights Hamilton Continentals Hartwick Hawks Hilbert Hawks Hobart Statesmen Houghton Highlanders Hunter Hawks Ithaca Bombers John Jay Bloodhounds Keuka Wolves Lehman Lightning Bugs Manhattanville Valiants Medgar Evers Cougars Merchant Marine Mariners Maritime Privateers Mount Saint Mary Blue Knights Mount Saint Vincent Dolphins Morrisville Mustangs Nazareth Golden Flyers New Paltz Hawks City Tech Yellow Jackets NYU Violets Old Westbury Panthers Oneonta Red Dragons Oswego Lakers Plattsburgh Cardinals Potsdam Bears Pratt Cannoners Purchase Panthers RPI Engineers Rochester Yellowjackets RIT Tigers Russell Sage Gators Skidmore Thoroughbreds St. John Fisher Cardinals St. Joseph's (Brooklyn) Bears St. Joseph's (Long Island) Golden Eagles St. Lawrence Saints Sarah Lawrence Gryphons SUNY Poly Wildcats Union Garnet Chargers Utica Pioneers Vassar Brewers Wells Express William Smith Herons Yeshiva Maccabees York Cardinals College athletics ( USCAA ) Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Panthers Berkeley Knights Bryant & Stratton College, Albany Bobcats Bryant & Stratton College, Buffalo Bobcats Bryant & Stratton College, Greece Bobcats Bryant & Stratton College, Syracuse Bobcats Culinary Institute of America Steels Five Towns Sounds The King's Lions Paul Smith's Bobcats SUNY ESF Mighty Oaks Vaughn Warriors Villa Maria Knights Word of Life Bible Institute Huskies College athletics ( NJCAA Division I ) Globe Institute of Technology Knights Monroe Mustangs ASA Avengers College athletics ( NJCAA Division II ) SUNY Erie Kats Genesee Cougars Hudson Valley Vikings Jamestown (Jamestown) Jayhawks Jamestown (Olean) Cattaraugus Jaguars Monroe Tribunes SUNY Niagara Thunderwolves SUNY Orange Colts SUNY Sullivan Generals College athletics ( NJCAA Division III ) SUNY Adirondack Wolves Borough of Manhattan Panthers Bronx Broncos SUNY Broome Hornets Cayuga Spartans Clinton Cougars Columbia-Greene Twins Corning Red Barons Dutchess Falcons Finger Lakes Lakers FIT Tigers Fulton–Montgomery Raiders Genesee Cougars Herkimer County Generals Hostos Caimans Jefferson Cannoners Mohawk Valley Hawks Nassau Lions North Country Saints Onondaga Lazers Queensborough Tigers Rockland Fighting Hawks Schenectady County Royals Suffolk County Sharks SUNY Sullivan Generals Tompkins Cortland Panthers SUNY Ulster Senators See also: Sports in New York City , Sports in Buffalo , Sports in Rochester , Sports in Syracuse , and Sports in New York's Capital District Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=NYU_Violets&oldid=1288453026 " Category : NYU Violets Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2018 Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 May 2025, at 18:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents NYU Violets 2 languages Add topic

