Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancient moral intellectualism 2 Contemporary views 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Moral intellectualism 7 languages Català Español Монгол پښتو Polski سنڌي 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Socratic intellectualism ) View in meta-ethics Part of a series on Socrates " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Gadfly Trial of Socrates Eponymous concepts Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic irony Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic problem Socratic questioning Category v t e Moral intellectualism or ethical intellectualism is a view in meta-ethics according to which genuine moral knowledge must take the form of arriving at discursive moral judgements about what one should do.

[ 1 ] One way of understanding this is that doing what is right is a reflection of what any being knows is right.

[ 2 ] However, it can also be interpreted as the understanding that a rationally consistent worldview and theoretical way of life, as exemplified by Socrates , is superior to the life devoted to a moral (but merely practical) life.

[ citation needed ] Ancient moral intellectualism [ edit ] For Socrates (469–399 BC), intellectualism is the view that "one will do what is right or best just as soon as one truly understands what is right or best"; that virtue is a purely intellectual matter, since virtue and knowledge are cerebral relatives, which a person accrues and improves with dedication to reason .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] So defined, Socratic intellectualism became a key philosophic doctrine of Stoicism .

[ 5 ] The Stoics are well known for their teaching that the good is to be identified with virtue.

[ 5 ] The apparent, problematic consequences of this view are "Socratic paradoxes", such as the view that there is no weakness of will (that no one knowingly does, or knowingly seeks to do, what is morally wrong); that anyone who does, or seeks to do, moral wrong does so involuntarily; and that since virtue is knowledge, there cannot be many different virtues such as those defended by Aristotle , and instead, all virtues must be one. The following are among the so-called Socratic paradoxes: [ 6 ] No one desires evil.

No one errs or does wrong willingly or knowingly.

Virtue – all virtue – is knowledge.

Virtue is sufficient for happiness.

However, it is clear in Meno that virtue is not knowledge, rather True Belief.

Typically, Stoic accounts of care for the self required specific ascetic exercises meant to ensure that not only was knowledge of truth memorized, but learned, and then integrated to the self, in the course of transforming oneself into a good person. Therefore, to understand truth meant "intellectual knowledge", requiring one's integration to the (universal) truth, and authentically living it in one's speech, heart, and conduct. Achieving that difficult task required continual care of the self, but also meant being someone who embodies truth, and so can readily practice the Classical -era rhetorical device of parrhesia : "to speak candidly, and to ask forgiveness for so speaking"; and, by extension, practice the moral obligation to speak the truth, even at personal risk.

[ 7 ] Contemporary views [ edit ] Contemporary philosophers dispute that Socrates's conceptions of knowing truth, and of ethical conduct, can be equated with modern, post- Cartesian conceptions of knowledge and of rational intellectualism.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Moral rationalism References [ edit ] ^ Adams, Zed (2014). "Against Moral Intellectualism".

Philosophical Investigations .

37 (1): 37– 56.

doi : 10.1111/phin.12025 .

ISSN 1467-9205 .

^ The Moral Intellectualism of Plato's Socrates The Case of the Hippias Minor ^ "Ancient Ethical Theory" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 7 July 2020 .

^ "FOLDOC" . Archived from the original on 2007-07-15.

(Definition and note on Socrates) ^ a b Ancient Ethical Theory ^ p. 14, Terence Irwin , The Development of Ethics , vol. 1, Oxford University Press 2007; p. 147, Gerasimos Santas, "The Socratic Paradoxes", Philosophical Review 73 (1964), pp. 147–164.

^ Gros, Frederic (ed.) (2005) Michel Foucault: The Hermeneutics of the Subject , Lectures at the College de France 1981–1982. Picador: New York ^ Heda Segvic (2005). "No One Errs Willingly: The Meaning of Socratic Intellectualism".

A Companion to Socrates . pp.

171– 185.

doi : 10.1002/9780470996218.ch10 .

ISBN 978-0470996218 .

Further reading [ edit ] Virtue Is Knowledge: The Moral Foundations of Socratic Political Philosophy , Lorraine Smith Pangle , University Of Chicago Press, 2014 External links [ edit ] Socrates' moral intellectualism The Ethics of Socrates Two Interpretations of Socratic Intellectualism v t e Socrates Bibliography Cultural depictions Life Trial of Socrates Socratic problem Concepts Social gadfly Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic questioning Phrases " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Family Sophroniscus (father) Phaenarete (mother) Xanthippe (wife) Lamprocles (son) Menexenus (son) Myrto (wife) Works that include Socrates Art Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca (3rd-century sculpture) The Death of Socrates (1787 painting) Socrates (1950 sculpture) Stage The Clouds (423 BC play) Der geduldige Socrates (1721 opera) Socrates (1759 play) Socrate (1919 oratorio) Socrates on Trial (2007 play) Literature De genio Socratis (1st-century essay) On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates (1841 thesis) The Plot to Save Socrates (2006 novel) Other Serenade after Plato's "Symposium" (1954 serenade) Barefoot in Athens (1966 film) Socrates (1970 film) Dialogues Plato Apology Axiochus Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Demodocus Epinomis Eryxias Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hipparchus Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Lysis Menexenus Meno Minos On Justice On Virtue Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Theages Timaeus Xenophon Apology Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Other Halcyon Socratic Letters Related Euthyphro dilemma Form of the Good Peritrope Religious skepticism Category v t e Stoicism Philosophers Greek Scholarchs of the Stoa Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Zeno of Tarsus Diogenes of Babylon Antipater of Tarsus Panaetius Aristo of Chios Sphaerus Persaeus Herillus Dioscorides Crates of Mallus Zenodotus Apollodorus of Seleucia Boethus of Sidon Dardanus Mnesarchus Dionysius of Cyrene Hecato of Rhodes Diotimus the Stoic Posidonius Geminus Diodotus Antipater of Tyre Apollonides Athenodorus Cananites Roman Publius Rutilius Rufus Quintus Lucilius Balbus Cato the Younger Quintus Sextius Attalus Papirius Fabianus Seneca Cornutus Chaeremon of Alexandria Paconius Agrippinus Persius Helvidius Priscus Arulenus Rusticus Musonius Rufus Thrasea Paetus Rubellius Plautus Barea Soranus Publius Egnatius Celer Mara bar Serapion Euphrates Epictetus Hierocles Claudius Maximus Basilides Apollonius of Chalcedon Junius Rusticus Marcus Aurelius ( Philosophy ) Philosophical concepts Logic Logos Adiaphora Katalepsis Diairesis Physics Physis Fire Pneuma Ethics Pathos Apatheia Eudaimonia Kathekon Negative visualization Oikeiôsis Prohairesis Sophos Works On Passions (Chrysippus) Paradoxa Stoicorum Letters to Lucilius (Seneca) Seneca's Essays De Providentia De Brevitate Vitae De Vita Beata De Beneficiis De Clementia De Tranquillitate Animi De Ira De Otio De Constantia Sapientis Seneca's Consolations Lectures (Musonius Rufus) Discourses of Epictetus Enchiridion of Epictetus Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta Related articles Stoa Poikile Stoic Opposition Neostoicism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moral_intellectualism&oldid=1294576553#Ancient_moral_intellectualism " Categories : A priori Virtue ethics Metaethics Rationalism Socrates Stoicism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 14:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moral intellectualism 7 languages Add topic

