Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Fiction 3 Research 4 See also 5 Notes 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Force field (technology) 16 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano עברית Latina Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fictional technology or superpower For other uses, see Force field .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Force field" technology – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Energy shield from the game Second Life In speculative fiction , a force field , sometimes known as an energy shield , force shield , energy bubble , or deflector shield , is a barrier produced by something like energy , negative energy , dark energy , electromagnetic fields , gravitational fields , electric fields , quantum fields , telekinetic fields , plasma , particles , radiation , solid light , magic , or pure force . It protects a person, area, or object from attacks or intrusions, or even deflects energy attacks back at the attacker. This fictional technology is created as a field of energy without matter that acts as a wall, so that objects affected by the particular force relating to the field are unable to pass through the field and reach the other side, instead being deflected or destroyed. Actual research in the 21st century has looked into the potential to deflect radiation or cosmic rays , as well as more extensive shielding.

This concept has become a staple of many science-fiction works, so much so that authors frequently do not even bother to explain or justify them to their readers, treating them almost as established fact and attributing whatever capabilities the plot requires. The ability to create force fields has become a frequent superpower in superhero media .

History [ edit ] The concept of a force field goes back at least as far as early 20th century.

The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction suggests that the first use of the term in science fiction was in 1931, in Spacehounds of IPC by E.E. 'Doc' Smith .

[ 1 ] An early precursor of what is now called "force field" may be found in Eugenio Taquechel 's Spanish historical-fiction novel "La Alhambra Romántica: Leyenda Morisca" published in Madrid in 1928, where in its 11th chapter it describes (translated) "... in front of his palace a wall as thin as a hair, strong and transparent as a diamond,  had been raised which defended from ..." [ 2 ] An earlier precursor is that of William Hope Hodgson 's The Night Land (1912), where the Last Redoubt, the fortress of the remnants of a far-future humanity, is kept safe by "The Air Clog" generated by the burning "Earth-Current".

[ 3 ] [ 1 ] An even earlier precursor is Florence Carpenter Dieudonné 's 1887 novel Rondah, or Thirty-Three Years in a Star , [ 1 ] where the far-off Sun Island is enclosed by a "wall in the air" that blocks access by land, sea and air, which is occasionally disabled.

[ 4 ] In Isaac Asimov 's Foundation universe, personal shields have been developed by scientists specializing in the miniaturization of planet-based shields. As they are primarily used by Foundation Traders, most other inhabitants of the Galactic Empire do not know about this technology. In an unrelated short story Breeds There a Man...?

by Asimov, scientists are working on a force field ("energy so channelled as to create a wall of matter-less inertia"), capable of protecting the population in case of a nuclear war. When activated by radiation, the force field becomes a solid hemisphere, completely opaque and reflective from both sides. Asimov explores the force field concept again in the short story Not Final!

.

The concept of force fields as a defensive measure from enemy attack or as a form of attack can be regularly found in films such as The War of the Worlds (1953, George Pál) and Independence Day , as well as modern video games .

The ability to create a force field has been a common superpower in comic books and associated media. While only a few characters have the explicit ability to create force fields (for example, the Invisible Woman of the Fantastic Four and Violet Parr from The Incredibles ), it has been emulated via other powers, such as Green Lantern 's energy constructs, Jean Grey 's telekinesis, and Magneto's manipulation of electromagnetic fields. Apart from this, its importance is also highlighted in Dr. Michio Kaku 's books (such as Physics of the Impossible ).

Fiction [ edit ] Science fiction and fantasy avenues suggest a number of potential uses of force fields: [ 5 ] A barrier allowing workers to function in areas exposed to the vacuum of space. The atmosphere inside would be habitable by humans, while at the same time allowing permissible objects to pass through the barrier A walkable surface between two points without the necessity of building a bridge.

An emergency quarantine area to service those afflicted by harmful biological or chemical agents A fire extinguisher where oxygen is exhausted by the use of a space confined by a force field thereby starving the fire As a shield to protect against damage from natural forces or an enemy attack As a deflector to allow fast spaceships to traverse space without colliding with small particles or objects.

A temporary habitable space in an area otherwise unsuitable for sustaining life As a security apparatus used to confine or contain a captive The capabilities and functionality of force fields vary; in some works of fiction (such as in the Star Trek universe), energy shields can nullify or mitigate the effects of both energy and particle (e.g., phasers ) and conventional weapons. In many fictional scenarios, the shields function primarily as a defensive measure against weapons fired from other spacecraft. Force fields in these stories also generally prevent transporting . There are generally two kinds of force fields postulated: one in which energy is projected as a flat plane from emitters around the edges of a spacecraft and another where energy surrounds a ship like a bubble.

The ability to create force fields has become a frequent superpower in superhero media . While sometimes an explicit power on their own, force fields have also been attributed to other fictional abilities.

Marvel Comics' Jean Grey is able to use her telekinesis to create a barrier of telekinetic energy that acts as a force field by repelling objects. Similarly, Magneto is able to use his magnetism to manipulate magnetic fields into acting as shields.
The most common superpower link seen with force fields is the power of invisibility . This is seen with Marvel Comics' Invisible Woman and Disney Pixar 's Violet Parr .
A further variation on the force field is a protective armor which constantly encompasses the user, seen in characters such as Cecilia Reye's bio-field or Skid's frictionless force field.

[ 6 ] Force fields often vary in what they are made of, though are commonly made of energy. The 2017 series The Gifted featured character Lauren Strucker who had the ability to create shields by pushing molecules together. This resulted in her being able to construct force fields out of air and water particles rather than energy.

Research [ edit ] In 2005, the NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts devised a way to protect from radiation by applying an electric field to spheres made of a thin, non-conductive material coated with a layer of gold with either positive or negative charges, which could be arranged to bend a stream of charged particles to protect from radiation.

[ 7 ] In 2006, a University of Washington group in Seattle , Washington, had been experimenting with using a bubble of charged plasma , contained by a fine mesh of superconducting wire, to surround a spacecraft.

[ 8 ] This would protect the spacecraft from interstellar radiation and some particles without needing physical shielding .

The Rutherford Appleton Laboratory was in 2007 attempting to design an actual test satellite, which would orbit Earth with a charged plasma field around it.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] In 2008, Cosmos Magazine reported on research into creating an artificial replica of Earth's magnetic field around a spacecraft to protect astronauts from dangerous cosmic rays .

[ 13 ] British and Portuguese scientists used a mathematical simulation to prove that it would be possible to create a " mini-magnetosphere " bubble several hundred meters across, possibly generated by a small uncrewed vessel that could accompany a future crewed mission to Mars.

In 2014, a group of students from the University of Leicester released a study describing functioning of spaceship plasma deflector shields.

[ 14 ] In 2015, Boeing was granted a patent on a force field system designed to protect against shock waves generated by explosions. It is not intended to protect against projectiles, radiation, or energy weapons such as lasers. The field purportedly works by using a combination of lasers, electricity and microwaves to rapidly heat the air creating a field of (ionised) superheated air-plasma which disrupts, or at least attenuates, the shock wave. As of March 2016, no working models were known to have been demonstrated.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In 2016, Rice University scientists discovered that Tesla coils can generate force fields able to manipulate matter (process called teslaphoresis ).

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Force field (physics) Li's field Magic circle Plasma window Stasis (fiction) Telekinesis Tractor beam Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c "Force Field" , an entry of The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction ^ "Taquechel%2c%20Eugenio | the Online Books Page" .

^ "Night Land by William Hope Hodgson" (free download).

Quote : "... a great circle of light, which was set up by the Earth-Current, and burned within a transparent tube; or had that appearance. And it bounded the Pyramid for a clear mile upon every side, and burned for ever; and none of the monsters had power to pass across, because of what we did call The Air Clog that it did make, as an invisible Wall of Safety" ^ The Project Gutenberg eBook of Rondah; or, thirty-three years in a star (free download/reading).

Quote : "It was useless to try to find out where and of whom they had learned our language. They only could tell us that they had been taught from the Sun Island, a far-off land of the sea. Sometimes, they said, the tide was low and we could walk on dry rocks to the isle. Sometimes there was a “wall in the air.” Then no one could get there." ^ for instance, as: [1] .

[ dead link ] ^ Benns, Tristan (November 2024).

"15 Most Effective Defensive Powers in X-Men History" .

Screenrant.com . Screen Rant.

Archived from the original on November 3, 2024 . Retrieved 24 July 2025 .

^ "Force fields may shield astronauts from radiation | New Scientist" .

^ "Plasma bubble could protect astronauts on Mars trip" . New Scientist. 2006-07-17 . Retrieved 2014-04-12 .

^ " 'Deflector' shields could protect future astronauts" . New Scientist. 2007-04-18 . Retrieved 2014-04-12 .

^ Rincon, Paul (2007-04-18).

"Space shield to block radiation" . BBC News . Retrieved 2014-04-12 .

^ "The ESD & Electrostatics Magazine" . ESD Journal . Retrieved 2014-04-12 .

^ "David Swenson's electrostatic "invisible wall" (1996)" . Amasci.com . Retrieved 2014-04-12 .

^ "Star Trek-style shields could become reality" . Cosmos Magazine. 2008-11-05. Archived from the original on 2013-11-05 . Retrieved 2014-04-12 .

^ "Students prove real-life Star Wars deflector shield is possible" .

ExtremeTech . 3 May 2014.

^ Newcomb, Alyssa (March 23, 2015).

"Boeing Patents 'Star Wars'-Style Force Field Technology" . ABC News . Retrieved March 23, 2015 .

^ "Boeing Has Patented a Plasma 'Force Field' to Protect Against Shock Waves" . 30 March 2015.

^ McGuire, Kim (April 14, 2016).

"Rice University scientists take key step to create a 'force field' " .

Houston Chronicle . Retrieved July 19, 2021 .

^ "Teslaphoresis lends the ability to massively scale up force fields to move matter remotely" .

Innovation Toronto . April 18, 2016. Archived from the original on 2021-07-20 . Retrieved July 19, 2021 .

^ Bornhoeft, Lindsey R.; Castillo, Aida C.; Smalley, Preston R.; Kittrell, Carter; James, Dustin K.; Brinson, Bruce E.; Rybolt, Thomas R.; Johnson, Bruce R.; Cherukuri, Tonya K.; Cherukuri, Paul (April 13, 2016).

"Teslaphoresis of Carbon Nanotubes" .

ACS Nano .

10 (4): 4873– 4881.

Bibcode : 2016ACSNa..10.4873B .

doi : 10.1021/acsnano.6b02313 .

PMID 27074626 .

Further reading [ edit ] Andrews, Dana G. (2004-07-13).

Things to do While Coasting Through Interstellar Space (PDF) .

40th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference and Exhibit . Future Flight II.

Fort Lauderdale, Florida . AIAA 2004-3706. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-04-20 . Retrieved 2008-12-13 .

Stanway, Elizabeth (2025-06-01).

"Protection or Prison?" .

Warwick University . Cosmic Stories Blog.

Archived from the original on 2025-06-04 . Retrieved 2025-06-04 .

v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Force_field_(technology)&oldid=1305341271 " Categories : Fiction about physics Fictional armour Fictional energy weapons Fictional superhuman abilities Fictional technology Science fiction themes Shields Space technology Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2017 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 14:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Force field (technology) 16 languages Add topic

