Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of rights Toggle Types of rights subsection 1.1 Natural versus legal 1.2 Claim versus liberty 1.3 Positive versus negative 1.4 Individual versus group 1.5 Other senses 1.6 Politics 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Criticism 3 History 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Rights 57 languages العربية Asturianu تۆرکجه বাংলা Български Català Dansk Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kurdî Latviešu Lingála मैथिली Malti मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Română Русский Shqip Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Right" redirects here. For other uses, see Right (disambiguation) .

Legal, social, or ethical principles Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e Rights are legal , social, or ethical principles of freedom or entitlement ; that is, rights are the fundamental normative rules about what is allowed of people or owed to people according to some legal system, social convention , or ethical theory.

[ 1 ] Rights are an important concept in law and ethics , especially theories of justice and deontology .

The history of social conflicts has often involved attempts to define and redefine rights. According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , "rights structure the form of governments, the content of laws , and the shape of morality as it is currently perceived".

[ 1 ] Types of rights [ edit ] Natural versus legal [ edit ] According to some views, certain rights derive from deities or nature .

Main article: Natural and legal rights Natural rights are rights which are "natural" in the sense of "not artificial, not man-made", as in rights deriving from human nature or from the edicts of a god . They are universal; that is, they apply to all people, and do not derive from the laws of any specific society. They exist necessarily, inhere in every individual, and cannot be taken away. For example, it has been argued that humans have a natural right to life . These are sometimes called moral rights or inalienable rights .

Legal rights , in contrast, are based on a society's customs, laws, statutes or actions by legislatures . An example of a legal right is the right to vote of citizens.

Citizenship , itself, is often considered as the basis for having legal rights, and has been defined as the "right to have rights". Legal rights are sometimes called civil rights or statutory rights and are culturally and politically relative since they depend on a specific societal context to have meaning.

Some thinkers see rights in only one sense while others accept that both senses have a measure of validity. There has been considerable philosophical debate about these senses throughout history. For example, Jeremy Bentham believed that legal rights were the essence of rights, and he denied the existence of natural rights, [ 2 ] whereas Thomas Aquinas held that rights purported by positive law but not grounded in natural law were not properly rights at all, but only a facade or pretense of rights.

Claim versus liberty [ edit ] Main article: Claim rights and liberty rights A claim right is a right which entails that another person has a duty to the right-holder. Somebody else must do or refrain from doing something to or for the claim holder , such as perform a service or supply a product for him or her; that is, he or she has a claim to that service or product (another term is thing in action ).

[ 3 ] In logic, this idea can be expressed as: "Person A has a claim that person B do something if and only if B has a duty to A to do that something." Every claim-right entails that some other duty-bearer must do some duty for the claim to be satisfied. This duty can be to act or to refrain from acting. For example, many jurisdictions recognize broad claim rights to things like "life, liberty, and property"; these rights impose an obligation upon others not to assault or restrain a person, or use their property, without the claim-holder's permission. Likewise, in jurisdictions where social welfare services are guaranteed, citizens have legal claim rights to be provided with those services.

A liberty right or privilege , in contrast, is simply a freedom or permission for the right-holder to do something, and there are no obligations on other parties to do or not do anything.

[ 3 ] This can be expressed in logic as: "Person A has a privilege to do something if and only if A has no duty not to do that something." For example, if a person has a legal liberty right to free speech, that merely means that it is not legally forbidden for them to speak freely: it does not mean that anyone has to help enable their speech, or to listen to their speech; or even, per se, refrain from stopping them from speaking, though other rights, such as the claim right to be free from assault, may severely limit what others can do to stop them.

Liberty rights and claim rights are the inverse of one another: a person has a liberty right permitting him to do something only if there is no other person who has a claim right forbidding him from doing so. Likewise, if a person has a claim right against someone else, then that other person's liberty is limited. For example, a person has a liberty right to walk down a sidewalk and can decide freely whether or not to do so, since there is no obligation either to do so or to refrain from doing so. But pedestrians may have an obligation not to walk on certain lands, such as other people's private property, to which those other people have a claim right. So a person's liberty right of walking extends precisely to the point where another's claim right limits his or her freedom.

Positive versus negative [ edit ] Main article: Negative and positive rights In one sense, a right is a permission to do something or an entitlement to a specific service or treatment from others, and these rights have been called positive rights . However, in another sense, rights may allow or require inaction, and these are called negative rights ; they permit or require doing nothing. For example, in some countries, e.g. the United States , citizens have the positive right to vote and they have the negative right to not vote; people can choose not to vote in a given election without punishment. In other countries, e.g.

Australia , however, citizens have a positive right to vote but they do not have a negative right to not vote, since voting is compulsory . Accordingly: Positive rights are permissions to do things, or entitlements to be done unto. One example of a positive right is the purported "right to welfare".

[ 4 ] Negative rights are permissions not to do things, or entitlements to be left alone. Often the distinction is invoked by libertarians who think of a negative right as an entitlement to non-interference such as a right against being assaulted.

[ 4 ] Though similarly named, positive and negative rights should not be confused with active rights (which encompass "privileges" and "powers") and passive rights (which encompass "claims" and "immunities").

Individual versus group [ edit ] Main article: Individual and group rights This section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Individual rights are rights held by individual people regardless of their group membership or lack thereof.

Do groups have rights ? Some argue that when soldiers bond in combat , the group becomes like an organism in itself and has rights which trump the rights of any individual soldier.

Group rights , including the rights of nations , have been argued to exist when a group is seen as more than a mere composite or assembly of separate individuals but an entity in its own right. In other words, it is possible to see a group as a distinct being in and of itself; it is akin to an enlarged individual, a corporate body, which has a distinct will and power of action and can be thought of as having rights . Rights of nations, including a national right to self-determination have been argued for, [ 5 ] and a platoon of soldiers in combat can be thought of as a distinct group, since individual members are willing to risk their lives for the survival of the group, and therefore the group can be conceived as having a "right" which is superior to that of any individual member; for example, a soldier who disobeys an officer can be punished, perhaps even killed, for a breach of obedience. But there is another sense of group rights in which people who are members of a group can be thought of as having specific individual rights because of their membership in a group. In this sense, the set of rights which individuals-as-group-members have is expanded because of their membership in a group. For example, workers who are members of a group such as a labor union can be thought of as having expanded individual rights because of their membership in the labor union, such as the rights to specific working conditions or wages.

[ citation needed ] There can be tension between individual and group rights. A classic instance in which group and individual rights clash is conflicts between unions and their members. For example, individual members of a union may wish a wage higher than the union-negotiated wage, but are prevented from making further requests; in a so-called closed shop which has a union security agreement , only the union has a right to decide matters for the individual union members such as wage rates. So, do the supposed "individual rights" of the workers prevail about the proper wage? Or do the "group rights" of the union regarding the proper wage prevail?

[ citation needed ] The Austrian School of Economics holds that only individuals think, feel, and act whether or not members of any abstract group. The society should thus according to economists of the school be analyzed starting from the individual. This methodology is called methodological individualism and is used by the economists to justify individual rights .

[ citation needed ] Similarly, the author Ayn Rand argued that only individuals have rights, according to her philosophy known as Objectivism .

[ 6 ] However, others have argued that there are situations in which a group of persons is thought to have rights, or group rights .

Other senses [ edit ] This section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Other distinctions between rights draw more on historical association or family resemblance than on precise philosophical distinctions. These include the distinction between civil and political rights and economic, social and cultural rights , between which the articles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are often divided. Another conception of rights groups them into three generations . These distinctions have much overlap with that between negative and positive rights , as well as between individual rights and group rights , but these groupings are not entirely coextensive.

Politics [ edit ] Police officers in the United States are required to read the Miranda warning between making an arrest and beginning an interrogation. The warning informs the person arrested that they have rights included in the Fifth Amendment. Failure to "read Miranda" disqualifies evidence obtained primarily in the questioning.

A campaigner for prisoners’ rights Rights are often included in the foundational questions that governments and politics have been designed to deal with. Often the development of these socio-political institutions have formed a dialectical relationship with rights.

[ citation needed ] Rights about particular issues, or the rights of particular groups, are often areas of special concern. Often these concerns arise when rights come into conflict with other legal or moral issues, sometimes even other rights. Issues of concern have historically included Indigenous rights , labor rights , LGBTQ rights , reproductive rights , disability rights , patient rights and prisoners' rights . With increasing monitoring and the information society, information rights , such as the right to privacy are becoming more important.

[ citation needed ] Some examples of groups whose rights are of particular concern include animals , [ 7 ] and amongst humans , groups such as children [ 8 ] and youth , parents (both mothers and fathers ), and men and women .

[ 9 ] Accordingly, politics plays an important role in developing or recognizing the above rights, and the discussion about which behaviors are included as "rights" is an ongoing political topic of importance. The concept of rights varies with political orientation. Positive rights such as a "right to medical care" are emphasized more often by left-leaning thinkers, while right-leaning thinkers place more emphasis on negative rights such as the "right to a fair trial".

[ citation needed ] Further, the term equality which is often bound up with the meaning of "rights" often depends on one's political orientation.

Conservatives and right-wing libertarians and advocates of free markets often identify equality with equality of opportunity , and want what they perceive as equal and fair rules in the process of making things, while agreeing that sometimes these fair rules lead to unequal outcomes. In contrast, socialists see the power imbalance of employer-employee relationships in capitalism as a cause of inequality and often see unequal outcomes as a hindrance to equality of opportunity. They tend to identify equality of outcome as a sign of equality and therefore think that people have a right to portions of necessities such as health care or economic assistance or housing that align with their needs.

[ 10 ] [ better source needed ] Philosophy [ edit ] In philosophy , meta-ethics is the branch of ethics that seeks to understand the nature of ethical properties , statements, attitudes, and judgments. Meta-ethics is one of the three branches of ethics generally recognized by philosophers , the others being normative ethics and applied ethics .

While normative ethics addresses such questions as "What should one do?", thus endorsing some ethical evaluations and rejecting others, meta-ethics addresses questions such as "What is goodness?" and "How can we tell what is good from what is bad?", seeking to understand the nature of ethical properties and evaluations.

Rights ethics is an answer to the meta-ethical question of what normative ethics is concerned with (meta-ethics also includes a group of questions about how ethics comes to be known, true, etc. which is not directly addressed by rights ethics).
Rights ethics holds that normative ethics is concerned with rights. Alternative meta-ethical theories are that ethics is concerned with one of the following: Duties ( deontology ) Value ( axiology ) Virtue ( virtue ethics ) Consequences ( consequentialism , e.g.

utilitarianism ) Rights ethics has had considerable influence on political and social thinking. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights gives some concrete examples of widely accepted rights.

Criticism [ edit ] Some philosophers have criticised some rights as ontologically dubious entities.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] See also: History of human rights Magna Carta or "The Great Charter" was one of England's first documents containing commitments by a king to his people to respect certain legal rights. It reduced the power of the monarch.

The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen in 1789 in France The specific enumeration of rights has differed greatly in different periods of history. In many cases, the system of rights promulgated by one group has come into sharp and bitter conflict with that of other groups. In the political sphere, a place in which rights have historically been an important issue, constitutional provisions of various states sometimes address the question of who has what legal rights.

Historically, many notions of rights were authoritarian and hierarchical , with different people granted different rights, and some having more rights than others. For instance, the right of a father to be respected by his son did not indicate a right of the son to receive something in return for that respect; and the divine right of kings , which permitted absolute power over subjects, did not leave much possibility for many rights for the subjects themselves.

[ 11 ] In contrast, modern conceptions of rights have often emphasized liberty and equality as among the most important aspects of rights, as was evident in the American and French revolutions.

Important documents in the political history of rights include: The Persian Empire of ancient Iran established unprecedented principles of human rights in the 6th century BC under Cyrus the Great . After his conquest of Babylon in 539 BC, the king issued the Cyrus cylinder , discovered in 1879 and seen by some today as the first human rights document.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] The Constitution of Medina (622 AD; Arabia) instituted a number of rights for the Muslim, Jewish, camp followers and "believers" of Medina.

[ 15 ] Magna Carta (1215; England ) required the King of England to renounce certain rights and respect certain legal procedures, and to accept that the will of the king could be bound by law , after King John promised his barons he would follow the "law of the land". While Magna Carta was originally a set of rules that the king had to follow, and mainly protected the property of aristocratic landowners, today it is seen as the basis of certain rights for ordinary people, such as the right of due process.

[ 16 ] The Declaration of Arbroath (1320; Scotland ) established the right of the people to choose a head of state (see popular sovereignty ).

The Henrician Articles (1573; Poland-Lithuania) or King Henry's Articles were a permanent contract that stated the fundamental principles of governance and constitutional law in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, including the rights of the nobility to elect the king, to meet in parliament whose approval was required to levy taxes and declare war or peace, to religious liberty and the right to rebel in case the king transgressed against the laws of the republic or the rights of the nobility.

The Bill of Rights (1689; England) declared that Englishmen , as embodied by Parliament , possess certain civil and political rights; the Claim of Right (1689; Scotland) was similar but distinct.

The Virginia Declaration of Rights (1776) by George Mason declared the inherent natural rights and separation of powers .

The United States Declaration of Independence (1776) succinctly defined the rights of man as including, but not limited to, " Life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness " which later influenced " liberté, égalité, fraternité " (liberty, equality, fraternity) in France.

[ 17 ] The phrase can also be found in Chapter III, Article 13 of the 1947 Constitution of Japan , [ 18 ] [ non-primary source needed ] and in President Ho Chi Minh 's 1945 declaration of independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam .

[ 19 ] [ non-primary source needed ] An alternative phrase "life, liberty and property", is found in the Declaration of Colonial Rights , a resolution of the First Continental Congress . Also, Article 3 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights reads, "Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person".

The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (1789; France), one of the fundamental documents of the French Revolution , defined a set of individual rights and collective rights of the people.

The Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom (1785; United States), written by Thomas Jefferson in 1779, was a document that asserted the right of man to form a personal relationship with God free from interference by the state.

The United States Bill of Rights (1789–1791; United States), the first ten amendments of the United States Constitution specified rights of individuals in which government could not interfere, including the rights of free assembly, freedom of religion, trial by jury, and the right to keep and bear arms.

The Constitution of Poland-Lithuania (1791; Poland-Lithuania) was the first constitution in Europe, and second in the world. It built upon previous Polish law documents such as the Henrician Articles, as well as the US constitution , and it too, specified many rights.

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) is an overarching set of standards by which governments, organisations and individuals would measure their behaviour towards each other.

[ citation needed ] The preamble declares that the "...recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom , justice and peace in the world..." The European Convention on Human Rights (1950; Europe) was adopted under the auspices of the Council of Europe to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms.

The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966), a follow-up to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , concerns civil and political rights .

The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1966), another follow-up to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , concerns economic, social and cultural rights .

The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (1982; Canada) was created to protect the rights of Canadian citizens from actions and policies of all levels of government.

[ 20 ] [ non-primary source needed ] The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (2000) is one of the most recent proposed legal instruments concerning human rights.

See also [ edit ] Outline of rights Animal rights Contractual rights Constitutionalism Deed Droit Equal rights (disambiguation) , various meanings Exclusive rights Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Freedom of the press History of citizenship Jurisprudence Prerogative Right to food Right to housing Right to property Right to water Right to an adequate standard of living Right to health Right to social security Rule according to higher law Social contract Organisations: Amnesty International Human Rights Watch United States Commission on Civil Rights References [ edit ] ^ a b Wenar, Leif (July 9, 2007).

"Rights" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Stanford University . Retrieved 2009-12-21 .

Rights dominate most modern understandings of what actions are proper and which institutions are just. Rights structure the forms of our governments, the contents of our laws, and the shape of morality as we perceive it. To accept a set of rights is to approve a distribution of freedom and authority, and so to endorse a certain view of what may, must, and must not be done.

^ Harrison, Ross (1995).

"Jeremy Bentham" . In Honderich, Ted (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford University Press. pp.

85– 88. Archived from the original on 2017-01-29 . Retrieved 2012-12-01 .

Also see Sweet, William (11 April 2001).

"Jeremy Bentham" .

The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 7 January 2011 .

^ a b "Human Rights | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" . Retrieved 2020-11-14 .

^ a b Wenar, Leif (July 9, 2007).

"Rights" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Stanford University . Retrieved 2009-12-21 .

A distinction between negative and positive rights is popular among some normative theorists, especially those with a bent toward libertarianism. The holder of a negative right is entitled to non-interference, while the holder of a positive right is entitled to provision of some good or service. A right against assault is a classic example of a negative right, while a right to welfare assistance is a prototypical positive right.

^ Pope John Paul II , Sollicitudo rei socialis , section 15, published 30 December 1987, accessed 29 July 2023 ^ Ayn Rand (2009-12-18).

"The Virtue of Selfishness: Individual Rights" . The Ayn Rand Lexicon . Retrieved 2009-12-18 .

Individual rights are not subject to a public vote; a majority has no right to vote away the rights of a minority; the political function of rights is precisely to protect minorities from oppression by majorities (and the smallest minority on earth is the individual). see page 104. See also: Collectivized 'Rights ^ Kate Pickert (Mar 9, 2009).

"Undercover Animal-Rights Investigator" .

Time Magazine . Archived from the original on March 10, 2009 . Retrieved 2009-12-21 .

One of the most powerful tools animal-rights activists have is the video footage shot inside places like poorly run dog kennels, animal-testing facilities and factory farms, used as grim evidence of the brutality that can take place. But how do animal-rights crusaders actually get those videos?

^ Victoria Burnett (July 26, 2007).

"Human Rights Watch says migrant children are at risk in Canary Islands" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2009-12-21 .

They must immediately come up with a plan to close these centers," Simone Troller, author of the report and a children's rights researcher for Human Rights Watch in Europe, said in a telephone interview. "While these centers continue to exist, we believe children continue to be at risk.

^ "Soap Operas Boost Rights, Global Economist Says" .

Morning Edition . NPR. October 21, 2009.

Archived from the original on Dec 25, 2009 . Retrieved 2009-12-21 .

Many of these locally produced programs feature strong female characters. When Rede Globo began broadcasting in its native Brazil in 1965 the average woman had about six children — now the average woman has no children or one child.

^ Roemer, John E.

(December 14, 2005).

"Roemer on equality of opportunity" .

New Economist (Blog). New Economist . Retrieved 2009-12-21 .

Equality of opportunity is to be contrasted with equality of outcome. While advocacy of the latter has been traditionally associated with a left-wing political philosophy, the former has been championed by right-wing political philosophy. Equality of outcome fails to hold individuals responsible for imprudent actions that may, absent redress, reduce the values of the outcomes they enjoy, or for wise actions that would raise the value of the outcomes above the levels of others'. Equality of opportunity, in contrast, 'levels the playing field,' so that all have the potential to achieve the same outcomes; whether or not, in the event, they do, depends upon individual choice.

^ "Divine Right of Kings" . BBC. 2007-10-11 . Retrieved 2009-12-21 .

[...] the idea that a king was sacred, appointed by God and above the judgment of earthly powers [...] was called the Divine Right of Kings and it entered so powerfully into British culture during the 17th century that it shaped the pomp and circumstance of the Stuart monarchs, imbued the writing of Shakespeare and provoked the political thinking of Milton and Locke.

^ "The First Global Statement of the Inherent Dignity and Equality" . United Nations . Retrieved 2010-09-13 .

^ Lauren, Paul Gordon (2003). "Philosophical Visions: Human Nature, Natural Law, and Natural Rights".

The Evolution of International Human Rights: Visions Seen . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 0-8122-1854-X .

^ Robertson, Arthur Henry; Merrills, J. G. (1996).

Human rights in the world : an introduction to the study of the international protection of human rights . Manchester: Manchester University Press.

ISBN 978-0-7190-4923-1 .

^ R. B. Serjeant , The Sunnah Jami'ah, pacts with the Yathrib Jews, and the Tahrim of Yathrib: Analysis and translation of the documents comprised in the so-called "Constitution of Medina" .

Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies , University of London, Vol. 41, No. 1. (1978), p. 4.

^ Lepore, Jill (2015-04-13).

"The Myth of Magna Carta" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 2024-02-10 .

^ Dyck, Rand (2000).

Canadian Politics: Critical Approaches (3rd ed.).

Thomas Nelson .

ISBN 978-0-17-616792-9 .

^ "1947 Japanese Constitution" .

Hanover Historical Texts Collection . Hanover College History Department.

^ "Vietnamese Declaration of Independence, 1945" .

Internet History Sourcebooks Project .

^ "Learn about the Charter" .

Canada's System of Justice . Department of Justice Canada. 2018-04-12 . Retrieved 2019-02-02 .

Look up right in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Rights .

Links to related articles v t e Liberty Concepts Artistic freedom Cognitive liberty Free will Freedom of conscience Freedom of expression Freedom of Expression (book) Algeria Canada India South Africa Freethought Moral responsibility Personification of Liberty Libertas Negative liberty Positive liberty Rights Self-ownership Topfreedom By type Academic Civil Economic Financial Intellectual Internet Morphological Political By right Abortion Assembly Association Asylum Cannabis Choice Civil and political Clothing Death Digital Education Fair trial Family Freedom from discrimination Food Gun Health Housing Internet access Information Life Morphological Movement Personality Press Privacy Property Protest Religion Repair Resist Self-defense Sexual and reproductive health Sexuality Silence Speech Thought To be forgotten Truth Water and sanitation Workers' right to access the toilet See also All men are created equal Anarchism Autonomy Beard and haircut laws by country Civil libertarianism Clothing laws by country Dancing ban Decriminalization of sex work Drug liberalization Human rights Left-libertarianism Legality of recording by civilians LGBTQ rights Libertarianism Liberty, equality, brotherhood Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness Photography and the law Photography Is Not a Crime Pornography laws by region Prostitution law Psilocybin decriminalization in the United States Right-libertarianism Self-determination Stanley v. Georgia Universal Declaration of Human Rights v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Rights theory Natural rights and legal rights Claim rights and liberty rights Negative and positive rights Individual and group rights Natural law Positive law Sovereign states Universal jurisdiction Equality before the law Social contract v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases : National Japan NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐gm9tl
Cached time: 20250816085054
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.791 seconds
Real time usage: 0.985 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6486/1000000
Revision size: 33840/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 281593/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 91523/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 136879/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.449/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26649441/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  739.246      1 -total
 23.70%  175.205      1 Template:Reflist
 15.73%  116.259      1 Template:Navboxes
 11.91%   88.012      7 Template:Cite_news
 10.71%   79.165      6 Template:Lang
  9.65%   71.324     12 Template:Fix
  9.25%   68.417      1 Template:Rights
  9.09%   67.224      1 Template:Sidebar
  7.56%   55.915      1 Template:Redirect
  7.39%   54.605      6 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:51490:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816085054 and revision id 1299329577. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rights&oldid=1299329577 " Categories : Rights Concepts in ethics Theories of law Libertarian theory Social concepts Legal doctrines and principles Concepts in political philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from February 2024 All articles with style issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from February 2024 Articles containing French-language text All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from February 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2013 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 19:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rights 57 languages Add topic

