Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Etymology Toggle Etymology subsection 2.1 Return mechanism 3 Traditional styles and uses 4 Modern styles and uses 5 Aerodynamics 6 Throwing technique 7 Competitions and records Toggle Competitions and records subsection 7.1 Competition disciplines 7.2 World records 7.3 Guinness World Records 7.3.1 Smallest returning boomerang 7.3.2 Longest throw of any object by a human 8 Related terms 9 Cultural references 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Boomerang 76 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Thrown tool and weapon This article is about the wooden implement. For other uses, see Boomerang (disambiguation) .

An Egyptian boomerang; National Archaeological Museum, Athens , Greece.

Australian Aboriginal boomerangs A boomerang ( / ˈ b uː m ə r æ ŋ / ) is a thrown tool typically constructed with airfoil sections and designed to spin about an axis perpendicular to the direction of its flight, designed to return to the thrower. The origin of the word is from an Aboriginal Australian language of the Sydney region. Its original meaning, which is preserved in official competitions, refer only to returning objects, not to throwing sticks , which were also used for hunting by various peoples both in Australia and around the world. However, the term "non-returning boomerang" is also in general use. Various forms of boomerang-like designs were traditionally and in some cases are still used by some groups of Aboriginal Australians for hunting. The tools were known by various names in the many Aboriginal languages prior to colonisation . The oldest surviving Aboriginal boomerang, now held in the South Australian Museum , was found in a peat bog in South Australia , dated to 10,000 BC . Historically, boomerangs have been used for hunting , sport, and entertainment, and are made in various shapes and sizes to suit different purposes. Ancient "boomerangs", used for hunting, have also been discovered in Egypt, the Americas, and Europe, although it is unclear whether any of these were of the returning type.

History [ edit ] Types of boomerangs in Australia before European contact Various types of boomerangs from Australia, India, and Africa Boomerangs  were, historically, used as hunting weapons, percussive musical instruments , battle clubs , fire-starters, decoys for hunting waterfowl , and as recreational play toys. The smallest boomerang may be less than 10 cm (3.9 in) from tip to tip, and the largest over 180 cm (71 in) in length.

[ 1 ] Depictions of boomerangs being thrown at animals, such as kangaroos, appear in some of the oldest rock art in the world, the Indigenous Australian rock art of the Kimberley region, which is potentially up to 50,000 years old.

[ 2 ] According to reports the oldest European surviving boomerang, that was found in a cave in Poland in 1985, dates back about 40,000 years old.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The oldest surviving Australian Aboriginal boomerang was found in a peat bog in the Wyrie Swamp of South Australia in 1973.

[ 5 ] It was dated to 10,000 BC and is held by the South Australian Museum in Adelaide .

[ 6 ] According to Tony Butz, former history teacher and linguist and founder of the Boomerang Throwing Association of New South Wales, "the returning boomerang was unknown to Aboriginal peoples in most of the Northern Territory , all of Tasmania , half of South Australia and the northern parts of Queensland and Western Australia . Roughly 60% of Aboriginal peoples used both returning boomerangs and non-returning hunting sticks, and therefore had words for them; a further 10% had only non-returning hunting sticks, and the remaining 30% used neither".

[ 7 ] Stencils and paintings of boomerangs appear in the rock art of West Papua , including on Bird's Head Peninsula and Kaimana , likely dating to the Last Glacial Maximum (24,000–16,000 BCE), when lower sea levels led to cultural continuity between Papua and Arnhem Land in Northern Australia.

[ 8 ] A boomerang made of a mammoth tusk found in the Obłazowa Cave Although traditionally thought of as Australian, similar weapons have been found also in ancient Europe, Egypt , and North America . There is evidence of the use of non-returning weapons similar to boomerangs by the ancient Egyptians, the Native Americans of California and Arizona , and inhabitants of South India for killing birds and rabbits.

[ 9 ] An 1883 study reported Ancient Egyptian examples and African examples, but these were non-returning tools.

[ 10 ] Hunting sticks discovered in Europe seem to have formed part of the Stone Age arsenal of weapons.

[ 11 ] A boomerang-like weapon discovered in Obłazowa Cave in the Carpathian Mountains in Poland and reported in 1987 was made of mammoth 's tusk. It is believed, based on AMS dating of objects found with it, to be about 40,000 years old, earliest certain find of this type of weapon in the world.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] In the Netherlands, boomerangs ( cateia ) have been found in Vlaardingen and Velsen from the first century BC.

King Tutankhamun owned a collection of boomerangs.

[ 11 ] 4 boomerangs from the tomb of Pharaoh Tutankhamun (1336–1326 BC) No one knows for sure how the returning boomerang was invented, but some modern boomerang makers speculate that it developed from the flattened throwing stick, still used by Aboriginal Australians and other indigenous peoples around the world, including the Navajo in North America. The curving flight characteristic of returning boomerangs was probably first noticed by early hunters trying to "tune" their throwing sticks to fly straight.

[ 11 ] [ unreliable source?

] It is thought by some that the shape and elliptical flight path of the returning boomerang makes it useful for hunting birds and small animals, or that noise generated by the movement of the boomerang through the air, or, by a skilled thrower, lightly clipping leaves of a tree whose branches house birds, would help scare the birds towards the thrower. It is further supposed by some that this was used to frighten flocks or groups of birds into nets that were usually strung up between trees or thrown by hidden hunters.

[ 16 ] In southeastern Australia, it is claimed that boomerangs were made to hover over a flock of ducks; mistaking it for a hawk, the ducks would dive away, toward hunters armed with nets or clubs.

[ 17 ] Aboriginal man with boomerang, Yuendumu , 2018 Traditionally, most hunting sticks used by Aboriginal groups in Australia were non-returning. These weapons, sometimes called "throwsticks" or "kylies", were used for hunting a variety of prey, from kangaroos to parrots; at a range of about 100 m (330 ft), a 2 kg (4.4 lb) non-returning boomerang could inflict mortal injury to a large animal.

[ 17 ] Recent evidence also suggests that boomerangs were used as war weapons.

[ 18 ] Etymology [ edit ] The origin of the term is uncertain, although it is known to be Australian.

[ 19 ] David Collins listed "Wo-mur-rāng" as one of eight Aboriginal "Names of clubs" in 1798.

[ 20 ] but was probably referring to the woomera , which is actually a spear -thrower. An anonymous 1790 manuscript on Aboriginal languages of New South Wales reported "Boo-mer-rit" as "the Scimiter".

[ 21 ] The first written record of a boomerang's return flight was made by a French-born ensign of the New South Wales Corps , Francis Louis Barrallier in November, 1802, but there had been reports of boomerangs in action by colonist of Sydney in the first few years of the colony.

[ 7 ] At Farm Cove ( Port Jackson ), in December 1804, a weapon was witnessed during a tribal skirmish , as recorded in the Sydney Gazette and New South Wales Advertiser : [ 22 ] ... the white spectators were justly astonished at the dexterity and incredible force with which a bent, edged waddy resembling slightly a Turkish scimytar , was thrown by Bungary , a native distinguished by his remarkable courtesy. The weapon, thrown at 20 or 30 yards [18 or 27 m] distance, twirled round in the air with astonishing velocity, and alighting on the right arm of one of his opponents, actually rebounded to a distance not less than 70 or 80 yards [64 or 73 m], leaving a horrible contusion behind, and exciting universal admiration.

One source asserts that the term entered the language in 1827, adapted from an Aboriginal language of near Sydney , New South Wales , but mentions a variant, "wo-mur-rang", which it dates to 1798.

[ 23 ] In 1822, it was described in detail and recorded as a "bou-mar-rang" in the language of the Dharawal people (a sub-group of the Darug ) of the Georges River near Port Jackson . The Dharawal used other words for their hunting sticks but used "boomerang" to refer to a returning throw-stick .

[ 7 ] [ 24 ] Similarly, other Aboriginal peoples used different words for throwing sticks (non-returning) and returning weapons.

[ 7 ] The word was also spelt "bomerang", "bommerang", "bomring", "boomereng", "boomering", "bumerang", and other variants.

[ 19 ] The word was adopted into International English , and also started to be used with a figurative meaning. An early example of its adoption into American English is found in Boston Daily Advertiser in 1846. From the 1850s, it started to be used as a verb in Australian English.

[ 19 ] Return mechanism [ edit ] Some boomerangs come back and some do not. Returning boomerangs can be grouped into two main flight categories.

Circular return Changes direction during flight. The slightly twisted object rotates, generating a lift force perpendicular to the surface of the boomerang. The horizontal component of the lift becomes the centripetal force in flight, and the boomerang moves in a circular motion. The vertical component of the lift prevents the boomerang from falling.

Straight out-and-back return The boomerang does not change direction during flight. A spinning object will have a force that tries to maintain its direction. The boomerang will maintain its orientation. The boomerang glides back through the air.

Traditional styles and uses [ edit ] Three types of Australian Aboriginal boomerangs at the British Museum : a returning variant, a hooked melee "Number 7" variant, also known as a "Kylie", and a wedge boomerang According to the Boomerang Throwing Association of New South Wales, only returning devices should be referred to as boomerangs, per the origins of the word.

[ 7 ] However, the term "non-returning boomerang" is used in common parlance to refer to a range of devices that are thrown.

One of the traditional uses of a boomerang was for hunting birds (including emus ), kangaroos , and smaller marsupials. This type of boomerang was either the same width from end to end, or had a broad middle and tapered at either end, with thin edges. They could travel very fast and so were effective and dangerous.  Expert hunters are said to be able to kill an animal 160 m (520 ft) away. Another hunting technique involves hanging nets among a group of trees, and when a flock of birds flies above them, boomerangs would be thrown above the birds to resemble a bird of prey such as a hawk. The spooked flock would swoop down to escape the hawk, and fly into the nets. The classic returning boomerang was never used in warfare, owing to its wide arc.

[ 25 ] Medium-weight "non-returning boomerangs" were sometimes used for fights at close quarters, by throwing them at the enemy, and larger ones (up to 2 m (6 ft 7 in) were used as fighting sticks.

[ 25 ] Heavier and wider hunting sticks sometimes called "non-returning boomerangs" were used to kill fish trapped in rock pools at low tide, and could also be used as a digging stick to forage for root vegetables and other uses.

[ 25 ] Another use for boomerangs are in formal dance ceremonies , used both as percussion instruments (like clapsticks ) and by dancers. Styles and decorations varied widely among clans and different Aboriginal groups across Australia, and were significant in the ceremonies.

[ 25 ] Traditionally-made boomerangs take a long time to make. After obtaining a suitably-shaped piece of wood from a tree, it would be left to dry out for weeks, before the maker would sit scraping it back for days and days to achieve the required shape. Few are made by this method today, with some exceptions being in some remote areas of Western Australia and the Northern Territory . These are mostly non-returning boomerangs, used for hunting. In La Perouse in Sydney , and on Palm Island , Queensland , they are made for the tourist trade.

[ 25 ] Modern styles and uses [ edit ] A boomerang throwing event in Alice Springs (Mparntwe), c. 1950s Aboriginal men with boomerangs in Alice Springs (Mparntwe), c.1960s Sport boomerangs Boomerangs for sale at the 2005 Melbourne Show Beginning in the later part of the twentieth century, there has been a bloom in the independent creation of unusually designed art boomerangs. These often have little or no resemblance to the traditional historical ones and on first sight some of these objects may not look like boomerangs at all. The use of modern thin plywoods and synthetic plastics have greatly contributed to their success. Designs are very diverse and can range from animal inspired forms, humorous themes, complex calligraphic and symbolic shapes, to the purely abstract. Painted surfaces are similarly richly diverse. Some boomerangs made primarily as art objects do not have the required aerodynamic properties to return.

[ citation needed ] Boomerangs are mostly used for recreation today. Modern boomerangs used for sport can be made from Finnish birch plywood , hardwood , or plastics such as ABS , polypropylene , phenolic paper , or carbon fibre-reinforced plastics . Most sport boomerangs typically weigh less than 100 g (3.5 oz), with MTA boomerangs (boomerangs used for the maximum-time-aloft event) often under 25 g (0.88 oz).

[ citation needed ] There are different types of throwing contests: accuracy of return; Aussie round; trick catch; maximum time aloft ; fast catch; and endurance (see below).

[ citation needed ] Boomerangs have also been suggested as an alternative to clay pigeons in shotgun sports, where the flight of the boomerang better mimics the flight of a bird offering a more challenging target.

[ 26 ] The modern boomerang is often computer-aided designed with precision airfoils. The number of "wings" is often more than 2 as more lift is provided by 3 or 4 wings than by 2.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Among the latest inventions is a round-shaped boomerang, which has a different look but using the same returning principle as traditional boomerangs.

[ 29 ] This allows for safer catch for players.

Aerodynamics [ edit ] A cross-shaped toy boomerang at the British Museum A boomerang is a throwing stick with aerodynamic properties, traditionally made of wood, which returns to the thrower after an elliptical flight.

[ 30 ] "Classic" boomerangs usually follow a circular trajectory, or sometimes in the shape of a teardrop. Its range varies from 3–60 m (9.8–196.9 ft). Hunting, or non-returning, boomerangs, fly in a straight line, usually 40–90 m (130–300 ft). There are also long-range boomerangs, which differ in design and fly in an S-shape. Wind affects the flight paths of all types of boomerang.

[ 31 ] A returning boomerang is a rotating wing. It consists of two or more arms, or wings, connected at an angle; each wing is shaped as an airfoil section. Although it is not a requirement that a boomerang be in its traditional shape, it is usually flat. Boomerangs can be made for right- or left-handed throwers. The difference between right and left is subtle, the planform is the same but the leading edges of the aerofoil sections are reversed. A right-handed boomerang makes a counter-clockwise, circular flight to the left while a left-handed boomerang flies clockwise to the right. Most sport boomerangs weigh between 70 and 110 g (2.5 and 3.9 oz), have a 250–300 mm (9.8–11.8 in) wingspan, and a 20–40 m (66–131 ft) range.

A falling boomerang starts spinning, and most then fall in a spiral. When the boomerang is thrown with high spin, a boomerang flies in a curved rather than a straight line. When thrown correctly, a boomerang returns to its starting point. As the wing rotates and the boomerang moves through the air, the airflow over the wings creates lift on both "wings". However, during one-half of each blade's rotation, it sees a higher airspeed, because the rotation tip speed and the forward speed add, and when it is in the other half of the rotation, the tip speed subtracts from the forward speed. Thus if thrown nearly upright, each blade generates more lift at the top than the bottom.

[ 32 ] While it might be expected that this would cause the boomerang to tilt around the axis of travel, because the boomerang has significant angular momentum, the gyroscopic precession causes the plane of rotation to tilt about an axis that is 90 degrees to the direction of flight, causing it to turn.

[ 32 ] When thrown in the horizontal plane, as with a Frisbee , instead of in the vertical, the same gyroscopic precession will cause the boomerang to fly violently, straight up into the air and then crash.

Fast Catch boomerangs usually have three or more symmetrical wings (seen from above), whereas a Long Distance boomerang is most often shaped similar to a question mark.

[ 33 ] Maximum Time Aloft boomerangs mostly have one wing considerably longer than the other. This feature, along with carefully executed bends and twists in the wings help to set up an "auto-rotation" effect to maximise the boomerang's hover time in descending from the highest point in its flight.

Some boomerangs have turbulators — bumps or pits on the top surface that act to increase the lift as boundary layer transition activators (to keep attached turbulent flow instead of laminar separation).

In 1992, German astronaut Ulf Merbold performed an experiment aboard Spacelab that established that boomerangs function in zero gravity as they do on Earth. French Astronaut Jean-François Clervoy aboard Mir repeated this in 1997.

[ 34 ] In 2008, Japanese astronaut Takao Doi again repeated the experiment on board the International Space Station .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Throwing technique [ edit ] Boomerangs are generally thrown in unobstructed, open spaces at least twice as large as the range of the boomerang. The flight direction to the left or right depends upon the design of the boomerang itself, not the thrower. A right-handed or left-handed boomerang can be thrown with either hand, but throwing a boomerang with the non-matching hand requires a throwing motion that many throwers find awkward. The following technique applies to a right-handed boomerang; the directions are mirrored for a left-handed boomerang. Different boomerang designs have different flight characteristics and are suitable for different conditions. The accuracy of the throw depends on understanding the weight and aerodynamics of that particular boomerang, and the strength, consistency and direction of the wind; from this, the thrower chooses the angle of tilt, the angle against the wind, the elevation of the trajectory, the degree of spin and the strength of the throw. A great deal of trial and error is required to perfect the throw over time.

[ 37 ] A properly thrown boomerang will travel out parallel to the ground, sometimes climbing gently, perform a graceful, anti-clockwise, circular or tear-drop shaped arc, flatten out and return in a hovering motion, coming in from the left or spiralling in from behind. Ideally, the hover will allow a practiced catcher to clamp their hands shut horizontally on the boomerang from above and below, sandwiching the centre between their hands.

The grip used depends on size and shape; smaller boomerangs are held between finger and thumb at one end, while larger, heavier or wider boomerangs need one or two fingers wrapped over the top edge in order to induce a spin. The aerofoil-shaped section must face the inside of the thrower, and the flatter side outwards. It is usually inclined outwards, from a nearly vertical position to 20° or 30°; the stronger the wind, the closer to vertical.  The elbow of the boomerang can point forwards or backwards, or it can be gripped for throwing; it just needs to start spinning on the required inclination, in the desired direction, with the right force.

The boomerang is aimed to the right of the oncoming wind; the exact angle depends on the strength of the wind and the boomerang itself. Left-handed boomerangs are thrown to the left of the wind and will fly a clockwise flight path. The trajectory is either parallel to the ground or slightly upwards. The boomerang can return without the aid of any wind, but even very slight winds must be taken into account however calm they might seem. Little or no wind is preferable for an accurate throw, light winds up to 3–5 knots (6–9 km/h; 3–6 mph) are manageable with skill. If the wind is strong enough to fly a kite, then it may be too strong unless a skilled thrower is using a boomerang designed for stability in stronger winds. Gusty days are a great challenge, and the thrower must be keenly aware of the ebb and flow of the wind strength, finding appropriate lulls in the gusts to launch their boomerang.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Competitions and records [ edit ] Boomerang Aerodynamic returning boomerang First played Ancient Characteristics Contact No Mixed-sex No Type Throwing sport Equipment Boomerang Presence Country or region Australia Olympic No World Games 1989 (invitational) A world record achievement was made on 3 June 2007 by Tim Lendrum in Aussie Round. Lendrum scored 96 out of 100, giving him a national record as well as an equal world record throwing an "AYR" made by expert boomerang maker Adam Carroll.

[ citation needed ] In international competition, a world cup is held every second year.

[ 41 ] As of 2017 [update] , teams from Germany and the United States dominated international competition. The individual World Champion title was won in 2000, 2002, 2004, 2012, and 2016 by Swiss thrower Manuel Schütz. In 1992, 1998, 2006, and 2008 Fridolin Frost from Germany won the title.

[ citation needed ] The team competitions of 2012 and 2014 were won by Boomergang (an international team). World champions were Germany in 2012 and Japan in 2014 for the first time. Boomergang was formed by individuals from several countries, including the Colombian Alejandro Palacio. In 2016 USA became team world champion.

[ 42 ] Competition disciplines [ edit ] Modern boomerang tournaments usually involve some or all of the events listed below.

[ 43 ] In all disciplines the boomerang must travel at least 20 metres (66 ft) from the thrower. Throwing takes place individually. The thrower stands at the centre of concentric rings marked on an open field.

[ citation needed ] Events include: [ citation needed ] Aussie Round : considered by many to be the ultimate test of boomeranging skills. The boomerang should ideally cross the 50-metre (160 ft) circle and come right back to the centre. Each thrower has five attempts. Points are awarded for distance, accuracy and the catch.

Accuracy : points are awarded according to how close the boomerang lands to the centre of the rings. The thrower must not touch the boomerang after it has been thrown. Each thrower has five attempts. In major competitions there are two accuracy disciplines: Accuracy 100 and Accuracy 50.

Endurance : points are awarded for the number of catches achieved in 5 minutes.

Fast Catch : the time taken to throw and catch the boomerang five times. The winner has the fastest timed catches.

Trick Catch/Doubling : points are awarded for trick catches behind the back, between the feet, and so on. In Doubling, the thrower has to throw two boomerangs at the same time and catch them in sequence in a special way.

Consecutive Catch : points are awarded for the number of catches achieved before the boomerang is dropped. The event is not timed.

MTA 100 ( Maximal Time Aloft , 100 metres (328 ft)): points are awarded for the length of time spent by the boomerang in the air. The field is normally a circle measuring 100 m. An alternative to this discipline, without the 100 m restriction is called MTA unlimited .

Long Distance : the boomerang is thrown from the middle point of a 40-metre (130 ft) baseline. The furthest distance travelled by the boomerang away from the baseline is measured. On returning, the boomerang must cross the baseline again but does not have to be caught. A special section is dedicated to LD below.

Juggling : as with Consecutive Catch, only with two boomerangs. At any given time one boomerang must be in the air.

World records [ edit ] This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( May 2025 ) As of September 2017 Sport boomerang world records [ citation needed ] Discipline Result Name Year Tournament Accuracy 100 99 points Alex Opri 2007 Viareggio Aussie Round 99 points Fridolin Frost 2007 Viareggio Endurance 81 catches Manuel Schütz 2005 Milan Fast Catch 14.07 s Manuel Schütz 2017 Besançon Trick Catch/Doubling 533 points Manuel Schütz 2009 Bordeaux Consecutive Catch 2251 catches Haruki Taketomi 2009 Japan MTA 100 139.10 s Nick Citoli 2010 Rome MTA unlimited 380.59 s Billy Brazelton 2010 Rome Long Distance 238 m Manuel Schütz 1999 Kloten Guinness World Records [ edit ] Smallest returning boomerang [ edit ] Non-discipline record : Smallest Returning Boomerang (Guinness World Record): Sadir Kattan of Australia in 1997 with 48 mm (1.9 in) long and 46 mm (1.8 in) wide. This tiny boomerang flew the required 20 m (66 ft), before returning to the accuracy circles on 22 March 1997 at the Australian National Championships.

[ 44 ] Longest throw of any object by a human [ edit ] A boomerang was used to set a Guinness World Record with a throw of 427.2 m (1,402 ft) by David Schummy on 15 March 2005 at Murarrie Recreation Ground, Australia.

[ 45 ] This broke the record set by Erin Hemmings who threw an Aerobie 406.3 m (1,333 ft) on 14 July 2003 at Fort Funston , San Francisco.

[ 46 ] Related terms [ edit ] In Noongar language , kylie is a flat curved piece of wood similar in appearance to a boomerang that is thrown when hunting for birds and animals.

[ 47 ] "Kylie" is one of the Aboriginal words for the hunting stick used in warfare and for hunting animals.

[ 48 ] Instead of following curved flight paths, kylies fly in straight lines from the throwers. They are typically much larger than boomerangs, and can travel very long distances; due to their size and hook shapes, they can cripple or kill an animal or human opponent. The word is perhaps an English corruption of a word meaning "boomerang" taken from one of the Western Desert languages, for example, the Warlpiri word "karli".

Cultural references [ edit ] Trademarks of Australian companies using the boomerang as a symbol, emblem or logo proliferate, usually removed from Aboriginal context and symbolising "returning" [ 49 ] or to distinguish an Australian brand.

[ 50 ] Early examples included Bain's White Ant Exterminator (1896); Webendorfer Bros. explosives (1898); E. A. Adams Foods (1920); and by the (still current) Boomerang Cigarette Papers Pty. Ltd.

[ 51 ] "Aboriginalia", including the boomerang, as symbols of Australia dates from the late 1940s and early 1950s and was in widespread use by a largely European arts, crafts and design community.

[ 52 ] By the 1960s, the Australian tourism industry extended it to the very branding of Australia, [ 53 ] particularly to overseas and domestic tourists as souvenirs and gifts and thus Aboriginal culture. At the very time when Aboriginal people and culture were subject to policies that removed them from their traditional lands and sought to assimilate them (physiologically and culturally) into mainstream white Australian culture, causing the Stolen Generations , [ 54 ] Aboriginalia found an ironically "nostalgic", entry point into Australian popular culture at important social locations: holiday resorts and in Australian domestic interiors. In the 21st century, souvenir objects depicting Aboriginal peoples, symbolism and motifs including the boomerang, from the 1940s–1970s, regarded as kitsch and sold largely to tourists in the first instance, became highly sought after by both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal collectors and has captured the imagination of Aboriginal artists and cultural commentators.

[ 55 ] [ 50 ] See also [ edit ] List of premodern combat weapons List of martial arts weapons Australian Aboriginal artefacts Cateia , an ancient Egyptian throwing weapon Chakram , an Indian throwing weapon Throwing stick , used in Australia Valari , an Indian throwing weapon References [ edit ] ^ Bailey, Ted.

"World's largest boomerang" .

flight-toys.com .

Archived from the original on 7 September 2008 . Retrieved 17 October 2008 .

^ "Kimberley rock art could be among oldest in the world" .

ABC News .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . 2 November 2015.

Archived from the original on 7 February 2016 . Retrieved 7 February 2016 .

^ "World's oldest boomerang older than thought, but not Australian" .

www.bbc.com . 25 June 2025 . Retrieved 26 June 2025 .

^ Talamo, Sahra; Casaccia, Nicole; Richards, Michael P.; Wacker, Lukas; Tassoni, Laura; Nadachowski, Adam; Kraszewska, Anna; Kowal, Magda; Skłucki, Jakub; Barrington, Christopher; Kelly, Monica; Tait, Frankie; Williams, Mia; Figus, Carla; Vazzana, Antonino (25 June 2025).

"Boomerang and bones: Refining the chronology of the Early Upper Paleolithic at Obłazowa Cave, Poland" .

PLOS ONE .

20 (6): e0324911.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0324911 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 12194152 .

PMID 40560845 .

^ "Earliest evidence of the boomerang in Australia" .

National Museum of Australia . 13 April 2018 . Retrieved 19 December 2024 .

^ "Boandik leaders oppose sale of Aboriginal artefacts collected by teacher" .

ABC News . 19 December 2024 . Retrieved 19 December 2024 .

^ a b c d e "Boomerang Association of Australia" .

boomerang.org.au . 1 August 2003. Archived from the original on 2 June 2003 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ Arifin, Karina (2004).

Rock Art in West Papua (PDF) . UNESCO Publishing.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 February 2017 . Retrieved 20 January 2017 .

^ "Boomerang" .

Boomerang (Weaponry) .

Encyclopædia Britannica (Britannica Online Encyclopedia ed.).

Archived from the original on 29 April 2009 . Retrieved 25 January 2009 .

^ Rivers, Pitt (1883).

"On the Egyptian boomerang and its affinities" .

The Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland .

12 : 454– 463.

doi : 10.2307/2841682 .

JSTOR 2841682 .

^ a b c "Boomerang history" .

rangs.co.uk . Archived from the original on 30 June 2007 . Retrieved 17 October 2008 .

^ Biel, Radosław (1 July 2025).

"Najstarszy bumerang na świecie ma jednak 40 000 lat. Pochodzi z Małopolski" .

Archeologia.com.pl (in Polish). Archived from the original on 26 October 2023 . Retrieved 10 July 2025 .

^ Valde-Nowak, Pawel; Nadachowski, Adam; Wolsan, Mieczyslaw (1 October 1987).

"Upper Palaeolithic boomerang made of a mammoth tusk in south Poland" .

Nature .

329 (6138): 436– 438.

Bibcode : 1987Natur.329..436V .

doi : 10.1038/329436a0 .

S2CID 4361636 . Archived from the original on 6 February 2016.

^ "Er fliegt! Wurfversuche mit dem Jungpaläolithischen Wurfgerät aus der Oblazowa-Höhle in den Polnischen Karpaten" [It flies! Throwing experiments with the Upper Palaeolithic throwing device from the Oblazowa Cave in the Polish Carpathians].

Bumerang Welt (in German). No. I/95. January–March 1995. Archived from the original on 31 October 2007.

^ "Paleolithic throwing object" .

Rediboom . Archived from the original on 5 December 2008 . Retrieved 6 September 2008 .

– Throwing experiments with the Palaeolithic throwing object from the Oblazowa in the Polish Carpathians ^ Lloyd, John; Mitchinson, John (2006).

The Book of General Ignorance . Mackays of Chatham. p. 244.

ISBN 978-0-571-23368-7 .

^ a b Jones, Philip (1996).

Boomerang: Behind an Australian Icon . Wakefield Press.

ISBN 9781862543829 .

^ "Boomerangs were lethal weapons of war, skeleton suggests" .

National Geographic Australia . 20 September 2016. Archived from the original on 3 August 2019 . Retrieved 15 April 2020 .

^ a b c "Meanings and origins of Australian words and idioms" .

ANU . School of Literature, Languages and Linguistics . 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ Collins, David (1798).

"Appendix XII (Language)" .

An Account of the English Colony in New South Wales . p. 554.

Archived from the original on 31 August 2020 . Retrieved 28 August 2020 .

^ Image of handwritten note .

Archived 14 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine , in The notebooks of William Dawes on the Aboriginal language of Sydney .

Archived 17 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine .

The Hans Rausing Endangered Languages Project .

Archived 29 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "The beginning of the week presented a native warfare ..." Sydney Gazette and New South Wales Advertiser . 23 December 1804. p. 2, col. 3, last ¶.

Archived from the original on 9 April 2022 . Retrieved 3 March 2010 – via National Library of Australia.

^ "Boomerang" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Archived from the original on 4 March 2014.

^ Ludowyk, Frederick (October 2009).

"Boomerang, boomerang, thou spirit of Australia!" (PDF) .

Ozwords .

18 (2).

^ a b c d e "The Origins of the Boomerang" .

Yarn Marketplace . 20 August 2020 . Retrieved 16 May 2025 .

^ Aussie Boomerang Shootin' . 15 October 2012.

Archived from the original on 1 February 2013 . Retrieved 18 October 2012 – via YouTube.

^ Boomerang Aerodynamics Archived 7 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine , boomerangs.com .

Archived 22 March 2006 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Saulius Pakalnis, Aerodynamics of Boomerang Archived 11 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine , 21 April 2006, researchsupporttechnologies.com Archived 15 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Round-shaped boomerang patent .

Archived 7 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine . 8 July 2021 ^ Baker, Horace (1890), "The Blackfellow and his Boomerang", Scribner's Magazine , Vol.7, No.3, (March 1890), pp 374-377.

("Horace Baker, late chief-engraver to the Picturesque Atlas of Australasia , is now in New York where he occasionally throws the boomerang, to the great astonishment and peril of the American nation": The Bulletin , 18 January 1890, p. 9 ).

^ "How the boomerang flies" .

Decoboomerangs . Retrieved 16 May 2025 .

^ a b "Boomerang" .

gsu.edu .

Archived from the original on 14 June 2012 . Retrieved 8 May 2012 .

^ "baggressive.com" . Baggressive.com. 19 April 2005. Archived from the original on 24 December 2008 . Retrieved 3 March 2010 .

^ "Boomerangs in Space" . Flight-toys.com. 18 March 2008.

Archived from the original on 24 May 2010 . Retrieved 3 March 2010 .

^ "Boomerang works in space, says astronaut" . News.com.au. 21 March 2008. Archived from the original on 24 March 2008 . Retrieved 3 March 2010 .

^ "Does a Boomerang Work in Space?" .

Universetoday.com . 24 March 2008.

Archived from the original on 1 December 2008 . Retrieved 3 March 2010 .

^ "BOOMERANG THROWING INSTRUCTIONS" .

www.rangsboomerangs.com .

Archived from the original on 2 October 2019 . Retrieved 4 February 2020 .

^ "How to Throw a Boomerang" .

wikiHow .

Archived from the original on 4 February 2020 . Retrieved 4 February 2020 .

^ "How To Throw Boomerangs!" .

Boomerangs.com .

Archived from the original on 4 February 2020 . Retrieved 4 February 2020 .

^ "How Do You Throw a Boomerang So That It Comes Back to You?" .

HowStuffWorks . 6 September 2001.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2020 . Retrieved 4 February 2020 .

^ "Boomerang Sport History" .

Leading Edge Boomerangs . Retrieved 30 January 2023 .

^ "World Boomerang Championships" .

usba.org . United States Boomerang Association . Retrieved 23 June 2025 .

^ "About Boomerang Throwing" .

Top End Sports . Retrieved 30 January 2023 .

^ "World's smallest boomerang" . boomerang.org.au. 12 April 2008.

Archived from the original on 2 May 2013 . Retrieved 3 March 2010 .

^ "Longest Boomerang Throw" .

YouTube . September 2010.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2021 . Retrieved 8 July 2021 .

^ "First quarter Mile Throw in History at Fort Funston" .

Business Wire .

Business Wire . 16 July 2003. Archived from the original on 19 April 2005 . Retrieved 28 May 2009 .

^ "Language | Kaartdijin Noongar" .

www.noongarculture.org.au . SWLASC.

Archived from the original on 6 February 2017 . Retrieved 6 February 2017 .

^ "Whence comes, and what is a boomerang" .

bumerang-sport.de .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2017 . Retrieved 26 July 2017 .

^ Jones, P. (1992). "The boomerang's erratic flight: The mutability of ethnographic objects." Journal of Australian Studies , 16(35), 59-71.

^ a b Spearritt, P. (1997). "Symbols for Australia: The changes to the iconography of political and corporate advertising".

Artlink , 17(3), 58.

^ Cozzolino, Mimmo ; Rutherford, Graeme Fysh (2000), Symbols of Australia (20th anniversary ed.), Penguin, p. 62, ISBN 978-0-646-40309-0 ^ Hume, D. L. (2009). "The development of tourist art and souvenirs—the arc of the boomerang: from hunting, fighting and ceremony to tourist souvenir".

International journal of tourism research , 11(1), 55-70.

^ Prideaux, B.; Timothy, D. J.; Chon, K., eds. (2008). "Themes in cultural and heritage tourism in the Asia Pacific region".

Cultural and heritage tourism in Asia and the Pacific . pp. 1-14.

^ Scates, B. (1997). "'We Are Not...[A] boriginal... We Are Australian': William Lane, Racism and the Construction of Aboriginality".

Labour History: A Journal of Labour and Social History , (72), 35-49.

^ Franklin, A. (2010). "Aboriginalia: Souvenir Wares and the 'Aboriginalisation' of Australian Identity".

Tourist Studies , 10(3), 195-208.

Further reading [ edit ] Nishiyama, Yutaka, Why do boomerangs come back?

, Int. J. of Pure and Appl. Math.

78(3), 335–347, 2012.

Nylah Lee (20 August 2023).

"Did Australia's boomerangs pave the way for flight?" .

BBC Travel .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Boomerangs .

Look up boomerang in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

International Federation of Boomerang Associations "Unspinning the boomerang" .

plus.maths.org . 1 January 1999.

Boomerang aerodynamics: an online dissertation How to Throw a Boomerang Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Boomerang" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

v t e Prehistoric technology Prehistory Timeline Outline Stone Age Subdivisions New Stone Age Technology history Glossary Tools Farming Neolithic Revolution Founder crops New World crops Ard / plough Celt Digging stick Domestication Goad Irrigation Secondary products Sickle Terracing Food processing ( Paleolithic diet ) Fire Basket Cooking Earth oven Granaries Grinding slab Ground stone Hearth Aşıklı Höyük Qesem cave Manos Metate Mortar and pestle Pottery Quern-stone Storage pits Hunting Arrow Boomerang throwing stick Bow and arrow history Nets Spear spear-thrower baton harpoon Schöningen woomera Projectile points Arrowhead Transverse Bare Island Cascade Clovis Cresswell Cumberland Eden Folsom Lamoka Manis Mastodon Plano Systems Game drive system Buffalo jump Toolmaking Earliest toolmaking Oldowan Acheulean Mousterian Aurignacian Clovis culture Cupstone Fire hardening Gravettian culture Hafting Hand axe Grooves Langdale axe industry Levallois technique Lithic core Lithic reduction analysis debitage flake Lithic technology Magdalenian culture Metallurgy Microblade technology Mining Prepared-core technique Solutrean industry Striking platform Tool stone Uniface Yubetsu technique Other tools Adze Awl bone Axe Bannerstone Blade prismatic Bone tool Bow drill Burin Canoe Oar Pesse canoe Chopper tool Cleaver Denticulate tool Fire plough Fire-saw Hammerstone Knife Microlith Quern-stone Racloir Rope Scraper side Stone tool Tally stick Weapons Wheel illustration Architecture Ceremonial Kiva Pyramid Standing stones megalith row Stonehenge Dwellings Neolithic architecture long house British megalith architecture Nordic megalith architecture Burdei Cave Cliff dwelling Dugout Hut Quiggly hole Jacal Longhouse Mudbrick Mehrgarh Pit-house Pueblitos Pueblo Rock shelter Blombos Cave Abri de la Madeleine Sibudu Cave Roundhouse Stilt house Alp pile dwellings Stone roof Wattle and daub Water management Check dam Cistern Flush toilet Reservoir Well Other architecture Archaeological features Broch Burnt mound fulacht fiadh Causewayed enclosure Tor enclosure Circular enclosure Goseck Cursus Henge Thornborough Megalithic architectural elements Midden Oldest extant buildings Timber circle Timber trackway Sweet Track Arts and culture Material goods Baskets Beadwork Beds Chalcolithic Clothing/textiles timeline Cosmetics Glue Hides shoes Ötzi Jewelry amber use Mirrors Pottery Cardium Cord-marked Grooved ware Jōmon Linear Unstan ware Sewing needle Weaving Wine winery wine press Prehistoric art Art of the Upper Paleolithic Art of the Middle Paleolithic Blombos Cave List of Stone Age art Bird stone Cairn Carved stone balls Cave paintings Cup and ring mark Geoglyph Hill figure Golden hats Guardian stones Gwion Gwion rock paintings painting pigment Megalithic art Petroform Petroglyph Petrosomatoglyph Pictogram Rock art Rock cupule Stone carving Sculpture Statue menhir Stone circle list British Isles and Brittany Venus figurine Prehistoric music Evolutionary musicology music archaeology Alligator drum Paleolithic flute Divje Babe flute Gudi Prehistoric religion Evolutionary origin of religion Paleolithic religion Spiritual drug use Burial Burial mounds Bowl barrow Round barrow Mound Builders culture U.S. sites Chamber tomb Cotswold-Severn Cist Dartmoor kistvaens Clava cairn Court cairn Cremation Dolmen Great dolmen Funeral pyre Gallery grave transepted wedge-shaped Grave goods Jar burial Long barrow unchambered Grønsalen Megalithic tomb Mummy Passage grave Rectangular dolmen Ring cairn Simple dolmen Stone box grave Tor cairn Unchambered long cairn Other cultural Archaeoastronomy sites lunar calendar Behavioral modernity Origin of language Prehistoric counting Prehistoric medicine trepanning Prehistoric warfare Symbols symbolism v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Boomerang&oldid=1303575546 " Categories : 1790s neologisms Australian Aboriginal bushcraft Individual sports Sports equipment Throwing clubs Australian inventions Sports originating in Australia Physical activity and dexterity toys Australian English Hunting equipment National symbols of Australia Weapons of Australia Hidden categories: CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Australian English from March 2013 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from April 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2025 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2025 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 20:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Boomerang 76 languages Add topic

