Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 Middle years 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Pierre Ossian Bonnet 12 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Kreyòl ayisyen Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French mathematician (1819–1892) This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Pierre Ossian Bonnet" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( October 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Pierre Ossian Bonnet Born ( 1819-12-22 ) 22 December 1819 Montpellier , France Died 22 June 1892 (1892-06-22) (aged 72) Paris, France Alma mater École Polytechnique École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées Known for Bonnet family Bonnet theorem Bonnet's recursion formula Bonnet–Myers theorem Gauss–Bonnet theorem Scientific career Fields Mathematics Pierre Ossian Bonnet ( French: [bɔnɛ] ; 22 December 1819, Montpellier – 22 June 1892, Paris ) was a French mathematician . He made some important contributions to the differential geometry of surfaces, including the Gauss–Bonnet theorem .

Biography [ edit ] Early years [ edit ] Pierre Bonnet attended the Collège in Montpellier.  In 1838 he entered the École Polytechnique in Paris.  He also studied at the École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées .

Middle years [ edit ] In graduating he was offered a post as an engineer. After some thought Bonnet decided on a career in teaching and research in mathematics instead.

Turning down the engineering post had not been an easy decision since Bonnet was not well off financially. He had to do private tutoring so that he could afford to accept a position at the Ecole Polytechnique in 1844.

One year before this, in 1843, Bonnet had written a paper on the convergence of series with positive terms. Another paper on series in 1849 was to earn him an award from the Brussels Academy. However between these two papers on series, Bonnet had begun his work on differential geometry in 1844.

Bonnet was elected to the Academy of Sciences in 1862 to replace Biot . He defeated Bour for this position. From 1868 Bonnet assisted Chasles at the Ecole Polytechnique, and three years later he became a director of studies there. In addition to this post he also taught at the Ecole Normale Supérieure.

In 1878 Bonnet succeeded Le Verrier to the chair at the Sorbonne, then in 1883 he succeeded Liouville as a member of the Bureau des Longitudes.

Bonnet did important work on differential geometry, a topic that was also being investigated in France by Serret , Frenet , Bertrand and Puiseux . Here Bonnet made major contributions to the concept of  curvature. In particular, he  published a formula relating the surface integral of the Gauss curvature to the Euler characteristic of the surface and   the line integral of the geodesic curvature of its boundary; this result  is now known as the Gauss–Bonnet theorem .

Gauss was known to have previously discovered   a special case of this fundamental result, but had never published it.

Independently of Ferdinand Minding , Bonnet showed the invariance of the Gauss curvature of a surface under bending. Between 1844 and 1867 he published a series of papers on the differential geometry of surfaces. In 1859 he submitted an important memoir for the Grand Prize of the Paris Academy. In modern terminology, the prize was offered for determining all possible local isometric embeddings in Euclidean 3-space of a surface with given Riemannian metric ("line element").

See also [ edit ] Topics named after Carl Friedrich Gauss References [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Pierre Ossian Bonnet" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews External links [ edit ] Pierre Ossian Bonnet at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany France BnF data Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pierre_Ossian_Bonnet&oldid=1305121277 " Categories : 1819 births 1892 deaths Members of the French Academy of Sciences Academic staff of the University of Paris Differential geometers École Polytechnique alumni Academic staff of the École Normale Supérieure 19th-century French mathematicians Members of the Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA Use dmy dates from October 2018 This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 05:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pierre Ossian Bonnet 12 languages Add topic

