Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mathematics 2 Astronomy 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Hippocrates of Chios 38 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Winaray Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 5th-century BC Greek mathematician and astronomer This article is about the mathematician. For the Ancient Greek doctor, see Hippocrates .

The Lune of Hippocrates . Partial solution of the " Squaring the circle " task, suggested by Hippocrates. The area of the shaded figure is equal to the area of the triangle ABC. This is not a complete solution of the task (the complete solution is proven to be impossible with compass and straightedge ).

Hippocrates of Chios ( Ancient Greek : Ἱπποκράτης ὁ Χῖος ; c. 470 – c. 421 BC) was an ancient Greek mathematician , geometer , and astronomer .

He was born on the isle of Chios , where he was originally a merchant. After some misadventures (he was robbed by either pirates or fraudulent customs officials) he went to Athens , possibly for litigation , where he became a leading mathematician.

On Chios, Hippocrates may have been a pupil of the mathematician and astronomer Oenopides of Chios. In his mathematical work there probably was some Pythagorean influence too, perhaps via contacts between Chios and the neighboring island of Samos , a center of Pythagorean thinking: Hippocrates has been described as a 'para-Pythagorean', a philosophical 'fellow traveler'. "Reduction" arguments such as reductio ad absurdum argument (or proof by contradiction) have been traced to him, as has the use of power to denote the square of a line.

[ 1 ] Mathematics [ edit ] The major accomplishment of Hippocrates is that he was the first to write a systematically organized geometry textbook, called Elements (Στοιχεῖα, Stoicheia ), that is, basic theorems, or building blocks of mathematical theory. From then on, mathematicians from all over the ancient world could, at least in principle, build on a common framework of basic concepts, methods, and theorems, which stimulated the scientific progress of mathematics.

Only a single, famous fragment of Hippocrates' Elements is existent, embedded in the work of Simplicius . In this fragment the area is calculated of some so-called Hippocratic lunes . This was part of a research program to square the circle , that is, to construct a square with the same area as a circle. Although Hippocrates failed to square the circle, he was the first to prove an equality of area between a curved shape and a polygonal shape. Only much later was it proven (by Ferdinand von Lindemann , in 1882) that this approach had no chance of success, because the side length of the square would have a transcendental ratio π π {\displaystyle {\sqrt {\pi }}} to the radius of the circle, impossible to construct using compass and straightedge .

In the century after Hippocrates, at least four other mathematicians wrote their own Elements , steadily improving terminology and logical structure. In this way, Hippocrates' pioneering work laid the foundation for Euclid 's Elements (c. 325 BC), which was to remain the standard geometry textbook for many centuries. Hippocrates is believed to have originated the use of letters to refer to the geometric points and figures in a proposition, e.g., "triangle ABC" for a triangle with vertices at points A, B, and C.

Two other contributions by Hippocrates in the field of mathematics are noteworthy. He found a way to tackle the problem of ' duplication of the cube ', that is, the problem of how to construct a cube root . Like the quadrature of the circle, this was another of the so-called three great mathematical problems of antiquity. Hippocrates also invented the technique of 'reduction', that is, to transform specific mathematical problems into a more general problem that is easier to solve. The solution to the more general problem then automatically gives a solution to the original problem.

Astronomy [ edit ] In the field of astronomy, Hippocrates tried to explain the phenomena of comets and the Milky Way . His ideas have not been handed down very clearly, but he probably thought both were optical illusions, the result of refraction of solar light by moisture that was exhaled by, respectively, a putative planet near the Sun, and the stars. The fact that Hippocrates thought that light rays originated in our eyes instead of in the object that is seen, adds to the unfamiliar character of his ideas.

Notes [ edit ] ^ W. W. Rouse Ball , A Short Account of the History of Mathematics (1888) p. 36.

References [ edit ] Ivor Bulmer-Thomas , 'Hippocrates of Chios', in: Dictionary of Scientific Biography , Charles Coulston Gillispie, ed. (18 Volumes, New York 1970–1990) pp. 410–418.

[Axel Anthon] Björnbo, 'Hippokrates', in: Paulys Realencyclopädie der Classischen Altertumswissenschaft, G. Wissowa, ed. (51 Volumes; 1894–1980) Vol. 8 (1913) col. 1780–1801.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Hippocrates of Chios .

O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Hippocrates of Chios" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews The Quadrature of the Circle and Hippocrates' Lunes at Convergence Mesolabe Compass and Square Roots - Numberphile video explaining Hippocrates' mesolabe compass v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 WorldCat National Germany Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hippocrates_of_Chios&oldid=1286428309 " Categories : Ancient Greek geometers Ancient Chians 470s BC births 410s BC deaths 5th-century BC Greek mathematicians 5th-century BC Greek philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 19 April 2025, at 21:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hippocrates of Chios 38 languages Add topic

