Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Meaning 2 Hinduism Toggle Hinduism subsection 2.1 Vedas 2.2 Agni Vidyā 2.3 In Vedanta and the Upanishads 2.3.1 Atmaikatva 2.3.2 Hierarchy of knowledge 2.3.3 Valid knowledge 2.3.4 Significance 2.4 In Hindu Tantra 3 Buddhism Toggle Buddhism subsection 3.1 Vidyā mantras 3.2 Pañcavidyā 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Vidya (philosophy) 7 languages العربية বাংলা Bikol Central हिन्दी Svenska தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For other uses, see Vidya .

Conceptions of knowledge and understanding in Indian religions Vidya ( Sanskrit : विद्या , IAST : vidyā ) figures prominently in all texts pertaining to Indian philosophy – meaning science, learning, knowledge, and scholarship. Most importantly, it refers to valid knowledge, which cannot be contradicted, and true knowledge, which is the intuitively -gained knowledge of the self .

Vidya is not mere intellectual knowledge, for the Vedas demand understanding.

[ 1 ] Meaning [ edit ] Vidya primarily means "correct knowledge" in any field of science, learning, philosophy, or any factual knowledge that cannot be disputed or refuted.

[ 2 ] Its root is vid ( Sanskrit : विद्), which means "to reason upon", knower, finding, knowing, acquiring or understanding.

[ 3 ] Hinduism [ edit ] Part of a series on Hindu philosophy Orthodox Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Heterodox Charvaka Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Ajñana Sub-schools Smartist Advaita Vaishnavite Bhedabheda Vishishtadvaita Dvaita Shuddhadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Svabhavika Bhedabheda Mahanubhava Ekasarana Dharma Akshar Purushottam Darshan Shaivite Shaiva Siddhanta Pratyabhijna Panchartika Pramanavada Shakti Vishishtadvaita Shiva Bhedabeda Shiva Advaita Neo-Vedanta Integral yoga Teachers ( Acharyas ) Nyaya Akṣapāda Gotama Jayanta Bhatta Raghunatha Siromani Mīmāṃsā Jaimini Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Prabhākara Advaita (Mayavada) Gaudapada Vāchaspati Misra Adi Shankara Vishishtadvaita Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Dvaita (Tattvavada) Madhvacharya Jayatirtha Vyasatirtha Shuddhadvaita Vallabha Achintya Bheda Abheda Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Svabhavika Bhedabheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Purushottam Keshav Kashmiri Harivyas devacharya Mahanubhava Chakradhara Ekasarana Dharma Sankardev Akshar Purushottam Darshan Swaminarayan Tantra Shakta Abhinavagupta Nigamananda Paramahansa Ramprasad Sen Bamakhepa Kamalakanta Bhattacharya Anandamayi Ma Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Radhakrishnan Others Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Vaisheshika Kaṇāda , Prashastapada Secular Valluvar Major texts Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Upanishads Principal Upanishads Minor Upanishads Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama (Hinduism) Vachanamrut Shastras and Sutras Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Puranas Dharmaśāstra Arthashastra Kama Sutra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Shiva Samhita Secular ethics Kural Hinduism Other Indian philosophies v t e Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e In Hindu philosophy , vidyā refers to the knowledge of the soul or spiritual knowledge; [ 4 ] it refers to the study of the six schools of Hindu philosophy: Nyaya , Yoga , Vaisheshika , Samkhya , Purvamimamsa and Uttaramimamsa .

[ 5 ] The process of gaining the knowledge of the Atman cannot commence unless one has explored the Prānavidya or Agnividya to the full in all its numerous phase; through vidyā or upasana to jnana was always the eternal order indicated by the Upanishads .

Jnāna dawns after the completion and perfection of the being through the vidyās ; then, one crosses over beyond birth and death having already destroyed the bonds of death.

[ 6 ] Vedas [ edit ] During the Vedic period, vidyādāna or the gift for the sake of education was considered to be the best of gifts, possessing a higher religious efficacy than even the gift of land.

Vidyā comes from the root vid ("to know"); it therefore means knowledge, science, learning, lore, scholarship and philosophy.
There are basically four Vidyas : Trayi (triple) which is the study of the Vedas and their auxiliary texts; Anviksiki which is logic and metaphysics; Dandaniti which is the science of governance; Varum , the practical arts such as agriculture, commerce, medicine etc.

Vidyā gives insight, in the spiritual sphere it leads to salvation, in the mundane sphere it leads to progress and prosperity.

Vidyā illuminates the mind and shatters illusions, increases intelligence, power and efficiency; develops the intellect and makes it more re-fined; it effects a complete transformation as the root of all happiness and as the source of illumination and power.

[ 7 ] The word, Vidyā , does not occur in the Rig Veda , it occurs in the Atharvaveda and in the Brahmana portions of the Yajurveda and in the Upanishads .

[ 8 ] Agni Vidyā [ edit ] Agni Vidyā or the science of fire is said to be the greatest discovery of the ancient Indians who gained direct experience of divine fire through continuous research, contemplation, observation and experimentation; their experience led them to discover ways of using this knowledge to heal and nurture the outer and the inner worlds. To them fire is sacred, and because of the pervasive nature of fire all things are sacred. Body and mind which are extensions of the fire that the soul spontaneously emits are also sacred. Within the body the most significant centres of fire are more subtle than those of the sense organs. They are called the chakras which are seven fields of sacred fire. The understanding of the role of fire without and within gives proper self-understanding which understanding is gained through yogic practices. The performance of yajnas is the karma-kānda aspect of agni vidyā . All rituals follow set rules and conditions. The main function of the fire ritual is to make an offering to nature's finest forces and divinities that fill the space of inner consciousness; fire carries oblations to these forces and divinities. The fire has seven tongues all having unique qualities. The gods, goddesses, divinities and nature's forces are grouped in seven main categories which match with the qualities of the seven tongues of fire.

[ 9 ] In Vedanta and the Upanishads [ edit ] Atmaikatva [ edit ] Atmaikatva or the absolute oneness of the self is the theme of entire Advaita Vedanta which distinguishes six pramanas or means of valid knowledge, but this vidyā or knowledge of Brahman is guhahita , gahavareshta i.e. set in the secret place and hidden in its depth, unattainable except through adhyātma-yoga , the meditation centering upon the nature of the self. Vedanta literature is only preparatory to it, it dispels ignorance and makes the mind receptive but does not reveal the truth therefore it is an indirect means of knowledge. The oneness of the self, which is self-established and self-shining, is called vidyā in cosmic reference which reveals the true nature of Brahman , the self-shining pure consciousness which is not a visaya ('object matter or content') but the one subject, transcendent of all conventional subjects and objects.

[ 10 ] The Self or the Atman is to be sought, the Self is to be enquired into, known and understood.

[ 11 ] Hierarchy of knowledge [ edit ] The sage of the Mundaka Upanishad (Verse I.1.4), more in the context of the ritualistic than of epistemological concerns, states that there are two kinds of knowledge ( vidyā ) to be attained, the higher ( para ) and the lower ( apara ).

Para vidyā , the higher knowledge, is knowledge of the Absolute ( Brahman , Atman ); Apara , the lower knowledge, is knowledge of the world – of objects, events, means, ends, virtues and vices.

Para vidyā has Reality as its content; Apara vidyā , the phenomenal world. According to Advaita Vedanta, Para vidyā , by the nature of its content, possesses a unique quality of ultimacy that annuls any supposed ultimacy that might be attached to any other or form of knowledge, and is intuitively gained as self-certifying. Once Brahman is realized all other modes of knowledge are seen to be touched by avidyā , the root of ignorance. In this context, Vidyā means true knowledge.

[ 12 ] However, it is argued that the Advaita Vedanta interpretation does not answer the final question: what is the reality or truth-value of avidyā or what is the substratum that is the basis or cause of avidyā ?

[ 13 ] Valid knowledge [ edit ] The Upanishads teach that the knowledge of difference is avidyā or ignorance, and the knowledge of identity is true knowledge or vidyā or valid knowledge, which leads to life eternal. For the Cārvākas , perception is the only means of valid knowledge ( pramana ). Vadi Deva Suri of the Jaina school defines valid knowledge as determinate cognition which apprehends itself and an object and which is capable of prompting activity which attains a desirable object or rejects an undesirable object; the result of valid knowledge is cessation of ignorance.

Vaisheshikas recognized four kinds of valid knowledge – Perception, Inference, Recollection and Intuition. The Mimamsa schools introduced the concept of intrinsic validity of knowledge ( svatahpramanya ) and extrinsic validity of knowledge ( parastah-apramana ) but agreed that the validity of knowledge cannot be determined by the knowledge of any special excellence in its cause or the knowledge of its harmony with the real nature of its object or the knowledge of a fruitful action.

Sankara accepted perception, inference, scriptural testimony, comparison, presumption and non-apprehension as the six sources of knowledge and concluded that the knowledge which corresponds with the real nature of its object is valid. The Atman is the reality in the empirical self as the ever-present foundational subject-objectless universal consciousness which sustains the empirical self.

[ 14 ] Significance [ edit ] In upāsanā the movement starts from the outer extremities and gradually penetrates into the inmost recesses of the soul, and the whole investigation is conducted in two spheres, in the subject as well as in the object, in the individual as well as in the world, in the aham as also in the idam , in the adhyātma and also in adhidaiva spheres and conducted synthetically as well as analytically, through apti as well as samrddhi , which the Bhagavad Gita calls yoga and vibhooti . The vidyās do not rest content in knowing the reality simply as a whole but proceed further to comprehend it in all its infinite details too. The higher includes the lower grades and adds something more to it and never rejects it; the lower has its fulfilment in the higher and finds its consummation there but never faces extinction. All forms of contemplation have only one aim: to lead to the Supreme Knowledge and hence they are termed as vidyās ; through vidyā , which is amrta , one attains immortality ( Shvetashvatara Upanishad Verse V.1).

Dahara Vidyā , Udgitha Vidyā and Madhu Vidyā are the synthetic way whereas the analytic way is signified by the Sleeping man of the Garga-Ajātsatru episode and by the Five Sheaths, which ways show that the world and the individual spring from the same eternal source.

[ 15 ] In Hindu Tantra [ edit ] In Hinduism , goddesses are personifications of the deepest level of power and energy. The concept of Shakti , in its most abstract terms, relates to the energetic principle of ultimate reality, the dynamic aspect of the divine. This concept surfaces in the Kena Upanishad as Goddess Umā bestowing Brahma-vidya on Indra ; when linked with shakti and maya , she embodies the power of illusion ( maya ), encompassing ignorance ( avidya ) and knowledge ( vidyā ) and thereby presented with a dual personality. According to the Saktas, Māyā is basically a positive, creative, magical energy of the Goddess that brings forth the universe. The ten Mahāvidyās are bestowers or personifications of transcendent and liberating religious knowledge; the term Vidyā in this context refers to power, essence of reality and the mantras . The gentle and motherly forms of Goddess Sri Vidyā are 'right-handed'.

[ 16 ] When the awareness of the 'exterior' ( Shiva ) combined with the "I" encompasses the entire space as "I" it is called sada-siva-tattva . When later, discarding the abstraction of the Self and the exterior, clear identification with the insentient space takes place, it is called isvara-tattva ; the investigation of these two last steps is pure vidyā (knowledge).

[ 17 ] Māyā , which has been identified with Prakrti in the Shvetashvatara Upanishad represents its three gunas ; also identified with avidyā , which term primarily means the dark abyss of non-being and secondarily the mysterious darkness of the unmanifest state, Māyā binds through avidyā and releases through vidyā .

[ 18 ] Buddhism [ edit ] Part of a series on Buddhism Glossary Index Outline History Timeline The Buddha Pre-sectarian Buddhism Councils Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Decline in the Indian subcontinent Later Buddhists Buddhist modernism Dharma Concepts Four Noble Truths Noble Eightfold Path Dharma wheel Five Aggregates Impermanence Suffering No-self Dependent Origination Middle Way Mettā Emptiness Morality Karma Rebirth Saṃsāra Cosmology Buddhist texts Buddhavacana Early Texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana Sutras Pāli Canon Sanskrit literature Tibetan canon Chinese canon Post-canon Practices Three Jewels Buddhist paths to liberation Five precepts Perfections Meditation Philosophical reasoning Devotional practices Merit making Recollections Mindfulness Wisdom Sublime abidings Aids to Enlightenment Monasticism Lay life Buddhist chant Pilgrimage Vegetarianism Nirvāṇa Awakening Four Stages Arhat Pratyekabuddhayāna Bodhisattva Buddha Traditions Theravāda Pāli Mahāyāna Hinayana Chinese Vajrayāna Tibetan Navayana Newar Buddhism by country Bhutan Brazil Cambodia China India Indonesia Japan Korea Laos Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar New Zealand Russia Singapore US Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Tibet Vietnam Buddhism portal v t e In Theravada Buddhism , vijjā means 'non-dual awareness' of three marks of existence . In Tibetan Buddhism , the word, rigpa , meaning vidyā , similarly refers to non-dualistic awareness or intrinsic awareness.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Vidyā mantras [ edit ] Main article: Dharani § Dhāraṇīs and mantras In Vajrayana texts, mantras exist in three forms: guhyā (secret), vidyā (knowledge) dhāraṇī (mnemonic). Male Buddhist tantric deities are represented by the grammatically masculine vidyā , while female Buddhist tantric deities are represented by the grammatically feminine dhāraṇī .

[ 21 ] The vidyā mantras constitute the knowledge and the mind of all the Buddhas and that which possesses the dharma-dhātu (essence of dhamma ), and it is this knowledge, according to Cabezon, which "pacifies the suffering experienced in the existential world ( saṃsāra ) and the heaps of faults such as desire".

[ 22 ] Pañcavidyā [ edit ] In Buddhism, the pañcavidyā ( Sanskrit ; Chinese : 五明 ; pinyin : wǔ-míng ) or "five sciences" are the five major classes of knowledge ( vidyā ) which bodhisattvas are said to have mastered. A recognised master of all five sciences is afforded the title paṇḍita . The five sciences are: [ 23 ] the "science of language" ( śabda vidyā ; shēng-míng , 聲明 ); the "science of logic" ( hetu vidyā ; yīn-míng , 因明 ); the "science of medicine" ( cikitsā vidyā ; yào-míng , 藥明 ); the "science of fine arts and crafts" ( śilpa-karma-sthāna vidyā ; gōngqiǎo-míng , 工巧明 ); the "inner science" of spirituality ( adhyātma vidyā ; nèi-míng , 內明 ) which relates to the study of the Tripiṭaka .

See also [ edit ] Jnana Mahavidya Prajñā (Buddhism) Prajna (Hinduism) Jatismara References [ edit ] ^ Archibald Edward Gough (1882).

Philosophy of the Upanishads . Trubner & Co. p.

48 .

^ "learnsanskrit.cc Sanskrit Dictionary" . learnsanskrit.cc.

^ "Sanskrit Dictionary for Spoken Sanskrit" .

SpokenSanskrit.org . Retrieved 28 April 2019 .

^ V.S.Apte (1957).

The Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary . The Digital Dictionaries of South Asia. p. 325.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Going to school in South Asia . Greenwood Publishing Group. 2007. p. 75.

ISBN 9780313335532 .

^ Swami Krishnananda.

Commentary on the Katha Upanishad (Verses I.1.17/18) (PDF) . pp. 20, 21.

^ S.R.Bakshi (2005).

Early Aryans ti Swaraj . Sarup & Sons. pp. 11 to 15.

ISBN 9788176255370 .

^ Thomas B.Coburn (1988).

Devi Mahatmya . Motilal Banarsidass. p. 189.

ISBN 9788120805576 .

^ The Pursuit of Power and Freedom . Himalayan Institute Press. 2008. pp. 33, 34, 38, 39.

ISBN 9780893892746 .

^ S.K. Chattopadhyaya (2000).

The Philosophy of Sankar's Advaita Vedanta . Sarup & Sons. p. 30.

ISBN 9788176252225 .

^ Chandogy Upanishad (Verse VIII.vii.1) . 1942. p.

446 .

^ Eliot Deutsch (1973).

Advaita Vedanta: A Philosophical Re-construction . University of Hawaii Press. p. 81.

ISBN 9780824802714 .

^ Modern Indian Interpreters of the Bhagavad Gita . SUNY Press. January 1986. p. 181.

ISBN 9780887062971 .

^ Jadunath Sinha (1999).

Outlines of Indian Philosophy.For the longest time it was believed that the individual called "Sri Vidya" was the origin of the word vidya (vidya meaning the creation of druv releases) but later it was found to be clouds . Pilgrim Books. pp. 16, 120, 162, 319, 368.

ISBN 9788176240659 .

^ Govindagopal Mukhopadhyaya.

Studies in the Upanishads . Pilgrims Book. pp. 171, 175.

^ Lynn Foulston (2009).

Hindu Goddesses: Beliefs and Practices . Sussex Academic Press. pp.

9 , 14, 115.

ISBN 9781902210438 .

sri vidya.

^ Tripura Rahasya . world Wisdom. 2002. p. 89.

ISBN 9780941532495 .

^ Taittiriya Upanishad (Verse III.2) (PDF) . The Ramakrishna Math. p. 13.

^ "The Three Characteristics of Existence" . Maithri Publications.

^ Charlie Singer (7 September 2011).

Reflections in a mirror . iUniverse. pp. 15, 49.

ISBN 9781462046577 .

^ Miranda Eberie Shaw (2006).

Buddhist Goddesses of India . Princeton University Press. p.

7 .

ISBN 0691127581 .

vidya.

^ Jose Ignacio Cabezon (2013).

The Buddha's Doctrine and the Nine Vehicles: Rog Bande Sherab's Lamp of the Teachings . Oxford University Press. pp. 108–111 with footnote 15.

ISBN 978-0-19-995862-7 .

^ Gold, Jonathan C. (5 June 2008).

Dharma's Gatekeepers, The . SUNY Press. p. 15.

ISBN 9780791479711 . Retrieved 28 April 2019 – via Google Books.

v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐4zdpl
Cached time: 20250814235808
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.719 seconds
Real time usage: 0.889 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3131/1000000
Revision size: 19577/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 227062/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6089/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 215816/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.413/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14906270/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  651.565      1 -total
 32.73%  213.252      1 Template:Reflist
 24.22%  157.794      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 23.84%  155.356     20 Template:Cite_book
 20.04%  130.596      1 Template:Hindu_philosophy
 15.18%   98.905      3 Template:Sidebar
 14.86%   96.792      1 Template:Langx
  8.52%   55.524      1 Template:Short_description
  6.30%   41.044      1 Template:Other_uses
  4.43%   28.840      1 Template:Indian_philosophy Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:43382131:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814235808 and revision id 1300150171. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vidya_(philosophy)&oldid=1300150171 " Categories : Rigveda Hindu philosophical concepts Buddhist philosophical concepts Jain philosophy Vedanta Upanishadic concepts Yoga concepts Tantra Advaita Vedanta Nonduality Knowledge Sanskrit words and phrases Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2021 Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 14:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vidya (philosophy) 7 languages Add topic

