Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Kashf al-mahjub 2.2 Ithbat al-nubu'at 2.3 Kitab al-iftikhar 2.4 Al-Yanabi 2.5 Al-Maqalid 2.6 Al-Nusra 2.7 Sullam al-najat 2.8 Epistles 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 8 languages العربية Català فارسی Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Тоҷикӣ اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 10th century Persian Ismaili missionary and Neo-Platonic philosopher Not to be confused with Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani .

Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani Title Chief da'i of Rayy , Sijistan , and Khurasan Personal life Died 971 Flourished 930s–971 Known for Introduction of Neoplatonism into Isma'ili theology Religious life Religion Isma'ili Shi'a Islam Senior posting Predecessor Abu Hatim al-Razi (Rayy), Muhammad al-Nasafi (Khurasan) Part of a series on Islam Isma'ilism Concepts Quran Batiniyya Ta'wil Imamate Ẓāhir Bātin Nūr 'Aql ʿIlm Daʿwa Dāʿī Bāb Hujja Satr Taqiya Pīr Numerology Theology Reincarnation Titles Seven Pillars Walayah Purity Prayer Charity Fasting Pilgrimage Community Branches/sects Musta'li Tayyibi Dawoodi Bohra Progressive Hebtiahs Bohra Atba-i-Malak Bohra Badar Vakil Sulaymani Bohra Alavi Bohra Qutbi Bohra Hafizi Nizari Seveners Qarmatians Assassins Satpanth States Qarmatian state of Bahrayn Fatimid Caliphate Multan Sulayhid dynasty Zurayid dynasty Hamdanid dynasty Nizari Ismaili state People Hamdan Qarmat ibn Faraj ibn Ḥawshab ibn al-Fadl al-Jayshani ibn Mansur al-Yaman Abu Sa'id al-Jannabi Abu Tahir al-Jannabi Qadi Numan al-Nasafi al-Sijistani al-Kirmani al-Shirazi al-Naysaburi Nasir Khusraw Pamiris Queen Arwa al-Sulayhi Dhu'ayb ibn Musa Hasan-i Sabbah Hassan Ala Zikrihi's Salam Rashid ad-Din Sinan Pir Sadardin Aga Khans Khojas Dā'ī al-Mutlaqs Nasir al-Din Nasir Hunzai Centers Cairo Anjudan Nizārī strongholds Alamut Atashgah Gerdkuh Lambsar Masyaf Maymun-Diz Rudkhan Qalaat al-Madiq Other Palace of Queen Arwa Queen Arwa Mosque Nizārī Constitution Delegation Ginans Holy Du'a Jama'at Khana Qiyama Abbasid - Baghdad Manifesto House of Knowledge Women Early leaders Ali Hasan Husayn al-Sajjad al-Baqir Jaʿfar al-Ṣādiq Ismāʿīl ibn Jaʿfar al-Mubārak Muhammad ibn Ismāʿīl ash-Shākir ʿAbad Allāh (al-Wāfī Ahmad) Ahmad (al-Taqī Muhammad) Ḥusayn (ar-Raḍī ʿAbd Allāh) ʿAbd Allāh al-Mahdī bi'l-Lāh al-Qāʾim al-Manṣūr Maʿad al-Muʿizz li-Dīn Allāh Nizār al-ʿAzīz biʾllāh, Manṣūr al-Ḥākim bi-Amr Allāh ʿAlī al-Ẓāhir li-iʿzāz Dīn Allāh Maʿad al-Mustanṣir bi'l-Lāh Nizār al-Muṣṭafā li-Dīn’il-Lāh / Aḥmad al-Mustāʿlī bi'l-Lāh Manṣūr al-Āmir bi-Aḥkām’il-Lāh ʿAbd al-Majīd al-Ḥāfiz li-Dīn Allāh / Abu'l-Qāsim al-Tayyib Incumbent leaders Nizārī Ismā'īlī Imām : Aga Khan V Musta'li Ismaili - Taiyabi Dā'ī al-Mutlaqs : Alavi Bohra : Haatim Zakiyuddin Dawoodi Bohra : Mufaddal Saifuddin Qutbi Bohra : Taher Fakhruddin Islam portal v t e Abu Ya'qub Ishaq ibn Ahmad al-Sijistani ( Arabic : أبو يعقوب إسحاق بن أحمد السجستاني ) or al-Sijzi ( السجزي ), also known as Bandaneh [ 1 ] ( Persian : بندانه), was a 10th-century Persian Ismaili missionary active in the northern and eastern Iranian lands. His life is obscure, but he was a prolific writer, who played a crucial role in the infusion of Neoplatonic ideas into Isma'ili theology.

Life [ edit ] Al-Sijistani's life is obscure, [ 2 ] as references to him are found mostly in isolation in hostile Sunni heresiological works, while Isma'ili sources usually do not provide any details about him.

[ 3 ] He was given the nickname 'cottonseed' ( Arabic : khayshafūj , Persian : banba-dāna or Bandaneh ) in several near-contemporary non-Isma'ili works that mention him, but the origin and significance of it are unknown.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] What can be gleaned from the sources is that he was a senior missionary ( dāʿī ) in the Iranian lands of the eastern Islamic world.

[ 3 ] Nizam al-Mulk reports that a certain Ishaq succeeded Abu Hatim al-Razi as chief dāʿī at Rayy upon the latter's death on 934, while Ibn al-Nadim mentions a certain Abu Ya'qub as the chief dāʿī at Rayy in c.

932–942 . This Abu Ya'qub was also in charge of the missionary movement ( daʿwa ) in Upper Mesopotamia and Iraq , with the brothers Abu Muslim and Abu Bakr ibn hammad in Mosul and Ibn Nafis in Baghdad as his agents.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] This is likely to have been the same person as al-Sijistani, as it agrees with a statement in one of al-Sijistani's works that he was in Iraq in 934.

[ 3 ] Earlier opinion among scholars was that he was executed along with Muhammad al-Nasafi in 943, but this is now disproven.

[ 5 ] In reality, he was al-Nasafi's successor, both as chief dāʿī in Khurasan , as well as in continuing the development of al-Nasafi's theological ideas.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Other sources maintain that he was active in Sijistan (whence his nisba ), both during and after al-Nasafi's tenure.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The movement he headed was not initially affiliated with the Fatimid Caliphate , but at some point, during the caliphate of al-Mu'izz li-Din Allah ( r.

953–975 ), he accepted the Fatimids as the legitimate imams, and many of his views were taken over by the Fatimid-sponsored daʿwa .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] According to Rashid al-Din Hamadani , al-Sijistani was executed by the Saffarid emir of Sijistan, Khalaf ibn Ahmad ( r.

964–1003 ). Al-Sijistani's work Kitāb al-iftikhār was written around 971, this provides a terminus post quem for his execution. The introductions to two of his other works indicate they were written during the reign of the Fatimid caliph al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah ( r.

996–1021 ), but they are likely later interpolations.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Al-Sijistani died in 971.

[ 6 ] Works [ edit ] Several of al-Sijistani's works survive, having been copied and studied by the Tayyibi Isma'ili communities of Yemen and India. However, as they are regarded as "highly esoteric and restricted", they have been slow to be studied by modern scholars and published in critical editions.

[ 7 ] Furthermore, as the historian Paul Walker comments, "[a]s they exist now, it is in some cases difficult to determine the original form of the texts", as many survive only in translations or paraphrased summaries.

[ 3 ] Some works are only known by title or in fragments, being cited or quoted in other works.

[ 3 ] Kashf al-mahjub [ edit ] The Kashf al-maḥjūb ('Unveiling of the Concealed'), [ 8 ] [ 9 ] was the first of al-Sijistani's works to become available to scholars.

[ 10 ] It only survives in a Persian translation, or even paraphrase, of the Arabic original, produced in the 11th century.

[ 8 ] It comprises seven chapters, each further divided into seven parts. The aim of the work is to 'unveil' divine knowledge ( gnosis , irfan ), and deals with the concepts of the Oneness of God ( tawhid ), the stages of creation, the nature of prophethood, and resurrection ( qiyāma ).

[ 8 ] Based on its containing passages supporting the idea of metempsychosis , it likely belongs to the early phase of al-Sijistani's career, before he accepted Fatimid orthodoxy.

[ 11 ] Excerpts of the work were first published by Mahdi Bayani in 1938 ( Namūna-yi sukhan-i Fārsī , Tehran, Shirkat-i Chāp-i Khudkār).

[ 8 ] The Persian text was published with a French commentary in 1949 by Henry Corbin (Tehran, Institut Franco-Iranien & Paris, A. Maisonneuve). Corbin also published a full French translation in 1988 as Le dévoilement des choses cachées: Kashf al-Maḥjûb, Recherches de philosophie Ismaélienne (Lagrasse, Verdier).

[ 8 ] A partial English translation was published by Hermann Landolt ( Kashf al-maḥjūb, Unveiling of the Hidden ) in S.H. Nasr and M. Aminrazavi (eds.), An Anthology of Philosophy in Persia, Volume II (Oxford,  Oxford University Press, 2001).

[ 8 ] Ithbat al-nubu'at [ edit ] The Ithbāt al-nubūʾāt or al-nubuwwāt ('Proofs of Prophecies').

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In its seven sections, al-Sijistani "puts forward a variety of proofs for the necessity of prophecy ( nubuwwa ), also explaining different prophetic eras".

[ 8 ] According to Paul Walker, it shows signs of later editing, [ 3 ] and all available manuscripts are missing the final two sections.

[ 12 ] The work was published in Arabic in 1966 by Arif Tamir (Beirut, al-Matba'a al-Kathulikiyya).

[ 8 ] According to Walker, this edition "contains errors, faulty readings, pages out of order, and extraneous passages".

[ 12 ] Kitab al-iftikhar [ edit ] The Kitāb al-iftikhār ('The Book of Boasting'), [ 10 ] is likely the last of al-Sijistani's works, being written around 971.

[ 8 ] As its title suggests, it is "strikingly polemical and strikingly defensive and apologetic" work; Walker describes it as "an exceedingly frank confession of the points of difference between himself and the Ismaili daʿwa , on the one hand, and the intellectual, religious world all around him, on the other".

[ 13 ] For Walker, it is perhaps the "[best] place to look for a definition of [Isma'ili Shiism] in its fourth / tenth-century manifestation", [ 13 ] while Farhad Daftary , points out that it "presents a summary exposition of Ismaili doctrine and preserves remnants of the mythological cosmology propounded by the early Ismailis, including the spiritual beings called jadd , fatḥ and khayāl which mediated between the spiritual and the physical worlds".

[ 14 ] The work was first partially published by Mustafa Ghalib in 1980 (Beirut, Dar al-Andalus), [ 8 ] but "suffers from inaccuracies and serious omissions".

[ 12 ] In 2000 a "definitive" edition [ 12 ] with an English commentary was published by Ismail K. Poonawala (Beirut, Dar al-Gharb al-Islami).

[ 8 ] Al-Yanabi [ edit ] The Kitāb  al-Yanābīʿ [al-ḥikma] ('Book of the Wellsprings/Sources [of Wisdom]'), [ 15 ] was written around 961, and extensively paraphrased by the 11th-century dāʿī Nasir Khusraw in his own Khwān al-ikhwān .

[ 16 ] The work is a collection of treatises on about forty themes or 'wellsprings'.

[ 16 ] According to Daftary, the work's primary theme is "the wellsprings of human knowledge and spiritual life in each era of religious history", [ 16 ] while Walker emphasizes that "portions of this work are purely Neoplatonic in the tone and in the content of its teachings; other sections bring these concepts in line with the author's Shiite interpretation of religious knowledge and its purveyors".

[ 15 ] The work was first published in a critical edition, with a partial French translation ( Le livre des sources ) in Henry Corbin's 1961 Trilogie Ismailienne (Tehran, Département d’Iranologie de l’Institut Franco-Iranien and Paris, A. Maisonneuve).

[ 16 ] [ 12 ] An Arabic edition was published by Mustafa Ghalib in 1965 (Beirut, al-Maktab al-Tijari), and an English translation by Paul Walker in 1994 as part of The Wellsprings of Wisdom: A Study of Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani's Kitab al-Yanabi (Salt Lake City, University of Utah Press).

[ 16 ] Al-Maqalid [ edit ] The Kitāb al-Maqālīd ('Book of the Keys'), [ 3 ] comprises seventy chapters.

[ 12 ] According to Walker, it is of exceptional importance as it is "relatively late and by any account the most comprehensive" of al-Sijistani's works, but remains unpublished.

[ 17 ] Al-Nusra [ edit ] The Kitāb al-Nuṣra ('Book of the Support/Defence'), is no longer extant, except for extensive quotations in Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 's Kitāb al-riyāḍ .

[ 18 ] The work is one of al-Sijistani's earlier writings, composed as a defence of his predecessor and teacher, Muhammad al-Nasafi , against the accusations of antinomianism by Abu Hatim Ahmad ibn Hamdan al-Razi .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Sullam al-najat [ edit ] The Sullam al-najāt ('Ladder of Salvation') survives only in an incomplete form.

[ 21 ] In it, al-Sijistani gives a summary of the Isma'ili doctrine ( madhhab ). According to Walker, these can be summarized as "faith in God, His angels, His books, His emissaries, the last day, salvation after death, and paradise and hellfire".

[ 13 ] Its Arabic text was published by Muhtadi Mustafa Ghalib in 2002 (Salamiyya, Dar al-Ghadir).

[ 16 ] An English translation is part of a 1983 doctoral dissertation by M. Alibhai ( Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistānī and Kitab Sullam al-Najāt: A Study in Islamic Neoplatonism , Harvard University).

[ 12 ] Epistles [ edit ] The epistle Risalat tuḥfat al-mustajībīn expounding on Isma'ili doctrine was published by Arif Tamir in Khams rasāʾil Ismāʿīliyya and reprinted since in al-Mashriq in March/April 1967, and in Tamir's Thalāth rasāʾil Ismāʿīliyya .

[ 22 ] The epistle al-Risāla al-bāhira fi’l-maʿād was published by Boustan Hirji in 1992 ( Taḥqīqāt-i Islāmī , Vol. 7), with a Persian-language translation by Abdallah Nurani. An English-language translation was published as part of B. Hirji's doctoral thesis A Study of al-Risālah al-Bāhirah (McGill University, 1994).

[ 16 ] References [ edit ] ^ "ابویعقوب سجزی" .

^ a b c d e f Daftary 2007 , p. 155.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Walker 1983 .

^ Daftary 2007 , p. 154.

^ Stern 1960 , p. 160.

^ Armstrong, Karen (1994-08-09).

A History of God: The 4,000-Year Quest of Judaism, Christianity and Islam . Random House Publishing Group. p. 179.

ISBN 978-0-345-38456-0 .

^ Walker 2014 , p. 255.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Daftary 2004 , p. 153.

^ a b Walker 1993 , p. 20.

^ a b Walker 2014 , p. 256.

^ Walker 1993 , p. 21.

^ a b c d e f g Walker 1993 , p. 190.

^ a b c Walker 1993 , p. 23.

^ Daftary 2004 , pp. 153–154.

^ a b Walker 1993 , p. 22.

^ a b c d e f g Daftary 2004 , p. 154.

^ Walker 1993 , pp. 23, 150, 190.

^ Walker 1993 , pp. 20–21.

^ Walker 1993 , pp. 21, 60–63.

^ Daftary 2007 , pp. 225–227.

^ Walker 1993 , pp. 22, 190.

^ Daftary 2004 , p. 155.

Sources [ edit ] Daftary, Farhad (2004).

Ismaili Literature: A Bibliography of Sources and Studies . London and New York: I.B. Tauris.

ISBN 978-0-8577-1386-5 .

Daftary, Farhad (2007).

The Ismāʿı̄lı̄s: Their History and Doctrines (Second ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-61636-2 .

Stern, S. M.

(1960).

"Abū Yaʿḳūb Isḥāḳ b. Aḥmad al-Sid̲j̲zī" . In Gibb, H. A. R.

; Kramers, J. H.

; Lévi-Provençal, E.

; Schacht, J.

; Lewis, B.

& Pellat, Ch.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume I: A–B . Leiden: E. J. Brill. p. 160.

OCLC 495469456 .

Stern, S. M.

(1960). "The Early Ismā'Īlī Missionaries in North-West Persia and in Khurāsān and Transoxania".

Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies .

23 (1): 56– 90.

doi : 10.1017/s0041977x00148992 .

S2CID 162532568 .

Walker, Paul Ernest (1983).

"ABŪ YAʿQŪB SEJESTĀNĪ" . In Yarshater, Ehsan (ed.).

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. I/4: Abū Manṣūr Heravı̄–Adat. London and New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. pp.

396– 398.

ISBN 978-0-71009-093-5 .

Walker, Paul Ernest (1993).

Early Philosophical Shiism: the Ismaili Neoplatonism of Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-44129-3 .

Walker, Paul Ernest (2014).

"Sijistānī, Abū Yaʿqūb al-" . In Kalin, Ibrahim (ed.).

The Oxford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Science, and Technology in Islam . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

255– 257.

ISBN 978-0-19-981257-8 .

External links [ edit ] Abu Ya‘qub al-Sijistani at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Fatimid Caliphate topics Imam-Caliphs al-Mahdi Billah al-Qa'im bi-Amr Allah al-Mansur Billah al-Mu'izz li-Din Allah al-Aziz Billah al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah al-Zahir li-i'zaz Din Allah al-Mustansir Billah al-Musta'li Billah al-Amir bi-Ahkam Allah al-Hafiz li-Din Allah al-Zafir bi-Amr Allah al-Fa'iz bi-Nasr Allah al-Adid li-Din Allah Dynasty History Foundation and rise (909–973) Conquest of Aghlabid Ifriqiya Establishment 1st Sicilian revolt 1st invasion of Egypt 2nd invasion of Egypt 2nd Sicilian revolt Rebellion of Abu Yazid (943–947) Campaigns in the western Maghreb Conquest of Egypt Apogee and crisis (973–1073) Expansion into Syria Alexandretta 1st and 2nd Qarmatian invasions Struggle with Alptakin Aleppo Apamea Uprisings of Muffarij b. Daghfal Bedouin alliance uprising Revolt of Abu Rakwa Hilalian invasion of Ifriqiya al-Basasiri 's conquest of Baghdad Loss of Aleppo Mustansirite Hardship Recovery and downfall (1073–1171) Dictatorship of Badr al-Jamali Revolt of Nizar Musta'li – Nizari schism First Crusade Siege of Ascalon Regime of Kutayfat and accession of al-Hafiz Hafizi – Tayyibi schism Crusader invasions of Egypt End of the Fatimid Caliphate Battle of the Blacks Conspiracy against Saladin Government Viziers and regents Jawdhar Ya'qub ibn Killis Ibn Ammar Barjawan Sitt al-Mulk Ali ibn Ahmad al-Jarjara'i Abu Muhammad al-Yazuri Rasad Nasir al-Dawla Ibn Hamdan Badr al-Jamali al-Afdal Shahanshah Kutayfat Hasan ibn al-Hafiz Bahram al-Armani Ridwan ibn Walakhshi al-Ma'mun al-Bata'ihi al-Adil ibn al-Sallar Abbas ibn Abi al-Futuh Tala'i ibn Ruzzik Ruzzik ibn Tala'i Shawar Dirgham Shirkuh Saladin Vassal dynasties Kalbids ( Sicily ) Zirids and Hammadids ( Ifriqiya ) Sharifs of Mecca Sharifs of Medina Jarrahids ( Palestine ) Mirdasids ( Aleppo ) Sulayhids , Hamdanids , and Zurayids ( Yemen ) Banu Kanz ( Nubia ) Lodi ( Multan ) Officials , governors and generals Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Baghdadi Khalil ibn Ishaq al-Tamimi Jawhar Bakjur Manjutakin Anushtakin al-Dizbari al-Basasiri Qadi al-Fadil Military Fatimid army Kutama Ghilman Fatimid navy Economy Coinage Isma'ilism Doctrines Imamate Hujja Esotericism Batin and Zahir Branches and offshoots Qarmatians Druze Hamza ibn Ali Nizari Assassins Musta'li Tayyibi Hafizi Missionaries and theologians Hamdan Qarmat Ibn Hawshab Ali ibn al-Fadl al-Jayshani Abu Abdallah al-Shi'i Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Nasafi Abu Hatim al-Razi Abu Tammam Ja'far ibn Mansur al-Yaman al-Qadi al-Nu'man Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Naysaburi Abu'l-Fawaris Ahmad ibn Ya'qub Abdallah al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani Anti-Fatimid movement Akhu Muhsin Baghdad Manifesto Culture Art and architecture Mahdiya Great Mosque of Mahdiya Skifa Kahla Mansuriya Cairo Al-Hakim Mosque Aqmar Mosque Bab al-Futuh Bab al-Nasr Bab Zuweila Fatimid Great Palaces Juyushi Mosque Mashhad of Sayyida Ruqayya Portable mihrab Al-Salih Tala'i Mosque Minbar of the Ibrahimi Mosque Shrine of Husayn's Head Literature and learning Ali ibn Muhammad al-Iyadi al-Qadi al-Nu'man Muhammad ibn Hani al-Andalusi al-Azdi al-Musabbihi al-Azhar University House of Knowledge Media v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Sweden Israel People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abu_Ya%27qub_al-Sijistani&oldid=1288809451 " Categories : 10th-century executions 10th-century Iranian philosophers 10th-century Ismailis Neoplatonists Iranian Ismailis Executed Iranian people Ismaili theologians Ismaili da'is Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing French-language text CS1: long volume value Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 21:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 8 languages Add topic

