Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary 2 Reception 3 See also 4 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 4.1 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents The Dialectic of Sex 12 languages বাংলা Español Français Galego 한국어 עברית Português Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1970 book by Shulamith Firestone The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution Cover of the first edition, with a portrait of an anonymous woman by Edgar Degas Author Shulamith Firestone Language English Subject Radical feminism Publisher William Morrow and Company Publication date October 1970 [ 1 ] Publication place United States Media type Print (hardcover and paperback) Pages 216 ISBN 978-1784780524 OCLC 98546 Text The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution at Internet Archive The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution is a 1970 book by the radical feminist activist Shulamith Firestone . Written over a few months when Firestone was 25, it has been described as a classic of feminist thought.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Firestone argues that the "sexual class system" [ 3 ] predates and runs deeper than any other form of oppression, and that the eradication of sexism will require a radical reordering of society: "The first women are fleeing the massacre, and, shaking and tottering, are beginning to find each other. ... This is painful: no matter how many levels of consciousness one reaches, the problem always goes deeper. It is everywhere. ... feminists have to question, not just all of Western culture, but the organization of culture itself, and further, even the very organization of nature." [ 4 ] The goal of the feminist revolution, she wrote, must be "not just the elimination of male privilege but of the sex distinction itself" so that genital differences no longer have cultural significance.

[ 5 ] Summary [ edit ] In The Dialectic of Sex , Firestone argues that the biological division of humans based on reproductive roles is the root of women's subordination, perpetuating a patriarchal system most evident in the nuclear family . She envisions a future where artificial wombs liberate women from childbearing, rendering pregnancy obsolete. In this cybernetic communist utopia , all labor, not just reproductive, would be automated, eradicating the basis of traditional oppression.

[ 6 ] Reception [ edit ] The Dialectic of Sex is a feminist classic.

Mary Anne Warren described it in 1980 as "the clearest and boldest presentation thus far of the radical feminist position".

[ 7 ] In 1998 Arthur Marwick ranked it as one of radical feminism's two key texts, along with Kate Millett 's Sexual Politics (1969).

[ 8 ] Writing in The Cambridge Companion to Marx (1991), Jeff Hearn described Firestone's approach as having lasting significance in reviving interest in sexuality and reproduction as the basis of patriarchy .

[ 9 ] Writing in The Evolution of Human Sexuality (1979), the anthropologist Donald Symons attributed to Firestone the view that, although the sexes are identical at birth, men are emotionally crippled by early experiences that women escape, and that men, unlike women, are therefore unable to love. Symons contrasted Firestone's views with his own view that "selection has produced marked sex differences in sexuality" and that neither sex is a defective version of the other.

[ 10 ] In her introduction to the 1998 edition of the book, Rosalind Delmar argued that Firestone's "counter-explanation of problems observed by Freud relies too heavily on recourse to rationalizations", and neglect the inner world of fantasy. In Delmar's view, the result of Firestone's discussion of Freud is that "Freud is not so much refuted or rescued from his mistakes as ignored." [ 11 ] Mary O'Brien, in her The Politics of Reproduction (1981), criticized Firestone's work for reductionism, biologism, historical inaccuracy, and general crudity.

[ 9 ] In an interview with Anne-Marie Cusac in The Progressive , gay rights activist Urvashi Vaid identified The Dialectic of Sex as an influence on her work Virtual Equality (1995).

[ 12 ] According to Firestone, Valerie Solanas , author of the SCUM Manifesto , told her that she disliked The Dialectic of Sex .

[ 13 ] Juliet Mitchell argued that Firestone misreads Freud, and misunderstands the implications of psychoanalytic theory for feminism. She noted that while Firestone, like Simone de Beauvoir , attributes the term "Electra complex" to Freud, it was actually coined by Carl Jung . Mitchell suggested that for Firestone, the only kind of reality is social actuality (the generic experience or accidental experience of the individual), and that in this respect Firestone's work closely resembles that of Wilhelm Reich . In Mitchell's view, Firestone's interpretation of Freud reduces his psychological constructs to the social realities from which they were reduced, thereby equating the Oedipus complex with the nuclear family. Firestone thus interprets Freudian "metaphors" such as the Oedipus complex in terms of power relations within the family, an approach Mitchell considered mistaken.

[ 14 ] The American journalist Susan Faludi wrote in 2013 that, although criticized for their radicalism, the basic tenets of The Dialectic of Sex have been of lasting significance. Firestone imagined reproduction outside the womb, and children being raised by collectives and granted the right to leave abusive situations. "Predictably," Faludi wrote, "the proposal[s] stimulated more outrage than fresh thought, though many of Firestone's ideas—children's rights, an end to 'male' work and traditional marriage, and social relations altered through a 'cybernetic' computer revolution—have proved prescient." [ 1 ] Antonella Gambotto-Burke described Sophie Lewis ' 2022 book Abolish the Family as a rightful heir to The Dialectic of Sex , which in turn she described as "a book whose flagrant idiocy can be forgiven on twin grounds: the author's mental fragility and youth ... and the era's rudimentary understanding of developmental neuroscience ".

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Postgenderism Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Faludi 2013 .

^ Warren 1980 , pp. 155–157.

^ Firestone 1970 , p. 29.

^ Firestone 1970 , pp. 3–4.

^ Firestone 1970 , p. 11.

^ Maglaque, Erin (October 21, 2020).

"The radical legacy of Shulamith Firestone" .

New Statesman . Retrieved December 10, 2024 .

^ Warren 1980 , p. 155.

^ Marwick 1998 , p. 687.

^ a b Hearn 1999 , p. 241.

^ Symons 1979 , p. 4.

^ Delmar 1979 , p. 9.

^ Cusac 1996 , p. 34.

^ Firestone 1998 , pp. 130–131.

^ Mitchell 2000 , pp. 346–350.

^ Gambotto-Burke 2023 .

Sources [ edit ] Cusac, Anne-Marie (1996). "Urvashi Vaid".

The Progressive .

60 (3).

Delmar, Rosalind (1979). "Introduction". In Firestone, Shulamith (ed.).

The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution . London: The Women's Press.

ISBN 0-7043-3849-1 .

Faludi, Susan (April 15, 2013).

"Death of a Revolutionary" .

The New Yorker .

Firestone, Shulamith (2003) [1970].

The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution . Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

ISBN 978-0-374-52787-7 .

Firestone, Shulamith (1998).

Airless Spaces . Semiotext(e).

ISBN 1-57027-082-1 .

Gambotto-Burke, Antonella (April 8, 2023).

"Should we abolish the family?" . Review.

The Australian . p. 20.

Hearn, Jeff (1999).

Carver, Terrell (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to Marx . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-36694-1 .

Marwick, Arthur (1998).

The Sixties: Cultural Revolution in Britain, France, Italy, and the United States, c. 1958–c.1974 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-210022-X .

Mitchell, Juliet (2000).

Psychoanalysis and Feminism: A Radical Reassessment of Freudian Psychoanalysis . Penguin Books.

ISBN 0-14-027953-9 .

Symons, Donald (1979).

The Evolution of Human Sexuality . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19502535-0 .

Warren, Mary Anne (1980).

The Nature of Woman: An Encyclopedia & Guide to the Literature . Edgepress.

ISBN 0-918528-07-0 .

External links [ edit ] The Dialectic of Sex at Internet Archive v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index v t e Radical feminism People Wim Hora Adema Chude Pam Allen Ti-Grace Atkinson Kathleen Barry Rosalyn Baxandall Linda Bellos Julie Bindel Jenny Brown Judith Brown Susan Brownmiller Phyllis Chesler D. A. Clarke Nikki Craft Kimberlé Crenshaw Mary Daly Christine Delphy Gail Dines Andrea Dworkin Melissa Farley Shulamith Firestone Marilyn French Marilyn Frye Germaine Greer Carol Hanisch Merle Hoffman bell hooks Sheila Jeffreys Robert Jensen Lierre Keith Anne Koedt Marjorie Kramer Holly Lawford-Smith Audre Lorde Catharine A. MacKinnon Sheila Michaels Kate Millett Robin Morgan Meghan Murphy Irene Peslikis Janice Raymond Rosetta Reitz Adrienne Rich Florence Rush Kathie Sarachild Alix Kates Shulman Valerie Solanas Gloria Steinem John Stoltenberg Michele Wallace Marilyn Salzman Webb Ellen Willis Harriet Wistrich Monique Wittig Laura X Groups Cell 16 Chicago Women's Liberation Union Coalition Against Trafficking in Women Deep Green Resistance Lesbian Organization of Toronto Michigan Womyn's Music Festival Mountain Moving Coffeehouse New York Radical Feminists New York Radical Women Redstockings Stop Porn Culture The Feminists The Furies Collective WOMAD Women Against Pornography Women's Liberation Center Women's Liberation Front (WoLF) Issues 4 NOs Child sexual abuse False consciousness Feminism Lesbian Second wave Feminist separatism Feminist views on transgender topics Gender role Male privilege Patriarchy Political lesbianism Pornography Feminist views on pornography Postgenderism Prostitution Feminist views Reproductive rights Sexism Misogyny Internalized sexism Social construction of gender Violence against women Media Books The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution ( 1970) Sexual Politics (1970) Sisterhood Is Powerful (1970) " The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm " (1970) The Female Eunuch (1970) Lesbian Nation (1973) Woman Hating (1974) Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape (1974) Pornography: Men Possessing Women (1981) Ain't I a Woman?

(1981) Against Sadomasochism (1982) Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (1984) Sisterhood Is Global (1984) Intercourse (1987) Feminism Unmodified (1987) Toward a Feminist Theory of the State (1989) The Straight Mind and Other Essays (1992) Only Words (1993) Scapegoat: The Jews, Israel, and Women's Liberation (2000) Sisterhood Is Forever (2003) The Industrial Vagina (2008) Other Off Our Backs (1970–2008) SCUM Manifesto (1967) She's Beautiful When She's Angry (2014) Other Consciousness raising Herstory Miss America protest (1968) Radical lesbianism Womyn's land Feminism portal Portals : Books Feminism Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Dialectic_of_Sex&oldid=1269732616 " Categories : 1970 non-fiction books American non-fiction books Books by Shulamith Firestone Debut books Dialectical materialism English-language non-fiction books Feminism and psychoanalysis Marxist feminism Radical feminist books Socialist feminism William Morrow and Company books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from February 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from February 2022 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 16 January 2025, at 02:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Dialectic of Sex 12 languages Add topic

