Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Turkey Toggle Turkey subsection 1.1 Armenian genocide and its denial 1.1.1 Contemporary 2 Azerbaijan Toggle Azerbaijan subsection 2.1 Status of Armenian cultural monuments 2.2 Ongoing genocide risk 3 Russia 4 Georgia 5 United States Toggle United States subsection 5.1 Early 20th century 5.2 Since the 1990s 6 Israel 7 Daesh 8 Others Toggle Others subsection 8.1 Pakistan 8.2 Tajikistan 8.3 Ukraine 8.4 East Turkestan 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Anti-Armenian sentiment 17 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Հայերեն עברית ქართული Македонски Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Simple English Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Strong aversion and prejudice against Armenians This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( February 2022 ) Sketch by an eyewitness of the massacre of Armenians in Sasun in 1894 Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-Armenian sentiment , also known as anti-Armenianism and Armenophobia , is a diverse spectrum of negative feelings, dislikes, fears, aversion, racism , derision and/or prejudice towards Armenians , Armenia , and Armenian culture .

Historically, anti-Armenianism has manifested itself in several ways, ranging from expressions of hatred or of discrimination against individual Armenians to organized pogroms by mobs or state-sanctioned genocide . Notable instances of persecution include the Hamidean massacres (1894–1897), the Adana massacre (1909), the Armenian genocide (1915), the Sumgait pogrom (1988), and Operation Ring (1991).

Modern anti-Armenianism frequently consists of expressions of opposition to the actions or existence of an Armenian state , aggressive denial of the Armenian genocide or belief in an Armenian conspiracy to fabricate history and manipulate public and political opinion for political gain.

[ 1 ] Anti-Armenianism has also manifested as extrajudicial killing or intimidation of people of Armenian heritage and destruction of cultural monuments.

Turkey [ edit ] Of this photo, the United States ambassador wrote, "Scenes like this were common throughout the Armenian provinces, in the spring and summer months of 1915. Death in its several forms—massacre, starvation , exhaustion —destroyed the larger part of the refugees . The Turkish policy was that of extermination under the guise of deportation ." Main articles: Anti-Armenian sentiment in Turkey , Armenian genocide recognition § Position of Turkey , and Armenia–Turkey relations Armenian genocide and its denial [ edit ] Main article: Armenian genocide denial See also: List of massacres in Turkey Although it was possible for Armenians to achieve status and wealth in the Ottoman Empire , as a community they were never accorded more than "second-class citizen" status and were regarded as fundamentally alien to the Muslim character of Ottoman society.

[ 2 ] In 1895, revolts among the Armenian subjects of the Ottoman Empire in pursuit of equal treatment led to Sultan Abdül Hamid 's decision to massacre tens of thousands of Armenians in the Hamidian massacres .

[ 3 ] During World War I , the Ottoman government massacred between 1.2 and 1.8 million Armenians in the Armenian genocide .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The Turkish government continues to aggressively deny the Armenian genocide. This position has been criticized in a letter from the International Association of Genocide Scholars to – then Turkish Prime Minister , now President – Recep Tayyip Erdoğan .

[ 8 ] Contemporary [ edit ] Cenk Saraçoğlu argues that anti-Armenian attitudes in Turkey "are no longer constructed and shaped by social interactions between the 'ordinary people' ... Rather, the Turkish media and state promote and disseminate an overtly anti-Armenian discourse." [ 9 ] According to a 2011 survey in Turkey, 73.9% of respondents admitted having unfavorable views toward Armenians. The survey showed an unfavorable stance toward Armenians was "relatively more widespread among those participants with lower levels of education and socioeconomic status." [ 10 ] According to Minority Rights Group , while the government recognizes Armenians as a minority group, as used in Turkey this term denotes second-class status.

[ 11 ] The new generations are being taught to see Armenians not as human, but [as] an entity to be despised and destroyed, the worst enemy. And the school curriculum adds fuel to the existing fires.

- Turkish lawyer Fethiye Çetin [ 12 ] Shortly after Hrant Dink was murdered, the assassin was honored as a hero while in police custody, posing with a Turkish flag with policemen.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Hrant Dink , the editor of the weekly bilingual newspaper Agos , was assassinated in Istanbul on January 19, 2007, by Ogün Samast, who was reportedly acting on the orders of Yasin Hayal , a militant Turkish ultra-nationalist.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] For his statements on Armenian identity and the Armenian genocide, Dink had been prosecuted three times under Article 301 of the Turkish Penal Code for "insulting Turkishness".

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] (The law was later amended by the Turkish parliament , changing "Turkishness" to "Turkish Nation" and making it more difficult to prosecute individuals for the said offense.

[ 19 ] ) Dink had also received numerous death threats from Turkish nationalists who viewed his "iconoclastic" journalism (particularly regarding the Armenian genocide) as an act of treachery.

[ 20 ] İbrahim Şahin and 36 other alleged members of the Turkish ultra-nationalist Ergenekon group were arrested in January 2009 in Ankara . The Turkish police said the roundup was triggered by orders Şahin gave to assassinate 12 Armenian community leaders in Sivas .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] According to the official investigation in Turkey, Ergenekon also had a role in the murder of Hrant Dink.

[ 23 ] In 2002, a monument was erected in memory of Turkish-Armenian composer Onno Tunç in Yalova , Turkey.

[ 24 ] The monument to the composer of Armenian origin was subjected to much vandalism over the course of the years, in which unidentified people had taken out the letters on the monument. In 2012, Yalova Municipal Assembly decided to remove the monument. Bilgin Koçal, the former mayor of Yalova, informed the public that the memorial had been destroyed by time and that it would shortly be replaced with a new one in the memory of Tunç.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] On the other hand, a similar memorial stays in place at the village of Selimiye , where an aircraft had crashed; and the people in the village of 187 expressed their protest about the vandalism claims regarding the memorial in Yalova, adding that they paid from their own funds to keep up the maintenance of the monument in their village against the wearing effect of natural causes.

[ 28 ] Accounts of hate speech towards targeted groups in Turkish news outlets with Armenians shown as being targeted the most according to a January–April 2014 Media Watch on Hate Speech and Discriminatory Language Report [ 29 ] Sevag Balikci , a Turkish soldier of Armenian descent, was shot dead on April 24, 2011, the day of the commemoration of the Armenian genocide during his military service in Batman .

[ 30 ] It was later discovered that killer Kıvanç Ağaoğlu was an ultra-nationalist.

[ 31 ] Through his Facebook profile, it was uncovered that he was a sympathizer of nationalist politician Muhsin Yazıcıoğlu and Turkish agent / contract killer Abdullah Çatlı , who himself had a history of anti-Armenian activity, such as the Armenian Genocide Memorial bombing in a Paris suburb in 1984.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] His Facebook profile also showed that he was a Great Union Party (BBP) sympathizer, a far-right nationalist party in Turkey.

[ 32 ] Testimony given by Sevag Balıkçı's fiancée stated that he was subjected to psychological pressure at the military compound.

[ 35 ] She was told by Sevag over the phone that he feared for his life because a certain military serviceman threatened him by saying, "If war were to happen with Armenia, you would be the first person I would kill." [ 35 ] [ 36 ] On February 26, 2012, on the anniversary of the Khojaly Massacre , the Atsız Youth led a demonstration in Istanbul which contained hate speech and threats towards Armenia and Armenians .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Chants and slogans during the demonstration include: "You are all Armenian, you are all bastards", "bastards of Hrant [Dink] can not scare us", and " Taksim Square today, Yerevan Tomorrow: We will descend upon you suddenly in the night." [ 37 ] [ 38 ] In 2012, the ultra-nationalist ASIM-DER group (founded in 2002) had targeted Armenian schools, churches, foundations and individuals in Turkey as part of an anti-Armenian hate campaign.

[ 41 ] Azerbaijan [ edit ] Main articles: Anti-Armenian sentiment in Azerbaijan and Armenia–Azerbaijan relations Helmets of deceased Armenian troops, wax mannequins of captured Armenian soldiers of the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War showcased at Baku military park in Azerbaijan . President Ilham Aliyev shown in the first image during a visit to the park.

Anti-Armenian sentiment exists in Azerbaijan on institutional [ 42 ] and social [ 43 ] levels. An ECRI report found that Armenians are the most vulnerable group in Azerbaijan due to racism and racial discrimination, adding that they are sometimes described as "second-class citizens." [ 44 ] Throughout the 20th century, Armenian and the Turkish-speaking Muslim (Shia and Sunni; then known as "Caucasian Tatars" , later as Azerbaijanis ) [ a ] inhabitants of Transcaucasia have been involved in numerous conflicts.

[ 46 ] From 1918 to 1920, organized killings of Armenians occurred in Azerbaijan, especially in the Armenian cultural centers in Baku and Shusha .

[ 47 ] Contemporary Armenophobia in Azerbaijan traces its roots to the last years of the Soviet Union , when Armenians demanded that Soviet authorities transfer the mostly Armenian-populated Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast (NKAO) in the Azerbaijan SSR to the Armenian SSR .

[ 48 ] In response, Azeri nationalists carried out pogroms against Armenians in Sumgait , Kirovabad and Baku . From 1988 through 1990, an estimated 300,000-350,000 Armenians either fled under threat of violence or were deported from Azerbaijan, and roughly 167,000 Azeris were forced to flee Armenia, often under violent circumstances.

[ 49 ] The rising tensions between the two nations eventually escalated into two wars in and around Nagorno-Karabakh .

[ 48 ] [ 50 ] In a November 2020 alert, Genocide Watch reported that Armenians in Azerbaijan are dehumanized, being called “terrorists”, “bandits," "infidels," " leftovers of the sword " (a referral to the 1915 genocide [ 51 ] ).

[ 52 ] The Azerbaijani government has executed anti-Armenian policies inside and outside the country, which includes propaganda of hate toward Armenia and Armenians and the destruction of Armenian cultural heritage .

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] According to Fyodor Lukyanov [ ru ] , editor-in-chief of the journal Russia in Global Affairs , "Armenophobia is the institutional part of the modern Azerbaijani statehood and Karabakh is in the center of it".

[ 56 ] Both the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance and the UN Committee Against Torture have expressed concern that discriminatory statements by Azerbaijani officials, foster an environment that heightens the risk of violence against individuals of Armenian national or ethnic origin, [ 57 ] [ 58 ] After reviewing incidents of hate crimes and discrimination, the UN CAT stated that it regrets that "incitement to violence" was not criminally defined by the committee’s jurisdiction.

[ 58 ] According to historian Jeremy Smith , "National identity in post-Soviet Azerbaijan rests in large part, then, on the cult of the Alievs, alongside a sense of embattlement and victimisation and a virulent hatred of Armenia and Armenians ".

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] In the European Parliament's resolution of 10 March 2022 condemning the destruction of the Armenian heritage in Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabakh), [ 61 ] the parliament stated: European Parliament ... Acknowledges that the erasure of the Armenian cultural heritage is part of a wider pattern of a systematic, state-level policy of Armenophobia, historical revisionism and hatred towards Armenians promoted by the Azerbaijani authorities, including dehumanisation, the glorification of violence and territorial claims against the Republic of Armenia”.

[ 62 ] In March 2023, the European Parliament issued another resolution which condemned Azerbaijan's attacks on Armenia and called for Azerbaijan to lift its blockade of Artsakh .

[ 63 ] In response, Azerbaijani President Aliyev described the resolution as "beyond doubt...originat[ing] from Armenia and the Armenian Diaspora, long since a cancerous tumour of Europe." [ 64 ] Anti-Armenian hate crimes committed by Azerbaijanis have also occurred internationally beyond the country of Azerbaijan. In 2004, Ramil Safarov decapitated an Armenian while he was sleeping in Hungary .

Status of Armenian cultural monuments [ edit ] See also: Khachkar destruction in Nakhchivan In November 2020, newspaper The Guardian wrote about Azerbaijan's campaign of comprehensive "cultural cleansing" in Nakhichevan: Satellite imagery, extensive documentary evidence and personal accounts showed that 89 churches, 5,840 khachkars and 22,000 tombstones were destroyed between 1997 and 2006, including the medieval necropolis of Djulfa, the largest ancient Armenian cemetery in the world. The Azerbaijani response has consistently been to simply deny that Armenians had ever lived in the region.

[ 65 ] The most publicized case of mass destruction concerns gravestones at a medieval Armenian cemetery in Julfa , a sacred site of the Armenian Apostolic Church.

Charles Tannock , the member of the foreign affairs committee of the European Parliament , argued: "This is very similar to the Buddha statues destroyed by the Taliban. They have concreted the area over and turned it into a military camp." [ 66 ] The destruction of the cemetery has been widely described by Armenian sources, and some non-Armenian sources, as an act of cultural genocide .

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] European Parliament published a resolution on 10 March 2022, condemning the destruction of the Armenian heritage in Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabakh).

[ 61 ] The resolution read: European Parliament ... Strongly condemns Azerbaijan's continued policy of erasing and denying the Armenian cultural heritage in and around Nagorno-Karabakh, in violation of international law and the recent decision of the ICJ...

[ 62 ] Ongoing genocide risk [ edit ] Since 2020, Azerbaijan has attacked Armenian positions in Nagorno-Karabakh ( Second Nagorno-Karabakh War ), Armenia ( border crisis ), and has also blockaded the Republic of Artsakh . These events have resulted in numerous organizations, including those which specialize in genocide studies , reporting that Armenians are at risk of being subjected to another genocide.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] The Lemkin Institute for Genocide Prevention considers Armenians to be "one of the most threatened identities in the world today." [ 74 ] Sheila Paylan, international criminal lawyer and legal advisor to the United Nations has warned that  "The international community should take its R2P [Responsibility to Protect] commitments more seriously or risk becoming silently complicit in the next Armenian genocide—or ethnic cleansing." [ 75 ] Caucasus expert Laurence Broers draws parallels between "the Russian discourse about Ukraine as an artificial, fake nation, and the Azerbaijani discourse about Armenia, likewise claiming it has a fake history", thereby elevating the conflict to an "existential level" for Armenians.

[ 76 ] A coalition of various human rights organizations also issued a collective genocide warning in response to the blockade: "All 14 risk factors for atrocity crimes identified by the UN Secretary-General's Office on Genocide Prevention are now present." [ 73 ] The Lemkin Institute for Genocide Prevention – Since 2021, the organization has issued various "Red Flag Alerts" on Azerbaijan which the organization says poses a threat of genocide to Armenians.

[ 77 ] It described the Azerbaijan's blockade of the Republic of Artsakh as "a criminal act which intends to create terror and unbearable conditions of life for the population of Artsakh. These events are not isolated events; they are, instead, being committed within a larger genocidal pattern against Armenia and Armenians by the Azerbaijani regime." [ 78 ] The group also wrote "The genocidal intent of Baku has never been clearer and the actions carried out up to the moment highly predict this outcome." [ 79 ] Genocide Watch – issued its own genocide warnings in September 2020 saying that "Because of Azerbaijan’s invasion of Artsakh...Genocide Watch considers Azerbaijan to be at Stage 9: Extermination and at Stage 10: Denial. Genocide Watch considers that Azerbaijan's leadership may intend to forcibly deport the Armenian population of Artsakh by committing genocidal massacres that will terrorize Armenians into leaving Artsakh." [ 80 ] In September 2022, Genocide Watch issued another alert stating, "Due to its unprovoked attacks and genocidal rhetoric against ethnic Armenians, Genocide Watch considers Azerbaijan's assault on Armenia and Artsakh to be at Stage 4: Dehumanization, Stage 7: Preparation, Stage 8: Persecution, and Stage 10: Denial." [ 72 ] The group wrote a letter to the EU council, warning that the European Union "is turning a blind eye to the Azerbaijani dictatorship for geopolitical and resource reasons" and that Azerbaijan's "intentions are clear: to wipe out all traces of Armenian life and of an Armenian presence in this region. Azerbaijani President, Ilham Aliyev, has consistently and repeatedly stated that he intends to eradicate the indigenous Armenians dwelling in Artsakh." [ 81 ] [ 82 ] The International Association of Genocide Scholars (IAGS) – issued similar statements in October 2020: "Direct Turkish involvement in the decades-long [Nagorno-Karabakh] conflict is ... a fact that threatens to annihilate Armenians in Artsakh and beyond. A recent statement issued by the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, read that they, Turkey, were going 'to continue to fulfill the mission of their grandfathers, which was carried out a century ago in the Caucasus'. This constitutes a direct threat of continuing the Armenian genocide that began in 1915...History, from the Armenian genocide to the last three decades of conflict, as well as current political statements, economic policies, sentiments of the societies and military actions by the Azerbaijani and Turkish leadership should warn us that genocide of the Armenians in Nagorno-Karabakh, and perhaps even Armenia, is a very real possibility." [ 83 ] In October 2022, the IAGS issued another statement condemning Azerbaijan's September 2022 attacks on the Republic of Armenia : "Significant genocide risk factors exist in the Nagorno-Karabakh situation concerning the Armenian population" and "dehumanizing and other [irredentist] statements [from Azerbaijani government officials] demonstrate the existence of a risk of genocide, and may amount to incitement to genocide and possibly other international crimes." [ 70 ] Russia [ edit ] See also: Racism in Russia and Armenia-Russia relations This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( March 2024 ) A 19th-century Russian explorer, Vasili Lvovich Velichko , who was active during the period when the Russian tzarism carried out a purposeful anti-Armenian policy, [ 84 ] wrote "Armenians are the extreme instance of brachycephaly ; their actual racial instinct make them naturally hostile to the State." [ 85 ] According to a 2012 VTSIOM opinion research, 6% of respondents in Moscow and 3% in Saint Petersburg were "experiencing feelings of irritation, hostility" toward Armenians.

[ 86 ] In the 2000s there have been racist murders of Armenians in Russia.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] In 2002 an explosion took place in Krasnodar near the Armenian church which the local community believed was a terrorist act.

[ 90 ] Georgia [ edit ] Unrooted Armenian gravestones in a church yard in Velistsikhe , Kakheti, Georgia In the late 19th century and early 20th century, anti-Armenian sentiment was prevalent in both socialist and nationalist Georgian circles. The economic dominance of Armenians in Tbilisi fueled verbal attacks on Armenians.

Droeba , an influential journal, described Armenians as people who "strip our streets and fatten their pockets" and "but the last piece of property from our indebted peasant families." Both Ilia Chavchavadze and Akaki Tsereteli , two major literary figures, attacked Armenians for their perceived mercantilism. Tsereteli portrayed Armenians as a flea sucking Georgian blood in one fable. Chavchavadze denounced Armenians for "eating the bread baked by someone else or drinking that which is creating by another's sweat." Chavchavadze's newspaper, Iveria , depicted Armenians as "sly moneylenders and unscrupulous traders", according to Stephen F. Jones . The Social Democratic Party of Georgia (Georgian Mensheviks) attacked the bourgeoisie and imperialism to liberate Georgia from both Russian imperialism and perceived Armenian economic exploitation. During the existence of the Democratic Republic of Georgia (1918–21), the independent Georgian government saw Armenians as a potential " fifth column " for their supposed loyalty to the First Republic of Armenia and subject to manipulation by foreign powers. The Georgian–Armenian War of December 1918 increased anti-Armenian sentiments in Georgia.

Joseph Stalin wrote in his 1913 essay Marxism and the National Question : [ 91 ] [ 92 ] What exists in Georgia is anti-Armenian nationalism but this is because there is an Armenian big bourgeoisie which, by crushing the small and as yet weak Georgian bourgeoisie, thrusts the latter towards anti-Armenian nationalism.

In post-Soviet Georgia, the government has engaged in cultural cleansing against its Armenian population through state-backed closure of Armenian cultural centers and schools, enforced Kartvelization (forced usage of the Georgian language) of churches, pressured name changes, propaganda portraying Armenians as outsiders, and economic suppression of Armenian-populated regions.

[ 93 ] The first president Zviad Gamsakhurdia , an outspoken nationalist, viewed Armenians, along with other ethnic minorities, as "guests" or "aliens" who threaten Georgia's territorial integrity.

[ 94 ] Around the time of the 2007 parliamentary elections in the breakaway region of Abkhazia, the Georgian media emphasized the factor of ethnic Armenians in the area.

[ 95 ] The Georgian newspaper Sakartvelos Respublika predicted that much of the parliament would be Armenian and that there was even a chance of an Armenian president being elected.

[ 96 ] The paper also reported that the Abkhazian republic might already be receiving financial assistance from Armenians living in the United States .

[ 96 ] Some Armenian analysts believe such reports are attempting to create conflict between Armenians and ethnic Abkhazians to destabilize the region.

[ 96 ] A policy of desecration of Armenian churches and historical monuments on the territory of Georgia has actively been pursued.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] On November 16, 2008, Georgian monk Tariel Sikinchelashvili vandalised the graves of patrons of art Mikhail and Lidia Tamamshev .

[ 98 ] The Armenian Church of Norashen in Tbilisi , built in the middle of the 15th century, [ 97 ] has been desecrated and misappropriated by the Georgian government despite the fact that both Armenia's and Georgia's Prime-Ministers have reached an agreement on not to maltreat the church.

[ 98 ] Due to no law on religion, the status of Surb Norashen, Surb Nshan, Shamhoretsor Surb Astvatsatsin (Karmir Avetaran), Yerevanots Surb Minas and Mugni Surb Gevorg in Tbilisi and Surb Nshan in Akhaltsikhe is unknown since being confiscated during the Soviet era.

[ 100 ] Armenians in Georgia and Armenia have demonstrated against the destruction. On November 28, 2008, Armenian demonstrators in front of the Georgian embassy in Armenia demanded that the Georgian government immediately cease encroachments on the Armenian churches and punish those guilty, calling the Georgian party's actions " white genocide ".

[ 101 ] In August, 2011, Georgia's Culture Minister Nika Rurua sacked director Robert Sturua as head of the Tbilisi national theatre for "xenophobic" comments he made earlier this year, officials reported. "We are not going to finance xenophobia . Georgia is a multicultural country", Rurua said.

[ 102 ] Provoking public outrage, Sturua said in an interview with local news agency that " Saakashvili doesn't know what Georgian people need because he is Armenian." "I do not want Georgia to be governed by a representative of a different ethnicity", he added.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] In July 2014, the Armenian Ejmiatsin Church in Tbilisi was attacked. The Armenian diocese said it was "a crime committed on ethnic and religious grounds." [ 104 ] In 2018, the Tandoyants Armenian church in Tbilisi was gifted to the Georgian Orthodox Patriarchate. The Diocese of the Armenian Apostolic Holy Orthodox Church in Georgia stated that the church was "illegally transferred" to the Georgian Patriarchate. According to the Human Rights Education and Monitoring Center, Tandoyants is not the only historic Armenian church the Georgian Patriarchate has targeted. There are at least six others the Patriarchate has its sights set on.

[ 105 ] United States [ edit ] See also: Armenian genocide recognition § Position of the United States , Armenia-United States relations , and United States recognition of the Armenian genocide Early 20th century [ edit ] There has been historic prejudice against Armenians in the United States throughout various times, at least beginning from the early 1900s.

In early 1900s, Armenians were among the group of minorities who were barred from loaning money, land, and equipment particularly because of their race. They were referred to as "lower class Jews". Moreover, in Fresno, California, among other minorities Armenians lived on one side of Van Ness Blvd., while the residents of European white origin lived on the other side. A deed from one home there stated, "Neither said premises nor any part thereof shall be used in any matter whatsoever or occupied by any Black, Chinese, Japanese, Hindu, Armenian, Asiatic or native of the Turkish Empire." [ 106 ] Between the 1920s and the 1960s, some houses in the Rock Creek Hills neighborhood of Kensington, Maryland , a suburb of Washington, D.C., included anti-Armenian language in racial covenants that were part of property deeds. One deed in Rock Creek Hills declared that homes in the neighborhood "shall never be used or occupied by...negroes or any person or persons, of negro blood or extraction, or to any person of the Semitic Race, blood or origin, or Jews, Armenians, Hebrews, Persians and Syrians, except...partial occupancy of the premises by domestic servants." [ 107 ] In Anny Bakalian's book Armenian-Americans: From Being to Feeling Armenian , various groups of Armenians were polled for discrimination based on their identity. Roughly 77% of US-born Armenians felt they were discriminated in getting a job while 80% responded positively to a question whether they felt discriminated in getting admitted to a school.

[ 108 ] American historian Justin McCarthy is known for his controversial view that no genocide was intended by the Ottoman Empire but that both Armenians and Turks died as the result of civil war. Some attribute his denial of the Armenian genocide [ 109 ] to anti-Armenianism, as he holds an honorary doctorate of the Turkish Boğaziçi University and he is also a board member of the Institute of Turkish Studies .

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] Since the 1990s [ edit ] On April 24, 1998, during a campus exhibit organized by the Armenian Students' Association at UC Berkeley, Hamid Algar , a professor of Islamic & Persian Studies, reportedly approached a group of organizers and shouted, "It was not a genocide but I wish it was—you lying pigs!" The students also claimed that Algar also spat at them. Following the incident members of the Armenian Students' Association filed a report with campus police calling for an investigation.

[ 112 ] After a five-month investigation the Chancellor's office issued an apology, though no hate charges were filed as incident did not create a "hostile environment".

[ 113 ] On March 10, 1999, the Associated Students of University of California (ASUC) passed a resolution titled,  "A Bill Against Hate Speech and in Support of Reprimand for Prof. Algar", condemning the incident and calling for Chancellor to review the university decision not to file charges.

[ 113 ] In 1999, after Rafi Manoukian got elected to Glendale City Council, one resident attended the council's meetings every week to "tell Armenians to go back where they came from." Manoukian campaign had made a point to galvanize Glendale's large Armenian American electorate.

[ 114 ] In April 2007, the Los Angeles Times Managing Editor Douglas Frantz blocked a story on the Armenian genocide written by Mark Arax, allegedly citing the fact Arax was of Armenian descent and therefore had a biased opinion on the subject. Arax, who has published similar articles before, [ 115 ] has lodged a discrimination complaint and threatened a federal lawsuit. Frantz, who did not cite any specific factual errors in the article, is accused of having a bias obtained while being stationed in Istanbul , Turkey.

Harut Sassounian , an Armenian community leader, accused Frantz of having expressed support for denial of the Armenian genocide and has stated he personally believed that Armenians rebelled against the Ottoman Empire, an argument commonly used to justify the killings.

[ 115 ] Frantz resigned from the paper not long afterward, possibly due to the mounting requests for his dismissal from the Armenian community.

[ 116 ] In March 2012, three of five Glendale Police Department's officers of Armenian origin filed a lawsuit in Los Angeles County Superior Court against Glendale Police Department claiming racial discrimination.

[ 117 ] Another incident that received less coverage was a series of hate mail campaigns directed at Paul Krekorian , a city council candidate for Californian Democratic Primary, making racist remarks and accusations that the Armenian community was engaging in voter fraud .

[ 118 ] In 2016, during a race between Glendale City Clerk Ardy Kassakhian and Glendale Council Member Laura Friedman for the 43rd District Assembly seat, Kassakhian's campaign faced numerous threats and criticism based on the candidate's ethnicity. At one point in the campaign Kassakhian's office was evacuated after receiving a phone call that threatened the safety of employees and volunteers.

[ 119 ] On April 20, 2016, Armenian genocide denial propaganda appeared in the sky over the Hudson River between Manhattan and Northern New Jersey. The skywriting featured messages such as "101 years of Geno-lie", "BFF = Russia + Armenia", and " FactCheckArmenia.com ". The aerial stunt was part of a campaign by the website Fact Check Armenia, an Armenian genocide denialist site. The writing could be seen from roughly a 15-mile (24 km) radius. The media attention from the incident resulted in an official apology by the skywriting company.

[ 120 ] In the 4th episode of Season 3 of the CBS sitcom 2 Broke Girls (aired on October 14, 2013) "when a new cappuccino maker is brought into the cupcake store by a co-worker, he says he bought it for a cheap price from a person who stole it but sells it at a profit , adding 'it's the Armenian way.' When the character is pressed that he is not Armenian, he says 'I know. But, it's the Armenian way.

' " This scene was characterized as "racist" by Asbarez Editor Ara Khachatourian, who criticized CBS for promotion of racial stereotypes in their shows.

[ 121 ] In the January 9, 2018, episode of the Comedy Central late-night program The Daily Show Trevor Noah stated: "This is, like, really funny. Only Donald Trump could defend himself and, in the same sentence, completely undermine his whole point. It would be like someone saying, 'I'm the most tolerant guy out there, just ask this filthy Armenian.

' " [ 122 ] Armenian American organizations criticized Noah for alleged racism against Armenians. In a joint press release the Armenian Bar Association and the Armenian Rights Watch Committee (ARWC) compared "Filthy Armenians" to other offensive racial epithets, which although "may have been intended to coax a laugh from the audience by ridiculing President Trump's self-proclaimed genius and tolerance", constitutes "affront and slander". The organizations called for The Daily Show and Trevor Noah to issue a retraction and an apology.

[ 123 ] The Armenian National Committee of America (ANCA) also called for an apology.

[ 124 ] On October 29 and December 12, 2019, the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate officially recognized the Armenian genocide.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] In July 2020 the KZV Armenian School and its adjacent Armenian Community Center in San Francisco were vandalized overnight with threatening and racist graffiti. According to San Francisco officials, the attack claimed to support a violent, anti-Armenian movement led by Azerbaijan .

[ 127 ] The messages contained curse words and appeared to be connected to increased tensions between Azerbaijan and Armenia .

[ 128 ] The Speaker of the United States House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi noted that "The KZV Armenian School is a part of the beautiful fabric of our San Francisco family. The hateful defacing of this place of community and learning is a disgrace." San Francisco District Attorney Chesa Boudin and San Francisco Mayor London Breed also condemned the hate act.

[ 129 ] On April 24, 2021, U.S. President Joe Biden officially recognized the Armenian genocide.

[ 130 ] On September 24, 2021, the St. Peter Armenian Church in Fernando Valley, California , was vandalized. The suspect broke eight very rare stained glass windows of the church with a baseball bat. The ANCA-WR Executive Director Armen Sahakyan said “This act of vandalism is especially concerning as we recently marked one year since the Armenophobic hate crimes that took place in San Francisco .”. The Los Angeles Police Department continues its investigation on this crime.

[ 131 ] In the 2022 Los Angeles City Council scandal , Nury Martinez referred to Areen Ibranossian, an advisor to councillor Paul Krekorian , as "The guy with one eyebrow." Martinez wasn't able to recall the last name and Cedillo replied "It ends in i-a-n , I bet you." [ 132 ] Ibranossian said, "This type of depiction of Armenians is not uncommon and is too often tolerated." Growing up in Torrance, California , he was called " towel head " and " camel jockey ." [ 133 ] In 2023, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) ordered Citigroup to pay $24.5 million in fines and $1.4 million in restitution to Armenian Americans, alleging that the bank had illegally discriminated against members of the ethnic group and had unjustly denied them credit cards for which they had applied in a period beginning in 2015 and ending in 2021.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] According to the CFPB, Citigroup employees used the presence of -ian or -yan in applicant surnames as an indicator that a customer should undergo enhanced screening processes, while also deciding to avoid making mention of this screening method in emails.

[ 134 ] (The suffixes -ian and -yan are frequently found in Armenian surnames.) [ 136 ] Israel [ edit ] See also: Armenian genocide recognition § Position of Israel , Armenian–Jewish relations , and Armenia-Israel relations Israel-Armenia relations have been complicated throughout history, resulting in anti-Armenian sentiments in Israel.

The Jerusalem Post reported in 2009 that out of all Christians in Jerusalem's Old City Armenians were most often spat on by Haredi and Orthodox Jews.

[ 137 ] In 2011 several instances of spitting and verbal attacks on Armenian clergymen by Haredi Jews were reported in the Old City.

[ 138 ] In a 2013 interview Armenian Patriarch of Jerusalem Nourhan Manougian stated that Armenians in Israel are treated as "third-class citizens".

[ 139 ] In 2019, it was reported that 60 Armenian Church students attempted to lynch two Jewish men on the eve of Shavuot in Jerusalem, further increasing tensions between the religious groups.

[ 140 ] In 2023, Al Jazeera reported that anti-Christian violence, coinciding with anti-Palestinian violence, is becoming more widespread and normalized, especially by fundamentalist and right-wing Jews. Various anti-Christian laws were made, including limiting the amount of worshippers who can enter the Holy Sepulchre. 30 graves in Mount Zion were vandalized, and the Armenian quarter was spray-painted with the words "Death to Arabs, Christians and Armenians." [ 141 ] Israel has long refused to recognize the Armenian genocide , mainly to avoid harming its relations with Turkey . Former President and Prime Minister of Israel Shimon Peres referred to the history of the Armenian Genocide as "meaningless" and said that "We reject attempts to create a similarity between the Holocaust and the Armenian allegations. Nothing similar to the Holocaust occurred. It is a tragedy what the Armenians went through but not a genocide." [ 142 ] Other major figures and organizations in Israel have also propped up Turkey's genocide denial. In particular, the Turkish Israeli and Azerbaijani Israeli communities have encouraged genocide denial in Israel.

[ 143 ] The Knesset Committee on Education, Culture and Sports recognized the Armenian Genocide on August 1, 2016.

[ 144 ] When visiting the Israeli President the Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem on May 9, 2016, Reuven Rivlin concluded his speech by saying that "the Armenians were massacred in 1915. My parents remember thousands of Armenian migrants finding asylum at the Armenian Church. No one in Israel denies that an entire nation was massacred.

[ 144 ] Recognition of the Armenian Genocide in Israel remains to be an extremely contentious issue influenced heavily by Azerbaijan-Israel Relations .

[ 145 ] Israel's strategic alliance with Azerbaijan and Armenia's alliance with Iran have both resulted in hostility between the Israeli and Armenian governments and the subsequent deterioration of Armenia-Israel relations . In both the First and Second Nagorno-Karabakh Wars, Israel has supplied Azerbaijan with advanced weaponry. At a protest against Israel's arms sales to Azerbaijan, counter-protesters smashed a protester's car and blocked the road they were driving along.

[ 146 ] Many Israelis have also sympathized with Azerbaijan due to Azerbaijan's long and peaceful historical relations with Jews. Because of strong relations between Israel and Azerbaijan, pro-Israeli lobbying groups such as AIPAC have defended and lobbied for Azerbaijan against Armenia.

[ 147 ] Daesh [ edit ] Further information: Destruction of cultural heritage by the Islamic State With the breakout of the Syrian Civil War and subsequent rise of Daesh , Armenians, alongside Assyrians, Alawites and Shia Muslims, were some of the groups persecuted in areas occupied by Daesh militants. Armenian sites were targets of Daesh' infamous cultural destruction. After occupying Raqqa , Daesh fighters destroyed the Church of the Martyrs, an Armenian Catholic church.

[ 148 ] More infamously, Daesh fighters destroyed the Armenian Genocide Memorial in Deir-ez-Zor , [ 149 ] culturally significant to Armenians, as Deir-ez-Zor was the last destination before Armenians in 1915 would reach the Syrian Desert , with many dying along the way.

As Daesh began taking control of many cities, towns and villages, thousands of Christians were forced to flee, either abroad or to other, safer areas in Syria.

Others [ edit ] Pakistan [ edit ] See also: Armenia-Pakistan relations Pakistan is the only United Nations member state that has not recognized the Republic of Armenia, citing its support to Azerbaijan in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.

[ 150 ] Tajikistan [ edit ] In early 1990, 39 Armenian refugees from Azerbaijan were settled in Tajikistan. False rumors spread that allegedly up to 5,000 Armenians were being resettled in new housing in Dushanbe (which was experiencing acute housing shortage at that time). This led to riots which targeted both the Communist government and Armenians.

[ 151 ] The Soviet Ministry of Interior (MVD) suppressed the demonstrations, during which more than 20 people were killed and over 500 were injured.

[ 152 ] Ukraine [ edit ] See also: Armenia-Ukraine relations In 1944, in the town of Kuty in eastern Poland, Ukrainian nationalists from the OUN-UPA massacred (as part of the Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia ) Armenians and Poles, killing 200 people. Kuty was the largest concentration of Armenians in Poland .

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] In 2009, an ethnic conflict broke out in the city of Marhanets following the murder of a Ukrainian man by an Armenian. A fight between Ukrainians and Armenians started in the "Scorpion" café, [ citation needed ] and later turned into riots and pogroms against Armenians, [ 155 ] accompanied by the burning of houses and cars, which led to exodus of Armenians from the city.

[ 156 ] In 2023, Armenian media accused Oleksiy Danilov , the secretary of Ukraine's National Security and Defense Council , of making anti-Armenian statements.

[ 157 ] East Turkestan [ edit ] Uyghur separatist leader Isa Alptekin spouted anti-Armenian rhetoric while he was in Turkey and claimed that "our innocent Turkish Muslim brothers" were massacred by "Armenian murderers".

[ 158 ] See also [ edit ] List of anti-Armenian massacres Anti-Oriental Orthodox sentiment Anti-Assyrian sentiment Persecution of Eastern Orthodox Christians Armenian exodus from Nagorno-Karabakh Destroyed Armenian churches in Turkey Notes [ edit ] ^ The term "Tatars", employed by the Russians, referred to Turkish-speaking Muslims (Shia and Sunni ) of Transcaucasia .

[ 45 ] Unlike Armenians and Georgians , the Tatars did not have their own alphabet and used the Perso-Arabic script .

[ 45 ] After 1918 with the establishment of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic , and "especially during the Soviet era", the Tatar group identified itself as " Azerbaijani ".

[ 45 ] References [ edit ] ^ Black Garden, by Thomas De Waal (Aug 25, 2004), page 42 ^ Communal Violence: The Armenians and the Copts as Case Studies, by Margaret J. Wyszomirsky, World Politics, Vol. 27, No. 3 (Apr., 1975), p. 438 ^ Hamidian Massacres , Armenian Genocide.

^ Levon Marashlian.

Politics and Demography: Armenians, Turks, and Kurds in the Ottoman Empire .  Cambridge, MA: Zoryan Institute, 1991.

^ Samuel Totten, Paul Robert Bartrop, Steven L. Jacobs (eds.) Dictionary of Genocide . Greenwood Publishing, 2008, ISBN 0-313-34642-9 , p. 19.

^ Noël, Lise.

Intolerance: A General Survey . Arnold Bennett, 1994, ISBN 0-7735-1187-3 , p. 101.

^ Schaefer, Richard T (2008), Encyclopedia of Race, Ethnicity, and Society , p. 90 .

^ "INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF GENOCIDE SCHOLARS" . Archived from the original on April 16, 2006 . Retrieved April 16, 2006 .

from the International Association of Genocide Scholars to Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan , June 13, 2005 ^ Saraçoğlu, Cenk (2011).

Kurds of Modern Turkey: Migration, Neoliberalism and Exclusion in Turkish Society . London: I.B. Tauris . p.

175 .

ISBN 9780857719102 .

^ "Turkish citizens mistrust foreigners, opinion poll says" .

Hürriyet Daily News . 2 May 2011.

^ "Minority Rights Group International: Turkey: Armenians" . Archived from the original on 8 May 2015 . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ Tremblay, Pinar (11 October 2015).

"Grew up Kurdish, forced to be Turkish, now called Armenian" . Al-Monitor.

^ "Samast'a jandarma karakolunda kahraman muamelesi" .

Radikal (in Turkish). 2 February 2007. Archived from the original on 5 February 2007 . Retrieved 6 October 2016 .

^ Watson, Ivan (12 January 2012).

"Turkey remembers murdered journalist" . CNN.

^ Harvey, Benjamin (2007-01-24).

"Suspect in Journalist Death Makes Threat" .

The Guardian . London: Associated Press . Retrieved 2007-01-24 .

[ dead link ] ^ "Turkish-Armenian writer shot dead" .

BBC News . 2007-01-19.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2007 . Retrieved 2007-01-19 .

^ Robert Mahoney (2006-06-15).

"Bad blood in Turkey" (PDF) . Committee to Protect Journalists. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 January 2007 . Retrieved 2007-01-17 .

^ "IPI Deplores Callous Murder of Journalist in Istanbul" .

International Press Institute . 2007-01-22. Archived from the original on 3 March 2007 . Retrieved 2007-01-24 .

^ "Turkey" . Archived from the original on 14 January 2020 . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ Committee to Protect Journalists (2007-01-19).

"Turkish-Armenian editor murdered in Istanbul" .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2007 . Retrieved 2007-01-24 .

Dink had received numerous death threats from nationalist Turks who viewed his iconoclastic journalism, particularly on the mass killings of Armenians in the early 20th century, as an act of treachery.

^ Turkish police uncover arms cache, The Wall Street Journal , Jan. 10, 2009 ^ "E.I.R. GmbH" . Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ Montgomery, Devin (2008-07-12).

"Turkey arrests two ex-generals for alleged coup plot" .

JURIST . Archived from the original on 2008-12-26 . Retrieved 2008-07-07 .

^ BÜYÜKFURAN ARMUTLU, İbrahim (2002-06-11).

"Onno Tunç anıtı açıldı" .

Hürriyet (in Turkish) . Retrieved 2008-07-09 .

^ "Turkish municipality destroys monument of Armenian musician, composer" . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ Helix Consulting LLC.

"Monument to Armenian musician Onno Tunc destroyed in Turkey" . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ "Onno Tunç anıtını yıktık çünkü ..." Sabah . 30 April 2012 . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ "Haber - Onno Tunç anıtı'na Selimiye halkı el sürdürmüyor!" . Archived from the original on 18 April 2013 . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ Şahan, İdil Engindeniz; Fırat, Derya; Şannan, Barış.

"January-April 2014 Media Watch on Hate Speech and Discriminatory Language Report" (PDF) . Hrant Dink Foundation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-12-07 . Retrieved 2014-09-15 .

^ "Armenian private killed intentionally, new testimony shows" .

Today's Zaman . 2012-01-27. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014 . Retrieved 14 December 2012 .

^ "Sevag Şahin'i vuran asker BBP'li miydi?" (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 31 August 2011 . Retrieved 14 December 2012 .

^ a b "Halavurt: "Sevag 24 Nisan'da Planlı Şekilde Öldürülmüş Olabilir" " .

Bianet (in Turkish). May 4, 2011 . Retrieved 29 December 2012 .

:Translated from Turkish: "On May 1, 2011, after investigating into the background of the suspect, we discovered that he was a sympathizer of the BBP. We also have encountured nationalist themes in his social networks. For example, Muhsin Yazicioglu and Abdullah Catli photos were present" according to Balikci lawyer Halavurt.

^ "Title translated from Turkish: What Happened to Sevag Balikci?" .

Radikal (in Turkish) . Retrieved 29 December 2012 .

Translated from Turkish: "We discovered that he was a sympathizer of the BBP. We also have encountered nationalist themes in his social networks. For example, Muhsin Yazicioglu and Abdullah Catli photos were present" according to Balikci lawyer Halavurt.

^ "Sevag'ın Ölümünde Şüpheler Artıyor" .

Nor Zartonk (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 15 April 2013 . Retrieved 29 December 2012 .

Title translated from Turkish: Doubts emerge on the death of Sevag ^ a b "Fiancé of Armenian soldier killed in Turkish army testifies before court" .

News.am . Archived from the original on 30 January 2013 . Retrieved 29 December 2012 .

^ "Nişanlıdan 'Ermenilerle savaşırsak ilk seni öldürürüm' iddiası" .

Sabah (in Turkish). 2012-04-06 . Retrieved 29 December 2012 .

Title translated from Turkish: From the fiance: If we were to go to war with Armenia, I would kill you first" ^ a b "Azeris mark 20th anniversary of Khojaly Massacre in Istanbul" .

Hurriyet . February 26, 2012 . Retrieved 22 December 2012 .

One banner carried by dozens of protestors said, 'You are all Armenians, you are all bastards.' ^ a b "Inciting Hatred: Turkish Protesters Call Armenians 'Bastards' " .

Asbarez . February 28, 2012. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015 . Retrieved 22 December 2012 .

'Mount Ararat will Become Your Grave' Chant Turkish Students ^ "Khojaly Massacre Protests gone wrong in Istanbul: ' You are all Armenian, you are all bastards ' " .

National Turk . 28 February 2012 . Retrieved 22 December 2012 .

^ "Protests in Istanbul: "You are all Armenian, you are all bastards" " .

LBC International . 2012-02-26 . Retrieved 22 December 2012 .

^ "Ultra-nationalist group targets Turkey's Armenians" .

Zaman . 28 November 2012. Archived from the original on 29 November 2012 . Retrieved 31 May 2013 .

^ (in Russian) Fyodor Lukyanov [ ru ] , Editor-in-Chief of the journal Russia in Global Affairs "Первый и неразрешимый" .

Vzglyad . 2 August 2011 . Retrieved 12 January 2013 .

Армянофобия – институциональная часть современной азербайджанской государственности, и, конечно, Карабах в центре этого всего. "Armenophobia is the institutional part of the modern Azerbaijani statehood and Karabakh is in the center of it." ^ "Report on Azerbaijan" (PDF) . Strasbourg: European Commission against Racism and Intolerance . 15 April 2003. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 22 January 2013 .

Due to the conflict, there is a widespread negative sentiment toward Armenians in Azerbaijani society today." "In general, hate-speech and derogatory public statements against Armenians take place routinely.

^ "Second report on Azerbaijan" (PDF) . Strasbourg: European Commission against Racism and Intolerance . 24 May 2007. p. 27. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 23 January 2013 .

^ a b c Bournoutian, George (2018).

Armenia and Imperial Decline: The Yerevan Province, 1900-1914 . Routledge. p. 35 (note 25).

^ Dawisha, Karen; Parrot, Bruce (1994).

The International Politics of Eurasia . Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe. p. 242.

ISBN 9781563243530 .

^ Robert Gerwarth; John Horne, eds. (27 September 2012).

War in peace : paramilitary violence in Europe after the Great War . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199654918 .

^ a b "Human Rights in the OSCE Region: Europe, Central Asia and North America, Report 2005 (Events of 2004)" .

International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights . Archived from the original on 29 April 2010 . Retrieved 19 January 2013 .

The unresolved conflict with Armenia over Nagorno-Karabakh stimulated "armenophobia." ^ Human Rights Watch (1994).

Azerbaijan: seven years of conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh . New York: Humans Rights Watch.

ISBN 1-56432-142-8 .

^ "Second report on Azerbaijan" (PDF) . Strasbourg: European Commission against Racism and Intolerance . 24 May 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 23 January 2013 .

^ Watch, Genocide (2020-05-11).

"Turkey: Erdogan uses "Leftovers of the Sword" anti-Christian hate speech" .

genocidewatch . Retrieved 2023-03-13 .

^ Watch, Genocide (2020-11-06).

"Genocide Emergency Alert on the War in Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabakh)" (PDF) .

genocidewatch . Retrieved 2023-03-13 .

^ "Azerbaijan: The Status of Armenians, Russians, Jews and other minorities" (PDF) . Washington, DC: Immigration and Naturalization Service . 1993. p. 10 . Retrieved 25 January 2013 .

Despite the constitutional guarantees against religious discrimination, numerous acts of vandalism against the Armenian Apostolic Church have been reported throughout Azerbaijan. These acts are clearly connected to anti-Armenian sentiments brought to the surface by the war between Armenia and Azerbaijan.

^ Peter G. Stone; Joanne Farchakh Bajjaly (2008).

The destruction of cultural heritage in Iraq . Woodbridge, Suffolk: Boydell Press. p. xi.

ISBN 9781843833840 .

^ Adalian, Rouben Paul (2010).

Historical dictionary of Armenia . Lanham, Md.: Scarecrow Press. p. 95.

ISBN 9780810860964 .

^ (in Russian) Fyodor Lukyanov [ ru ] , editor-in-chief of the journal Russia in Global Affairs "Первый и неразрешимый" .

Vzglyad . 2 August 2011 . Retrieved 25 April 2014 .

Армянофобия – институциональная часть современной азербайджанской государственности, и, конечно, Карабах в центре этого всего.

^ "ECRI report on Azerbaijan (fourth monitoring cycle)" (PDF) . Strasbourg, France: European Commission against Racism and Intolerance . 31 May 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 March 2013 . Retrieved 19 January 2013 .

Alt URL ^ a b "Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment: Concluding observations on the fifth periodic report of Azerbaijan" . United Nations Committee Against Torture. 5 June 2024. p. 9.

The Committee is concerned about the effect that discriminatory statements made by high-level officials and disseminated in both online and offline media may have in creating an environment that greatly increases the likelihood of the commission of violence against persons of Armenian national or ethnic origin.... The Committee... regrets that article 283 does not criminalize incitement to violence, nor does it expressly include the grounds of colour, language, citizenship or ethnic origin as bases for discrimination.

^ Cheterian, Vicken (2018). "The Uses and Abuses of History: Genocide and the Making of the Karabakh Conflict".

Europe-Asia Studies .

70 (6): 884– 903.

doi : 10.1080/09668136.2018.1489634 .

S2CID 158760921 .

^ Smith, Jeremy (2013).

Red Nations . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-11131-7 .

^ a b "EU Parliament condemns destruction of Armenian heritage in Nagorno-Karabakh" .

OC Media . 2022-03-10 . Retrieved 2022-03-12 .

^ a b "JOINT MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION on the destruction of cultural heritage in Nagorno-Karabakh" .

www.europarl.europa.eu . Retrieved 2022-03-12 .

^ KOVATCHEV, Andrey.

"REPORT on EU-Armenia relations | A9-0036/2023 | European Parliament" .

www.europarl.europa.eu . Retrieved 2023-03-18 .

^ "Azerbaijani Parliament issues protest statement regarding European Parliament's resolution" .

Apa.az . Retrieved 2023-03-18 .

^ "The ceasefire agreement with Azerbaijan comes with great risks for Armenia" .

The Guardian . 19 November 2020.

^ Castle, Stephen (23 October 2011).

"Azerbaijan 'flattened' sacred Armenian site" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 2022-05-07.

^ Antonyan, Yulia; Siekierski, Konrad (2014). "A neopagan movement in Armenia: the children of Ara". In Aitamurto, Kaarina; Simpson, Scott (eds.).

Modern Pagan and Native Faith Movements in Central and Eastern Europe . Routledge. p.

280 .

By analogy, other tragic events or threatening processes are designated today by Armenians as "cultural genocide" (for example, the destruction by Azerbaijanis of the Armenian cemetery in Julfa)...

^ Ghazinyan, Aris (13 January 2006).

"Cultural War: Systematic destruction of Old Julfa khachkars raises international attention" .

ArmeniaNow . Archived from the original on 25 November 2015 . Retrieved 24 November 2015 .

...another "cultural genocide being perpetrated by Azerbaijan." ^ Uğur Ümit Üngör (2015). "Cultural genocide: Destruction of material and non-material human culture". In Carmichael, Cathie; Maguire, Richard C. (eds.).

The Routledge History of Genocide . Routledge. p.

250 .

ISBN 9781317514848 .

^ a b O'Brien, Melanie; WIlliams, Timothy; Martinez, Elisenda; White, Julia (October 24, 2022).

"Statement on Azerbaijani Aggression Against the Republic of Armenia and the Indigenous Armenians of the South Caucasus" (PDF) .

The International Association of Genocide Scholars .

^ Veldkamp, Joel (19 December 2022).

"Genocide Warning for Nagorno Karabakh issued by human rights organizations" .

Anglican Ink .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2022 . Retrieved 20 December 2022 .

^ a b "Genocide Warning: Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh" , Genocide Watch , September 23, 2022 , retrieved 3 January 2023 ^ a b "Genocide Warning: Nagorno Karabakh" .

120,000 people are under siege . Retrieved 2022-12-28 .

^ "Annual Report 2022 | Lemkin Institute For Genocide Prevention" .

Lemkin Institute . Retrieved 2023-02-03 .

^ "Do the Armenians Face a Second Genocide?" .

Newsweek . 2022-12-14 . Retrieved 2023-03-14 .

^ Boy, Ann-Dorit (2023-01-18).

"Blockade in the Southern Caucasus: "There Is Every Reason to Expect More Violence This Year" " .

Der Spiegel .

ISSN 2195-1349 . Retrieved 2023-03-14 .

^ "Armenia Project" .

Lemkin Institute . Retrieved 2023-02-03 .

^ "Red Flag Alert for Genocide - Azerbaijan - Update 5" .

Lemkin Institute . Archived from the original on 2022-12-22 . Retrieved 2023-03-14 .

^ "Red Flag Alert for Genocide - Azerbaijan Update 4" .

Lemkin Institute . Archived from the original on 2023-02-27 . Retrieved 2023-03-14 .

^ Watch, Genocide (2020-11-06).

"Genocide Emergency Alert on the War in Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabakh)" .

genocidewatch . Retrieved 2023-03-13 .

^ von Joeden-Forgey, Elisa; Victoria Massimino, Irene (2022-05-15).

"Open Letter to Charles Michel, President of the European Council, Regarding Complicity in Genocide" (PDF) .

^ "@LemkinInstitute" .

Twitter . Retrieved 2023-05-15 .

^ "Statement from a group of Genocide scholars on the Imminent Genocidal Threat deriving from Azerbaijan and Turkey against Artsakh (Nagorno-Karabakh)" .

www.genocide-museum.am . Retrieved 2023-03-14 .

^ "В.А.Шнирельман, "Албанский миф" в кн.: "Войны памяти. Мифы, идентичность и политика в Закавказье", М., ИКЦ, "Академкнига", 2003" . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ Benthall, Jonathan (ed.), The best of Anthropology Today, 2002, Routledge, ISBN 0-415-26255-0 , p. 350 by Anatoly Khazanov ^ "Москвичи и петербуржцы - о своих этнических симпатиях и антипатиях" [Residents of Moscow and St. Petersburg about their ethnic sympathies and antipathies]. Russian Public Opinion Research Center. 24 January 2012 . Retrieved 5 January 2013 .

^ Armenian student killed in Moscow race attack Nick Paton Walsh in Moscow, The Guardian, Monday 24 April 2006 ^ Six Russians Jailed For Racist Killing Of Armenian March 14, 2007, (Reuters) ^ Mibchuani, Teimuraz (2009).

Armenian Battalion Named After Bagramyan and Ethnic Cleansing of Georgians in Abkhazia . Georgian Foundation for Strategic and International Studies.

ISBN 978-9941126796 . Archived from the original on 2016-06-04.

^ Terian, Artur (11 November 2002).

"Armenian Church In Russia Damaged By Blast" .

azatutyun.am .

RFE/RL .

^ Service, Robert (2005).

Stalin: A Biography .

Harvard University Press . p.

98 .

ISBN 9780674016972 .

^ Stalin, J. V.

"Marxism and the National Question" .

marxists.org .

Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Mikolaj Golubiewski, Joanna Kulas, Krzysztof Czyżewski (2011).

A Handbook of Dialogue Trust and Identity . Wydawnictwo Pogranicze. pp.

229– 242.

Ethnic cleansing is naturally accompanied by the elimination of multiculturalism or, at best, a dramatic reduction in its scope. We can say that the cultural factor plays the role of an 'easy' ethnic-cleansing tool, making the latter indirect and somewhat civilized for the outer world. For example, in the case of the Armenian population of Georgia, ethnic cleansing by cultural means is manifested through indirect government support for closing Armenian cultural centers, including schools, the policy of enforced Kartvelization (forced usage of the Georgian language) of Armenian churches overtly supported by the state, fraudulent searches for Georgian origins in Armenian surnames, and forcing name changes through direct and indirect pressure. This is further reinforced by the propaganda of the 'historical' thesis presenting Armenians as guests, implying they should behave as such, as well as by policies preventing the economic development of Armenian-populated regions. By the way, the latter was practiced during the Soviet era by the Azerbaijani government, and its outcome is well known.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Jones, Stephen F.

(1993).

"Georgian- Armenian Relations in 1918-20 and 1991-94: A Comparison" .

Armenian Review .

46 ( 1– 4): 57 –77.

^ " "Ŕđě˙íńęčé âîďđîń" â Ŕáőŕçčč ăëŕçŕěč ăđóçčíńęčő ŃĚČ" .

ČŔ REGNUM . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ a b c "Focus on Faction: Georgian media stirs Abkhazian-Armenian "conflict" - News - ArmeniaNow.com" . Archived from the original on 2 February 2008 . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ a b The cultural genocide of Armenian historical monuments in Georgia, Organisation for the support of the Armenian Diocese in Georgia "Kanter" ^ a b c "Vandalism and misappropriation of Armenian churches in Georgia goes on" .

PanARMENIAN.Net . Retrieved 2008-11-29 .

^ United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

"Refworld - Georgia: Collapse of Armenian Church Provokes Row" .

Refworld . Archived from the original on 16 April 2013 . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ "Armenians of Georgia urge to stop barbarous destruction of Armenian cultural heritage" .

PanArmenian.net . Retrieved 2008-11-29 .

^ "Protest Action Against Encroachments On Armenian Churches in Georgia Held in Yerevan" .

defacto.am . Retrieved 2008-11-29 .

[ dead link ] ^ a b Georgia sacks theatre legend for 'xenophobia', AFP, August 2011 ^ "Đîáĺđň Ńňóđóŕ: Ńŕŕęŕřâčëč — ŕđě˙íčí" .

Đîńáŕëň . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ "Priests attacked at Armenian church in Tbilisi" . Democracy & Freedom Watch. 20 July 2014 . Retrieved 9 October 2014 .

^ Georgian Orthodox Church takes aim at Armenian churches "There is interest in erasing any evidence of Armenians in Tbilisi." by Neil Hauer, Bradley Jardine, Eurasianet, Nov 5, 2018 ^ Diana Aguilera (8 December 2015).

"Diversity In Fresno: How Racial Covenants Once Ruled Prestigious Neighborhoods" . Retrieved 1 May 2016 .

^ "Racist housing covenants haunt property records across the country. New laws make them easier to remove" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 2022-04-17 .

^ Anny Bakalian. Armenian-Americans, From Being to Feeling Armenian. 1993.

ISBN 978-1560000259 , pp. 223-4 ^ Stanley, Alessandra (2006-04-17).

"A PBS Documentary Makes Its Case for the Armenian Genocide, With or Without a Debate" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2006-09-02 .

^ MacDonald, David B.

Identity Politics in the Age of Genocide: the Holocaust and Historical Representation . London: Routledge, 2008, p. 121.

ISBN 0-415-43061-5 .

^ "Board of Governors" .

Institute of Turkish Studies . 2008-11-04. Archived from the original on 2008-12-24 . Retrieved 2008-11-05 .

^ "Berkeley Professor Spits at Armenian Student" .

Asbarez.com . 6 May 1998 . Retrieved 1 May 2016 .

^ a b "UC Berkeley Senate Calls On Prof. to Apologize" .

Asbarez.com . 16 March 1999 . Retrieved 1 May 2016 .

^ "Xenophobia and Death Threats Plague Glendale Politics" . 3 November 2016 . Retrieved 3 November 2016 .

^ a b "Armenian genocide dispute erupts at LAT" .

LA Observed . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ "Genocide Controversy Leads L.A. Times Managing Editor To Resign" . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ "3 Armenian police claim discrimination by Glendale department" .

Los Angeles Times . 8 March 2012 . Retrieved 1 May 2016 .

^ "Armenian Community Condemns Anti-Armenian Attacks During California Democratic Primary Election" . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ "Xenophobia and Death Threats Plague Glendale Politics" . 3 November 2016 . Retrieved 3 November 2016 .

^ "GEICO-Sponsored Company Put a Sky Message Above NYC Denying Turkey's Genocide of Armenians" . 22 April 2016 . Retrieved 22 April 2016 .

^ Khachatourian, Ara (16 October 2013).

"CBS Network's Streak of Racism Continues" .

Asbarez . Archived from the original on 29 November 2014 . Retrieved 14 November 2014 .

^ Nevins, Jake (9 January 2018).

"Late-night hosts on Oprah's Golden Globes speech: 'A year ago, I would've called it presidential' " .

The Guardian .

^ "U.S. Nationally Televised "Comedy Central" Joke about Trump Bombs, Smearing All Armenians" .

Hetq Online . 10 January 2018.

^ "Action Alert: Stand Up to Trevor Noah and the Daily Show" .

Asbarez . 12 January 2018.

^ "House Passes Resolution Recognizing Armenian Genocide" .

The New York Times . October 29, 2019.

^ "Senate passes resolution to formally 'commemorate the Armenian Genocide' " .

CNN . December 12, 2019.

^ Armenian school in SF vandalized with threats, hate speech as conflicts with Azerbaijan intensify, Megan Cassidy and Brett Simpson, San Francisco Chronicle, July 25, 2020 ^ SF Armenian school, community center vandalized with hateful graffiti, By Eric Ting, SFGATE, 25.07.2020 ^ Attack on KZV School, Armenian Center to be Investigated as Hate Crime , Asbarez Daily , 25.07.2020 ^ Arakelian, Chris (April 24, 2021).

"Statement by President Joe Biden on Armenian Remembrance Day" .

The White House . Retrieved April 24, 2021 .

^ "St. Peter Armenian Church in San Fernando Valley vandalized" .

Public Radio of Armenia . Retrieved 2021-09-24 .

^ Lin, Summer (October 11, 2022).

"Nury Martinez leak reveals insults about Jews, Armenians too" .

Archived from the original on October 11, 2022 . Retrieved October 12, 2022 .

^ Abcarian, Robin (October 11, 2022).

"Column: Almost no one was spared in that racist conversation among top L.A. Latino officials" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ a b Benoit, David; Feuer, Will (8 November 2023).

"Citigroup Fined for Discriminating Against Armenian Americans" .

The Wall Street Journal .

^ Matthews, Chris (8 November 2023).

"CFPB fines Citi $26 million for 'intentional' discrimination against Armenian Americans" .

MarketWatch .

^ Saul, Derek (8 November 2023).

"Citigroup Fined $25.9 Million For Allegedly Discriminating Against Armenian Americans" .

Forbes .

^ Derfner, Larry (26 November 2009).

"Mouths filled with hatred" .

The Jerusalem Post .

Of all Old City Christians, the Armenians get spat on most frequently because their quarter stands closest to those hot spots.

^ Rosenberg, Oz (6 November 2011).

"Armenian clergy subjected to Haredi spitting attacks" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 3 March 2014 .

^ " 'We are third-class citizens,' says Armenian Patriarch of Jerusalem" .

Haaretz . 29 June 2012 . Retrieved 31 August 2013 .

^ Israel, David (18 June 2019).

"Report: 60 Armenian-Church Students Attempted Lynching of 2 Jews on Eve of Shavuot" .

The Jewish Press .

^ Al Jazeera Staff (9 April 2023).

" 'Death to Christians': Violence steps up under new Israeli gov't" .

^ "Quote by Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres" . 5 September 2017.

^ "The Jews Who Befriended Turkey and Became Genocide Deniers" .

Haaretz .

^ a b "Israeli Knesset Committee Recognizes Armenian Genocide" .

Armenian National Committee of America . 2016-08-01 . Retrieved 2021-04-08 .

^ Lazar Berman (27 April 2021).

"Why Israel won't follow Biden's lead and recognize Armenian genocide" .

The Times of Israel . Retrieved 26 September 2021 .

^ "In Israel, Azeris attacked peaceful Armenian protesters with batons and stones" . 17 October 2020.

^ "How pro-Israel Jews Became Azerbaijan's Secret Weapon in Washington" .

Haaretz .

^ Hubbard, Ben (23 July 2014).

"Islamic State Controls Raqqa" .

The New York Times .

^ Toi Staff (22 September 2014).

"IS said to destroy Armenian Genocide memorial" .

Times of Israel .

^ "Pakistani President: "Islamabad will support Azerbaijan in Nagorno Karabakh issue" " .

ArmeniaNow . 14 February 2012 . Retrieved 2 March 2014 .

^ Horowitz, Donald L.

(2002).

The Deadly Ethnic Riot . University of California Press. pp.

74 .

ISBN 0-520-23642-4 .

^ Takeyh, Ray; Nikolas K. Gvosdev (2004).

The Receding Shadow of the Prophet . Greenwood Publishing Group.

ISBN 0-275-97629-7 .

^ Tadeusz Isakowicz-Zaleski , Przemilczane ludobójstwo na Kresach , Kraków 2008, ISBN 978-83-922939-8-9 ^ Romuald Niedzielko, Kresowa księga sprawiedliwych 1939-1945. O Ukraińcach ratujących Polaków poddanych eksterminacji przez OUN i UPA , Warszawa 2007, ISBN 978-83-60464-61-8 ^ Sanamyan, Emil (3 July 2009).

"Armenians targeted in Ukraine incident" .

Armenian Reporter . Archived from the original on 20 October 2014 . Retrieved 3 March 2014 .

The knifing death of Sergei Bondarenko (pictured) was followed by anti-Armenian reprisals in a small Ukrainian town.

^ Межнациональные столкновения в Марганце Archived 2012-04-26 at the Wayback Machine "Армяне массово выезжают в другие города." ^ "Ukrainian Official Explains 'Anti-Armenian' Statement" .

Azatutyun.am . 25 January 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2023 .

^ "İsa Yusuf Alptekin ve Türkiye'nin Siyasal Hayatına Etkileri" . Archived from the original on 5 October 2016 . Retrieved 1 May 2016 .

Further reading [ edit ] Hilmar Kaiser: Imperialism, Racism, and Development Theories. The Construction of a Dominant Paradigm on Ottoman Armenians , Gomidas Institute, Ann Arbor (MI) 1997 Onat, Ismail; Cubukcu, Suat; Demir, Fatih; Akca, Davut (2020). "Framing anti-Americanism in Turkey: An empirical comparison of domestic and international media".

International Journal of Media & Cultural Politics .

16 (2): 139– 157.

doi : 10.1386/macp_00021_1 .

S2CID 225861881 .

Suciyan, Talin (2015).

The Armenians in Modern Turkey: Post-Genocide Society, Politics and History . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-85772-773-2 .

Naydenova, Desislava (2014).

"Anti-Armenian Polemics in a Slavic Canon Law Miscellany (Ms. Slav. No 461 from the Manuscript Collection of the Romanian Academy)" .

Études balkaniques (3): 82– 95.

ISSN 2534-8574 .

Kolstø, Pål; Blakkisrud, Helge (2013). "Yielding to the sons of the soil: Abkhazian democracy and the marginalization of the Armenian vote".

Ethnic and Racial Studies .

36 (12): 2075– 2095.

doi : 10.1080/01419870.2012.675079 .

S2CID 144252799 .

Kasbarian, Sossie; Öktem, Kerem (2014). "Subversive friendships: Turkish and Armenian encounters in transnational space".

Patterns of Prejudice .

48 (2): 121– 146.

doi : 10.1080/0031322X.2014.900208 .

S2CID 144649549 .

Ihrig, Stefan (2016).

Justifying Genocide: Germany and the Armenians from Bismarck to Hitler . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-50479-0 .

Nefes, Türkay Salim (2021).

"The Relationship between Perceived Security Threats and Negative Descriptions of Armenians in Turkish Politics (1946–1960)" .

Nationalities Papers .

50 (6): 1217– 1231.

doi : 10.1017/nps.2021.6 .

hdl : 10261/369498 .

Nefes, Türkay Salim (2021). "Explaining negative descriptions of Armenians in Turkish parliamentary speeches (1960–1980) via group position theory".

Quality & Quantity .

55 (6): 2237– 2252.

doi : 10.1007/s11135-021-01108-8 .

hdl : 10261/306132 .

S2CID 233944826 .

Richard Albrecht, «nous voulons une Arménie sans Arméniens». Drei Jahrzehnte Armenierbilder in kolonial-imperialistischen und totalitär-faschistischen Diskursen in Deutschland, 1913–1943 page 625 Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Religions- und Kulturgeschichte 106 (2012) v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Anti-Armenian sentiment Events Hamidian massacres (1894) Armenian–Tatar massacres (1905–1906) Adana massacre (1909) Armenian genocide (1914–1923) Place name changes in Turkey (since 1913) September Days (1918) Khaibalikend massacre (1919) Agulis massacre (1919) Destruction of Armenian part of Shusha (1920) Deportation of Armenians from Azerbaijan of 1988–94 1990 Dushanbe riots Ban of entry for citizens of Armenia in Azerbaijan (since 1991) People visiting Nagorno Karabakh banned from entering Azerbaijan (since 2005) Armenian cemetery in Julfa (2006) 2020 Ghazanchetsots Cathedral shelling See also List of massacres of Armenians Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Armenian_sentiment&oldid=1306463104 " Categories : Anti-Armenian sentiment Anti-national sentiment Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2010 Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with dead external links from February 2025 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from February 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from February 2022 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with excerpts Articles to be expanded from March 2024 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2020 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 22:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Armenian sentiment 17 languages Add topic

