Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents 2 Interpretations 3 Texts and translations 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Statesman (dialogue) 20 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Íslenska Italiano Latina Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Socratic dialogue written by Plato Part of a series on Platonism Life Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(October 2023) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the German article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,848 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Politikos]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Politikos}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

The Statesman ( Ancient Greek : Πολιτικός , Politikós ; Latin : Politicus [ 1 ] ), also known by its Latin title, Politicus , is a Socratic dialogue written by Plato .  The text depicts a conversation among Socrates , the mathematician Theodorus , another person named Socrates (referred to as "Socrates the Younger"), and an unnamed philosopher from Elea referred to as "the Stranger" ( ξένος , xénos ). It is ostensibly an attempt to arrive at a definition of "statesman," as opposed to " sophist " or " philosopher " and is presented as following the action of the Sophist .

The Sophist had begun with the question of whether the sophist, statesman, and philosopher were one or three, leading the Eleatic Stranger to argue that they were three but that this could only be ascertained through full accounts of each ( Sophist 217b).  But though Plato has his characters give accounts of the sophist and statesman in their respective dialogues, it is most likely that he never wrote a dialogue about the philosopher.

[ 2 ] Contents [ edit ] The dialogue begins immediately after the Sophist ends, with Socrates (the elder) and Theodorus briefly reflecting on the discussion before the Eleatic Stranger proposes to begin a dialectical investigation with Socrates the Younger into the nature of the statesman.  The Eleatic Stranger and Socrates the Younger resume using the method of division employed in the Sophist , pausing to reflect on dialectical methods and a myth similar to the myth of ages .

[ 3 ] The interlocutors ultimately offer a complicated account of the statesman through a version of division that entails accounting for the object of inquiry 'by carving at the joints' like a 'sacrificial animal' ( Statesman 287b-c).

[ 3 ] Interpretations [ edit ] According to John M. Cooper , the dialogue was intended to clarify that to rule or have political power called for a specialized knowledge.

[ 4 ] The statesman was one who possesses this special knowledge of how to rule justly and well and to have the best interests of the citizens at heart. It is presented that politics should be run by this knowledge, or gnosis . This claim runs counter to those who, the Stranger points out, actually did rule. Those that rule merely give the appearance of such knowledge, but in the end are really sophists or imitators.  For, as the Stranger maintains, a sophist is one who does not know the right thing to do, but only appears to others as someone who does. The Stranger's ideal of how one arrives at this knowledge of power is through social divisions. The Stranger takes great pains to be very specific about where and why the divisions are needed in order to rule the citizenry properly.

Texts and translations [ edit ] Greek text at Perseus Plato: Statesman, Philebus, Ion.

Greek with translation by Harold N. Fowler and W. R. M. Lamb. Loeb Classical Library 164. Harvard Univ. Press (originally published 1925).

ISBN 978-0674991828 HUP listing Fowler translation at Perseus Jowett translation with introduction at StandardEbooks Plato.

Opera , volume I. Oxford Classical Texts.

ISBN 978-0198145691 Plato.

Complete Works.

Ed. J. M. Cooper and D. S. Hutchinson. Hackett, 1997.

ISBN 978-0872203495 References [ edit ] ^ Henri Estienne (ed.), Platonis opera quae extant omnia , Vol. 2, 1578, p. 250 .

^ Mary Louise Gill , Philosophos: Plato's Missing Dialogue , Oxford University Press, 2012.

^ a b Mitchell Miller , The Philosopher in Plato's Statesman, Parmenides Publishing, 2004.

^ Cooper and Hutchinson (1997). "Introduction to Politikos ".

External links [ edit ] Works related to Statesman at Wikisource Quotations related to Statesman (dialogue) at Wikiquote Statesman , in a collection of Plato's Dialogues at Standard Ebooks Statesman , english translation by Benjamin Jowett public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Socrates Bibliography Cultural depictions Life Trial of Socrates Socratic problem Concepts Social gadfly Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic questioning Phrases " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Family Sophroniscus (father) Phaenarete (mother) Xanthippe (wife) Lamprocles (son) Menexenus (son) Myrto (wife) Works that include Socrates Art Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca (3rd-century sculpture) The Death of Socrates (1787 painting) Socrates (1950 sculpture) Stage The Clouds (423 BC play) Der geduldige Socrates (1721 opera) Socrates (1759 play) Socrate (1919 oratorio) Socrates on Trial (2007 play) Literature De genio Socratis (1st-century essay) On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates (1841 thesis) The Plot to Save Socrates (2006 novel) Other Serenade after Plato's "Symposium" (1954 serenade) Barefoot in Athens (1966 film) Socrates (1970 film) Dialogues Plato Apology Axiochus Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Demodocus Epinomis Eryxias Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hipparchus Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Lysis Menexenus Meno Minos On Justice On Virtue Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Theages Timaeus Xenophon Apology Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Other Halcyon Socratic Letters Related Euthyphro dilemma Form of the Good Peritrope Religious skepticism Category v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Statesman_(dialogue)&oldid=1260061758 " Categories : Dialogues of Plato Political philosophy in ancient Greece Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 28 November 2024, at 16:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Statesman (dialogue) 20 languages Add topic

