Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History 3 Aspects of Afrocentricity and Afrocentrism Toggle Aspects of Afrocentricity and Afrocentrism subsection 3.1 Afrocentricity book 3.2 Afrocentric education 3.3 Afrocentric theology 3.4 Kwanzaa 3.5 Race and Pan-African identity 3.6 Pre-Columbian Africa-Americas theories 3.7 Afrocentrism and Ancient Egypt 3.8 African-American Afrocentric "hoteps" and the far-right 3.9 Alkebulan 4 Reception 5 List of prominent authors 6 See also 7 References 8 Literature Toggle Literature subsection 8.1 Primary 8.2 Secondary 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Afrocentrism 25 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Lietuvių Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia African ethnocentrism For the study of African culture and history, see African studies . For the academic theory, see Afrocentricity . For the book, see Afrocentricity (book) .

Part of a series on Pan-Africanism Symbols African art Western collections Black Star of Africa Pan-African colours Pan-African flag Ideologies African anarchism African communalism African nationalism African philosophy African socialism Afrocentrism Black nationalism Garveyism Négritude Nkrumaism Rastafari Sankarism Third International Theory Ujamaa Organizations African Union Conscious Community Organisation of African Unity People Akumu Amin Ben-Jochannan Cham Joof Diop Diouf Du Bois Fanon Gaddafi Garvey Houphouët-Boigny James Kenyatta Mak'Anyengo Malcolm X Malema (Julius) Mbah Mboya Mugabe Ngum Nkrumah Nyerere (Julius) Padmore Rodney Sankara Selassie Small Sékou Touré Thiaw Yeshitela Wilson Williams Dynamics Ethnic groups of Africa Languages of Africa Religion in Africa Conflicts in Africa Related Africa African and Black Topics Afro-Asian Afro-Latino Anti-imperialism Anti-Western sentiment Black people Reparations for slavery Pan-Africanism portal Africa portal Politics portal v t e This article is part of a series about Black power History Black Arts Movement Black is beautiful Black power movement Black Power Revolution Kwanzaa Raised fist events of 1968 and 1972 Ideologies African socialism Africana womanism Afrocentrism Anti-Americanism Black anarchism Black feminism Black leftism Black nationalism Black pride Black separatism Black supremacy Intercommunalism Pan-Africanism Garveyism Organizations African People's Socialist Party Assata's Daughters Black Guerrilla Family Black Liberators Black Liberation Army Black Panther Militia Black Panther Party Black Radical Congress Black Revolutionary Assault Team Black Riders Liberation Party Black Women's Defense League British Black Panthers Conscious Community Five-Percent Nation George Jackson Brigade Huey P. Newton Gun Club League of Revolutionary Black Workers Lowndes County Freedom Organization May 19th Communist Organization MOVE Nation of Islam National Joint Action Committee New Black Panther Party Republic of New Afrika Revolutionary Action Movement Revolutionary Black Panther Party SNCC Symbionese Liberation Army US Organization Weather Underground People Angela Davis Assata Shakur Donald DeFreeze Elaine Brown Eldridge Cleaver Fay Bellamy Powell Fred Hampton George Jackson Gloria Richardson Hakim Jamal Huey P. Newton John Africa Malcolm X Marcus Garvey Martin Luther King, Jr.

Maulana Karenga Malik Zulu Shabazz Michael X Max Stanford Obi Egbuna Robert F. Williams Rosa Parks Stokely Carmichael Wadsworth Jarrell Works A Taste of Power Black Power and the American Myth Ten-Point Program The Diary of Malcolm X Revolutionary Suicide Related Anarchism Black Lives Matter Black Power gang Black Power in the Caribbean Black Power in Montreal Communism Feminism Hutu Power New Left Political hip hop Red Power movement Socialism The Troubles United States civil rights movement White power Youth rights Category v t e Afrocentrism is a worldview that is centered on the history of people of African descent or a view that favors it over non-African civilizations.

[ 1 ] It is in some respects a response to Eurocentric attitudes about African people and their historical contributions. It seeks to counter what it sees as mistakes and ideas perpetuated by the racist philosophical underpinnings of Western academic disciplines as they developed during and since Europe's Early Renaissance as justifying rationales for the enslavement of other peoples, in order to enable more accurate accounts of not only African but all people's contributions to world history.

[ 2 ] Afrocentricity deals primarily with self-determination and African agency and is a pan-African point of view for the study of culture, philosophy , and history.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Afrocentrism is a scholarly movement that seeks to conduct research and education on global history subjects, from the perspective of historical African peoples and polities. It takes a critical stance on Eurocentric assumptions and myths about world history, in order to pursue methodological studies of the latter. Some of the critics of the movement believe that it often denies or minimizes European, Near Eastern , and Asian cultural influences while exaggerating certain aspects of historical African civilizations that independently accomplished a significant level of cultural and technological development. In general, Afrocentrism is usually manifested in a focus on the history of Africa and its role in contemporary African-American culture among others.

What is today broadly called Afrocentrism evolved out of the work of African American intellectuals in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, but flowered into its modern form due to the activism of African American intellectuals in the U.S.

civil rights movement and in the development of African American studies programs in universities. However, following the development of universities in African colonies in the 1950s, African scholars became major contributors to African historiography.

[ 5 ] A notable pioneer is the professor Kenneth Dike , who became chairman of the Committee on African Studies at Harvard in the 1970s.

[ 6 ] In strict terms Afrocentrism, as a distinct historiography, reached its peak in the 1980s and 1990s.

[ citation needed ] Today [ when?

] it is primarily associated with Cheikh Anta Diop , John Henrik Clarke , Ivan van Sertima and Molefi Kete Asante . Asante, however, describes his theories as Afrocentricity .

[ 7 ] Proponents of Afrocentrism support the claim that the contributions of various Black African people have been downplayed or discredited as part of the legacy of colonialism and slavery's pathology of "writing Africans out of history".

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Major critics of Afrocentrism include Mary Lefkowitz , who dismiss it as pseudohistory , [ 10 ] reactive, [ 11 ] and obstinately therapeutic.

[ 12 ] Others, such as Kwame Anthony Appiah , believe that Afrocentrism defeats its purpose of dismantling unipolar studies of world history by seeking to replace Eurocentricity with an equally ethnocentric and hierarchical curriculum, and negatively essentializes European culture and people of European descent.

Clarence E. Walker claims it to be "Eurocentrism in blackface ".

[ 13 ] Terminology The term "Afrocentrism" dates to 1962.

[ 14 ] The adjective "Afrocentric" appears in a typescript proposal for an entry in Encyclopedia Africana , possibly due to W. E. B. Du Bois .

[ 15 ] The abstract noun "Afrocentricity" dates to the 1970s, [ 16 ] [ 17 ] and was popularized by Molefi Asante 's Afrocentricity: The Theory of Social Change (1980). Molefi Kete Asante's theory, Afrocentricity, has been one developed in academic settings and may incorporate the terms Afrocentric to describe scholarship and Afrocentrists to describe scholars, but does not use Afrocentrism. According to Asante, though the two terms are often confused to mean the same, Afrocentrists are not adherents of Afrocentrism.

[ 17 ] This has caused confusing notions about who is considered an Afrocentrist, as various scholars who may or may not be associated with Asante and his works have been erroneously given the title, even by other academics.

[ 18 ] Asante has written that Afrocentricity and Afrocentrism are not the same and neither do they share the same origin: By way of distinction, Afrocentricity should not be confused with the variant Afrocentrism. The term “Afrocentrism” was first used by the opponents of Afrocentricity who in their zeal saw it as an obverse of Eurocentrism. The adjective “Afrocentric” in the academic literature always referred to “Afrocentricity.” However, the use of “Afrocentrism” reflected a negation of the idea of Afrocentricity as a positive and progressive paradigm. The aim was to assign religious signification to the idea of African centeredness. However, it has come to refer to a broad cultural movement of the late twentieth century that has a set of philosophical, political, and artistic ideas which provides the basis for the musical, sartorial, and aesthetic dimensions of the African personality. On the other hand, Afrocentricity, as I have previously defined it, is a theory of agency, that is, the idea that African people must be viewed and view themselves as agents rather than spectators to historical revolution and change. To this end Afrocentricity seeks to examine every aspect of the subject place of Africans in historical, literary, architectural, ethical, philosophical, economic, and political life.

[ 19 ] History A 1911 copy of the NAACP journal The Crisis depicting "Ra-Maat-Neb, one of the kings of the Upper Nile", a copy of the relief portraying Nebmaatre I on Meroe pyramid 17 Afrocentrism has its origins in the work of African and African diaspora intellectuals in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, following social changes in the United States and Africa due both to the end of slavery and the decline of colonialism . Following the American Civil War , African Americans in the South gathered together in communities to evade white control, established their own church congregations, and worked hard to gain education. They increasingly took more active public roles despite severe racial discrimination and segregation.

[ 20 ] American and African intellectuals looked to the African past for a re-evaluation of what its civilizations had achieved and what they meant for contemporary people.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] The combination of the European centuries gives us about four to five hundred years of solid European domination of intellectual concepts and philosophical ideas. Africa and Asia were subsumed under various headings of the European hierarchy. If a war between the European powers occurred it was called a World War and the Asians and Africans found their way on the side of one European power or the other. There was this sense of assertiveness about European culture that advanced with Europe's trade, religious, and military forces.

[ 23 ] — Molefi Asante, "De-Westernizing Communication: Strategies for Neutralizing Cultural Myths" As an ideology and political movement, Afrocentrism had its beginnings in activism among black intellectuals, political figures, and historians in the context of the US American civil rights movement .

[ 24 ] [ page needed ] According to U.S. professor Victor Oguejiofor Okafor, concepts of Afrocentricity lie at the core of disciplines such as African American studies .

[ 25 ] But Wilson J. Moses claims that Afrocentrism roots are not exclusively African: Despite the fulminations of ethno-chauvinists and other prejudiced persons, it remains a fact that the contributions of white scholars, like Boas, Malinowski, and Herskovits, were fundamental to that complex of ideas that we designate to days as Afrocentrism...Students of African and African American history have long appreciated the irony that much of what we now call Afrocentrism was developed during the 1930s by the Jewish American scholar Melville Herskovits [ citation needed ] — Wilson J. Moses, Historical Sketches of Afrocentrism In 1987, Martin Bernal published his Black Athena , in which he claims that ancient Greece was colonized by northern invaders mixing with a colony established by Phoenicia (modern Lebanon). A major theme of the work is the alleged denial by Western academia of the African and (western) Asiatic influence on ancient Greek culture.

Aspects of Afrocentricity and Afrocentrism Afrocentricity book Main article: Afrocentricity (book) In 2000, African American Studies professor Molefi Kete Asante , gave a lecture entitled "Afrocentricity: Toward a New Understanding of African Thought in this Millennium," [ 26 ] in which he presented many of his ideas: Africa has been betrayed by international commerce, by missionaries and imams , by the structure of knowledge imposed by the Western world, by its own leaders, and by the ignorance of its own people of its past.

Philosophy originated in Africa and the first philosophers in the world were Africans.

Afrocentricity constitutes a new way of examining data, and a novel orientation to data; it carries with it assumptions about the current state of the African world.

His aim is "to help lay out a plan for the recovery of African place, respectability, accountability, and leadership." Afrocentricity can stand its ground among any ideology or religion: Marxism, Islam , Christianity , Buddhism , or Judaism . Your Afrocentricity will emerge in the presence of these other ideologies because it is from you.

Afrocentrism is the only ideology that can liberate African people.

Asante also stated: As a cultural configuration, the Afrocentric idea is distinguished by five characteristics: an intense interest in psychological location as determined by symbols, motifs, rituals, and signs.

a commitment to finding the subject-place of Africans in any social, political, economic, or religious phenomenon with implications for questions of sex, gender, and class.

a defence of African cultural elements as historically valid in the context of art, music, and literature.

a celebration of centeredness and agency and a commitment to lexical refinement that eliminates pejoratives about Africans or other people.

a powerful imperative from historical sources to revise the collective text of African people.

However, Wilson J. Moses, said of Asante: "His second book, The Afrocentric Idea (1987), was a creative and in some respects brilliant but rambling theoretical work, much influenced by the revolution in " critical theory " that occurred in American intellectual life during the late 1970s and early 1980s." Some also assert that the definition of Afrocentricity has never sat still long enough to be properly described and accurately critiqued.

[ citation needed ] Afrocentric education Main article: Afrocentric education Afrocentric education is education designed to empower peoples of the African diaspora. A central premise behind it is that many Africans have been subjugated by limiting their awareness of themselves and indoctrinating them with ideas that work against them.

[ 27 ] To control a people's culture is to control their tools of self-determination in relationship to others.

[ 28 ] Like educational leaders of other cultures , proponents assert that what educates one group of people does not necessarily educate and empower another group–so they assert educational priorities distinctly for the Africans in a given context.

Afrocentric theology Further information: Black theology and Black church The black church in the United States developed out of the creolization of African spirituality and European-American Christianity ; early members of the churches made certain stories their own [ citation needed ] . During the antebellum years, the idea of deliverance out of slavery , as in the story of Exodus , was especially important [ citation needed ] . After Reconstruction and the restoration of white supremacy , their hope was based on deliverance from segregation and other abuses [ citation needed ] . They found much to respond to in the idea of a personal relationship with Jesus , and shaped their churches by the growth of music and worship styles that related to African as well as European-American traditions.

[ citation needed ] Twentieth-century "Africentric approaches" to Christian theology and preaching have been more deliberate. Writers and thinkers emphasize "Black presence" in the Christian Bible , including the idea of a " Black Jesus ".

[ 29 ] [ page needed ] Kwanzaa In 1966 Maulana Karenga of the black separatist US Organization created Kwanzaa ; which became the first specifically African American holiday to be widely observed amongst African Americans.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Karenga rejected liberation theology and considered the practice of Christianity anti-thetical to the creation of an African-American identity independent from white America.

[ 32 ] Karenga said his goal was to "give Blacks an alternative to the existing holiday and give Blacks an opportunity to celebrate themselves and history, rather than simply imitate the practice of the dominant society." [ 33 ] Race and Pan-African identity Further information: Ancient Egyptian race controversy and Pan-Africanism Many Afrocentrists [ who?

] seek to challenge concepts such as white privilege , color-blind perspectives, and race-neutral pedagogies. There are strong ties between Afrocentricity and Critical race theory .

[ 34 ] Afrocentrists agree with the current scientific consensus that holds that Africans exhibit a range of types and physical characteristics, and that such elements as wavy hair or aquiline facial features are part of a continuum of African types that do not depend on admixture with Caucasian groups. They cite work by Hiernaux [ 35 ] [ page needed ] and Hassan [ 36 ] that they believe demonstrates that populations could vary based on micro-evolutionary principles ( climate adaptation , drift, selection), and that such variations existed in both living and fossil Africans.

[ 37 ] Afrocentrists have condemned what they consider to be attempts at dividing African peoples into racial clusters as new versions of discredited theories, such as the Hamitic hypothesis and the Dynastic Race Theory . These theories, they contend, attempted to identify certain African ethnicities, such as Nubians, Ethiopians and Somalis, as "Caucasoid" groups that entered Africa to bring civilization to the natives. They believe that Western academics have traditionally limited the peoples they defined as "Black" Africans to those south of the Sahara , but used broader "Caucasoid" or related categories to classify peoples of Egypt or North Africa. Afrocentrists also believe strongly in the work of certain anthropologists who have suggested that there is little evidence to support that the first North African populations were closely related to "Caucasoids" of Europe and western Asia.

[ 35 ] In 1964 Afrocentric scholar Cheikh Anta Diop expressed a belief in such a double standard: But it is only the most gratuitous theory that considers the Dinka, the Nouer and the Masai, among others, to be Caucasoids. What if an African ethnologist were to persist in recognising as white only the blond, blue-eyed Scandinavians, and systematically refused membership to the remaining Europeans, and Mediterraneans in particular—the French, Italians, Greek, Spanish, and Portuguese? Just as the inhabitants of Scandinavia and the Mediterranean countries must be considered as two extreme poles of the same anthropological reality, so should the Negroes of East and West Africa be considered as the two extremes in the reality of the Negro world. To say that a Shillouk, a Dinka, or a Nouer is a Caucasoid is for an African as devoid of sense and scientific interest as would be, to a European, an attitude that maintained that a Greek or a Latin were not of the same race.

[ citation needed ] French historian Jean Vercoutter has claimed that archaeological workers routinely classified Negroid remains as Mediterranean, even though they found such remains in substantial numbers with ancient artefacts.

[ 38 ] Some Afrocentrists [ who?

] have adopted a pan-Africanist perspective that people of color are all "African people" or " diasporic Africans," citing physical characteristics they exhibit in common with Black Africans. Afrocentric scholar Runoko Rashidi writes that they are all part of the "global African community." Some Afrocentric writers include in the African diaspora the Dravidians of India, " Negritos " of Southeast Asia ( Thailand , the Philippines and Malaysia ); and the aboriginal peoples of Australia and Melanesia.

[ citation needed ] Pre-Columbian Africa-Americas theories Main article: Pre-Columbian Africa-Americas contact theories In the 1970s, Ivan van Sertima advanced the theory that the complex civilizations of the Americas were the result of trans-oceanic influence from the Egyptians or other African civilizations. Such a claim is his primary thesis in They Came Before Columbus , published in 1978. The few hyper-diffusionist writers seek to establish that the Olmec people, who built the first highly complex civilization in Mesoamerica and are considered by some to be the mother civilization for all other civilizations of Mesoamerica, were deeply influenced by Africans. Van Sertima said that the Olmec civilization was a hybrid one of Africans and Native Americans. His theory of pre-Columbian American-African contact has since met with considerable and detailed opposition by scholars of Mesoamerica. Van Sertima has been accused of "doctoring" and twisting data to fit his conclusions, inventing evidence, and ignoring the work of respected Central and South American scholars to advance his own theory.

[ 39 ] Mainstream historians of Mesoamerica overwhelmingly reject that view with detailed rebuttals.

[ 39 ] Claims have been also forwarded contending that African civilizations were founding influences on the Chinese Xia cultures.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Afrocentrism and Ancient Egypt Main article: Ancient Egyptian race controversy Several Afrocentrists have claimed that important cultural characteristics of ancient Egypt were indigenous to Africa and that these features were present in other early African civilizations [ 41 ] such as the later Kerma and the Meroitic civilizations of Nubia .

[ 42 ] Scholars who have held this view include Marcus Garvey , George James , Martin Bernal , Ivan van Sertima , John Henrik Clarke , and Molefi Kete Asante as well as the Afrocentrist writers Cheikh Anta Diop and Chancellor Williams . The claim has also been made by many Afrocentric scholars that the Ancient Egyptians themselves were Black African (sub-saharan African) rather than North African/Maghrebi, and that the various invasions on Egypt resulted in the "Africanity" of Ancient Egypt becoming diluted, resulting in the modern diversity seen today.

[ 43 ] [ page needed ] Examining this view, Egyptologist Stuart Tyson Smith , wrote that "Any characterization of race of the ancient Egyptians depends on modern cultural definitions, not on scientific study. Thus, by modern American standards it is reasonable to characterise the Egyptians as 'black', while acknowledging the scientific evidence for the physical diversity of Africans". Smith, however, expressed criticism of Egyptologists and Afrocentrists that defined ancient Egyptians "as members of an essentialist racial category" with perceived "Caucasoid" or "Negroid/Africoid" phenotypes".

[ 44 ] As historian Ronald H. Fritze argued, mainstream Egyptologists and other scholars strongly object to Afrocentric Egyptology, viewing it as "theurapetic mythology" for black people, since it fails to provide sufficient evidence or persuasive interpretations to back up its claims.

[ 45 ] Stephen Howe, professor in the history and cultures of colonialism at Bristol University, [ 46 ] writes that contrary to "Afrocentric speculation, depending on undocumented assertions that the relatively light-skinned people of the lower Nile today descend from Arab conquerors rather than earlier residents". Howe also cited a 1995 publication which stated "the latest major synthetic work on African populations is firmly of the opinion that "It was not the Arabs physically displaced Egyptians. Instead the Egyptians were transformed by relatively small number of immigrants bringing in new ideas, which, when disseminated, created a wider ethnic identity".

[ 47 ] S.O.Y. Keita, a biological anthropologist and research affilitate at the Smithsonian Institution who has been described as sympathetic to Afrocentrism, [ 48 ] but defined his position as that "it is not a question of “African” “influence”; Ancient Egypt was organically African. Studying early Egypt in its African context is not “Afrocentric,” but simply correct".

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Keita has argued that the original inhabitants of the Nile Valley were primarily a variety of indigenous Northeast Africans from the areas of the desiccating Sahara and more southerly areas. He reviewed studies on the biological affinities of the Ancient Egyptian population and described the skeletal morphologies of early dynastic Egyptian remains as a "Saharo-tropical African variant". He also noted that over time gene flow from the Near East and Europe added more genetic variability to the region.

[ 51 ] In 2022, Keita argued that some genetic studies have a "default racialist or racist approach" and should be interpreted in a framework with other sources of evidence.

[ 52 ] Several other academics, including Christopher Ehret , Fekri Hassan , 
Bruce Williams, Frank Yurco , Molefi Kete Asante , Lanny Bell and A.J. Boyce across various disciplines have contended that Ancient Egypt was fundamentally an African civilization, with cultural and biological connections to Egypt's African neighbors.

[ 53 ] Scholars have challenged the various assertions of Afrocentrists on the cultural and biological characteristics of Ancient Egyptian civilization and its people. At a UNESCO Symposium in the 1970s, some of the participants, including Jean Vercoutter , Serge Sauneron , Gunnar Säve-Söderbergh and Jean Leclant expressed "profound" disagreement with the "Black", homogeneous hypothesis.

[ 54 ] Despite contestations, UNESCO decided to include his "Origin of the ancient Egyptians" in the General History of Africa, with an editorial comment mentioning the disagreement. However, Diop's chapter was credited as a "painstakingly researched contribution" [ 55 ] in the general conclusion of the symposium report by the International Scientific Committee's Rapporteur, Professor Jean Devisse, [ 56 ] which nevertheless lead to a "real lack of balance" in the discussion among participants.

[ 57 ] The ancient world did not employ racial categories such as "Black" or "White" as they had no conception of "race", but rather labeled groups according to their land of origin and cultural traits. However, Keita studying the controversy, finds simplistic political appellations (in the negative or affirmative) describing ancient populations as "black" or "white" to be inaccurate and instead focuses on the ancestry of ancient Egypt as being a part of the native and diverse biological variation of Africa, which includes a variety of phenotypes and skin gradients.

[ 58 ] Egyptian Egyptologist Zahi Hawass has gone on record as saying that the Ancient Egyptians were not black and “We believe that the origin of Ancient Egyptians was purely Egyptian based on the discovery made by British Egyptologist Flinders Petrie at Naqada, and this is why the Ancient Egyptian civilisation did not occur in Africa , it occurred only here”.

[ 59 ] In 2022, Hawass reiterated his view that "Africans have nothing to do with the pyramids scientifically " [ 60 ] and stated that Africans "ruled in Egypt in the late Era, at the time of the 25th dynasty". Hawass also accused some international figures of African descent that promoted Afrocentrism of racism and fabrication of Egyptian history.

[ citation needed ] In 2008, Stuart Tyson Smith expressed criticism of a facial reconstruction of Tutankhamun as "very light-skinned" which reflected "bias" and "predictably and justifiably, it has provoked protests from Afrocentrists" as "Egyptologists have been strangely reluctant to admit that the ancient Egyptians were rather dark-skinned Africans, especially the farther south one goes".

[ 61 ] In 2011, Stephen Quirke , professor of Egyptian Archaeology and Philology argued that the UNESCO-sponsored conference on the General History of Africa in 1974 "did not change the Eurocentric climate of research" and of the need to incorporate both African-centred studies and White European, academic perspectives. He later outlined that "research conferences and publications on the history and language of Kemet [Egypt] remain dominated ... by those brought up and trained in European, not African societies and languages (which include Arabic)".

[ 62 ] African-American Afrocentric "hoteps" and the far-right Main article: Hoteps African-Americans who use the Black Egyptian hypothesis as a source of black pride have been called "the hoteps " (after the Egyptian word hotep ).

[ 63 ] The term has often been used disparagingly by non-hotep African-Americans, [ 64 ] some of whom have linked the ideology of the hotep community – which is anti-feminist , anti-gay and anti-Semitic – to the far-right .

[ 65 ] Hoteps have been described as promoting false histories and misinformation about black people and black history.

[ 63 ] Some have argued hotep beliefs are too narrow-minded (focusing only on Egypt as opposed to other aspects of African history ), [ 66 ] and black feminists argue that hoteps perpetuate rape culture by policing women's sexuality and not criticizing predatory black men.

[ 67 ] Alkebulan Among Afrocentrists the name 'Alkebulan' (also spelled 'Al Kebulan' or 'Alkebu Lan') is sometimes used a replacement for 'Africa.' Users often erroneously claim that it derives from the Arabic for 'Land of the Blacks' (in reality Bilad as-Sudan ), or alternatively that it comes from one or more indigenous African languages and means 'Garden of Life' or 'Motherland'.

[ 68 ] The earliest record of the term 'Alkebulan' is the introduction to an 1813 Spanish poem celebrating the defenders of Zaragoza , in which the author claimed an Arabic origin of the term. In the 20th century it was popularized by Yosef Ben-Jochannan , though this is sometimes incorrectly credited to Cheikh Anta Diop in a non-existent book called “The Kemetic History of Afrika”.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] Reception Afrocentrism has encountered opposition from mainstream scholars who charge it with historical inaccuracy, scholarly ineptitude, and racism.

[ 72 ] Yaacov Shavit , a critic of the movement, summarises its goals in the preface to his book History in Black , [ 73 ] in which he states: Thus, if historical myths and legends, or an invented history, play such a major role in the founding of every national reconstruction, the question that should concern us here is the nature of the distinct style in which black Americans imagine their past. The answer to this question is that radical Afrocentrism, the subject of this study, which plays a central role in shaping the modern historical world-view of a large section of the African-American (or Afro-American) community, is far more than an effort to follow the line taken by many ethnic groups and nations in modern rewriting, inventing or developing collective identity and national history. Rather, it is a large-scale historical project to rewrite the history of the whole of humankind from an Afrocentric point of view. The result is a new reconstruction of world history: it is a universal history.

Other critics, such as Mary Lefkowitz , contend that the Afrocentric historical approach is entrenched in myth and fantasy.

[ 74 ] She argues that Afrocentrism is grounded in identity politics and myth rather than sound scholarship.

[ 74 ] In The Skeptic's Dictionary , [ 75 ] philosophy professor Robert Todd Carroll labeled Afrocentrism " pseudohistorical ". He argued that Afrocentrism's prime goal was to encourage black nationalism and ethnic pride in order to effectively combat the destructive consequences of cultural and universal racism.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Professor of history Clarence E. Walker has described Afrocentrism as "a mythology that is racist, reactionary, essentially therapeutic" and "Eurocentrism in black face." [ 13 ] Classicist Mary Lefkowitz rejects George James 's theories about Egyptian contributions to Greek civilization as being faulty scholarship. She writes that ancient Egyptian texts show little similarity to Greek philosophy. Lefkowitz states that Aristotle could not have stolen his ideas from the great Library at Alexandria as James suggested, because the library was founded after Aristotle's death. On the basis of such errors, Lefkowitz calls Afrocentrism "an excuse to teach myth as history." [ 77 ] Mary Lefkowitz in 1997 whilst criticising elements of Afrocentrism had acknowledged that the origins of the ancient Egyptians were more clear due to the "recent evidence on skeletons and DNA [which] suggests that the people who settled in the Nile valley, like all of humankind, came from somewhere south of the Sahara; they were not (as some nineteenth-century scholars had supposed) invaders from the North." [ 78 ] In 2002, Ibrahim Sundiata wrote in the American Historical Review that: The word "Afrocentric" has been traced by Derrick Alridge to the American historian W.E.B. Du Bois, who employed it in the early 1960s. During the 1970s, Molefi Kete Asante appropriated the term, insisting that he was the only person equipped to define it, and asserting that even the holy archangels Du Bois and Cheikh Anta Diop had an imperfect and immature grasp of a concept that finds ultimate expression in his own pontifications. Subsequently, it became a catchall "floating signifier," nebulous, unstable, and infinitely mutable.

[ 79 ] Literature and languages scholar Cain Hope Felder , a supporter of Afrocentric ideas, has warned Afrocentrists to avoid certain pitfalls, [ 80 ] including: Demonizing categorically all white people, without careful differentiation between persons of goodwill and those who consciously perpetuate racism.

Adopting multiculturalism as a curricular alternative that eliminates, marginalizes, or vilifies European heritage to the point that Europe epitomizes all the evil in the world.

Gross over-generalizations and using factually or incorrect material is bad history and bad scholarship.

[ 80 ] Nathan Glazer writes that although Afrocentricity can mean many things, the popular press has generally given most attention to its most outlandish theories.

[ 81 ] Glazer agrees with many of the findings and conclusions presented in Lefkowitz's book Not Out of Africa . Yet he also argues that Afrocentrism often presents legitimate and relevant scholarship.

[ 81 ] The late Manning Marable was also a critic of Afrocentrism. He wrote: Populist Afrocentrism was the perfect social theory for the upwardly mobile black petty bourgeoisie. It gave them a sense of ethnic superiority and cultural originality, without requiring the hard, critical study of historical realities. It provided a philosophical blueprint to avoid concrete struggle within the real world... It was, in short, only the latest theoretical construct of a politics of racial identity, a world-view designed to discuss the world but never really to change it.

[ 12 ] Some Afrocentrists [ who?

] agree in rejecting those works which critics have characterized as examples of bad scholarship. Adisa A. Alkebulan states that the work of Afrocentric scholars is not fully appreciated because critics use the claims of "a few non-Afrocentrists" as "an indictment against Afrocentricity." [ 82 ] In 1996, the historian August Meier critically reviewed the new work of Mary Lefkowitz on Afrocentrism as "Eurocentric". He criticized her book Not Out of Africa: How Afrocentrism Became an Excuse to Teach Myth as History for what he saw as her neglect of the African-American historic literature of the 19th and 20th centuries. Meier believes she fails to take the African-American experiences into account, to the extent that she "fails to answer the question raised in this book's subtitle." [ 83 ] [ irrelevant citation ] Maghan Keita describes the controversy over Afrocentrism as a cultural war . He believes certain "epistemologies" are warring with each other: the "epistemology of blackness" argues for the "responsibilities and potential of black peoples to function in and contribute to the progress of civilization." [ 84 ] List of prominent authors Marimba Ani , [ 85 ] [ better source needed ] professor, author and activist: Yurugu: An Afrikan-centered Critique of European Cultural Thought and Behavior (Trenton: Africa World Press, 1994).

Molefi Kete Asante , professor, author: Afrocentricity: The Theory of Social Change ; The Afrocentric Idea ; The Egyptian Philosophers: Ancient African Voices from Imhotep to Akhenaten Jacob Carruthers , Egyptologist; founding director of the Association for the Study of Classical African Civilization; founder and director of the Kemetic Institute, Chicago Cheikh Anta Diop , [ 86 ] [ 87 ] author: The African Origin of Civilization: Myth or Reality ; Civilization or Barbarism: An Authentic Anthropology ; Precolonial Black Africa ; The Cultural Unity of Black Africa: The Domains of Patriarchy and of Matriarchy in Classical Antiquity ; The Peopling of Ancient Egypt & the Deciphering of the Meroitic Script Yosef Ben-Jochannan , author: African Origins of Major "Western Religions" ; Black Man of the Nile and His Family ; Africa: Mother of Western Civilization ; New Dimensions in African History ; The Myth of Exodus and Genesis and the Exclusion of Their African Origins ; Abu Simbel to Ghizeh: A Guide Book and Manual Jones, Gayl (1998).

The Healing . Boston: Beacon Press.

ISBN 978-0-8070-6314-9 .

The protagonist of this novel describes her ongoing daily experiences in the US using a consistently Afrocentric perspective.

Runoko Rashidi , [ 88 ] author: Introduction to African Civilizations ; The global African community: The African presence in Asia, Australia, and the South Pacific J.A. Rogers , author: Sex and Race: Negro-Caucasian Mixing in All Ages and All Lands: The Old World ; Nature Knows No Color Line ; Sex and Race: A History of White, Negro, and Indian Miscegenation in the Two Americas: The New World ; 100 Amazing Facts About the Negro With Complete Proof: A Short Cut to the World History of the Negro Ivan van Sertima , author: They Came before Columbus: The African Presence in Ancient America , African Presence in Early Europe ISBN 0-88738-664-4 ; Blacks in Science Ancient and Modern ; African Presence in Early Asia ; African Presence in Early America ; Early America Revisited ; Egypt Revisited: Journal of African Civilizations ; Nile Valley Civilizations ; Egypt: Child of Africa (Journal of African Civilizations, V. 12) ; The Golden Age of the Moor (Journal of African Civilizations, Vol. 11, Fall 1991) ; Great Black Leaders: Ancient and Modern ; Great African Thinkers: Cheikh Anta Diop [ 89 ] Chancellor Williams , author: The Destruction of Black Civilization: Great Issues of a Race from 4500 B.C. to 2000 A.D.

Théophile Obenga , author: Ancient Egypt and Black Africa: a student's handbook for the study of Ancient Egypt in philosophy, linguistics, and gender relations Asa Hilliard , III, author: SBA: The Reawakening of the African Mind ; The Teachings of Ptahhotep Charles S. Finch III an American physician, author, cultural historian, researcher African history, traditional medicine.

See also "Out of Africa" theory African-American culture African philosophy African Renaissance Anti-Europeanism Americentrism Asiacentrism Basking in reflected glory Black orientalism Black supremacy Ethnocentrism Nationalism and archaeology Négritude Nuwaubian Nation Pseudohistory Race and ethnicity in the United States Reverse discrimination Blaxit References ^ "Recent" here means in the last few thousand years, as opposed to in the Stone Age , for example 70,000 years ago ^ CC Verharen, "Molefi Asante...”, The Western Journal of Black Studies, (24)4, 2000, pp. 223–238 ^ Asante on Afrocentricity Archived 23 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Gates, Henry Louis , and Kwame Anthony Appiah (eds), Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African-American Volume 1, p. 111, Oxford University Press. 2005.

ISBN 0-19-517055-5 ^ General History of Africa, Vol 1, p41, UNESCO, 1981 ^ "Kenneth O. Dike Dies in a Nigerian Hospital" .

The New York Times . 13 November 1983.

^ Molefi Asante, The Painful Demise of Eurocentrism: An Afrocentric Response to Critics , foreword by Maulana Karenga : "Molefi Asante, the founding and preeminent theorist of Afrocentricity, is one of the most important intellectuals at work today. This work continues his tradition of combining an extraordinary intellectual range with an impressive ability to identify and clarify central issues in the current discourse on Afrocentricity, multiculturalism, race, culture, ethnicity and related themes. Dr. Asante offers an insightful and valuable response to Eurocentric critics of the Afrocentric initiative while simultaneously addressing a wide range of issues critical to understanding this important intellectual enterprise, including African agency, location, orientation, centerdness, subject-place and cultural groundedness. The volume is thoughtful, multifaceted and rewarding, and yields a rich sense of the contours and complexity of the Afrocentric project." --Dr. Maulana Karenga, Chair, Department of Black Studies, California State University, Long Beach." ^ Andrade, Susan Z. (1990).

"Rewriting History, Motherhood, and Rebellion: Naming an African Women's Literary Tradition" .

Research in African Literatures .

21 (1): 91– 110.

JSTOR 3819303 .

^ Woodson, Carter Godwin (1933).

The Mis-education of the Negro . ReadaClassic.com. p. 7. GGKEY:LYULWKX4YJQ.

^ Howe, Stephen (1998).

Afrocentrism: Mythical Pasts and Imagined Homes .

Verso Books . p.

10 .

ISBN 978-1-85984-228-7 .

^ Bracey, Earnest N. (1 January 1999).

Prophetic Insight: The Higher Education and Pedagogy of African Americans .

Lanham, Maryland : University Press of America . p.

7 .

ISBN 978-0-7618-1384-2 .

^ a b Marable, Manning (1995).

Beyond Black and White: Transforming African-American Politics .

Verso Books . p.

192 .

ISBN 978-1-85984-924-8 .

^ a b Banner-haley, C.P.; Walker, Clarence E. (2003).

"We Can't Go Home Again: An Argument about Afrocentrism" .

Journal of Southern History .

69 (3): 663– 665.

doi : 10.2307/30040016 .

JSTOR 30040016 . Retrieved 13 November 2007 .

^ Moses, Wilson Jeremiah (13 September 1998).

Afrotopia: The Roots of African American Popular History . Cambridge University Press. pp. 44–.

ISBN 978-0-521-47941-7 .

^ Levine, Robert (2008). "Elegant Inconsistencies: Race, Nation, and Writing in Wilson Jeremiah Moses's Afrotopia".

American Literary History .

20 (3): 497.

doi : 10.1093/alh/ajn016 .

S2CID 143005947 .

^ Thairu, Kihumbu (1975).

The African Civilization .

East African Literature Bureau .

^ a b Asante, Molefi K. (2007).

An Afrocentric Manifesto . Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. p. 6.

ISBN 978-07456-4102-7 .

^ Asante, Molefi K. (1998).

The Afrocentric Idea . Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press. pp.

ix– xiii.

ISBN 1-56639-595-X .

^ Asante, Molefi K. (2007).

An Afrocentric Manifesto . Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. p. 17.

ISBN 978-07456-4102-7 .

^ Du Bois, W. E. B., Black Reconstruction in America, 1860–1880 . New York: Harcourt Brace, 1935; reprint New York: The Free Press, 1998.

^ " Reconstruction ". Accessed 19 November 2007.

Archived 2009-10-31.

^ Moses, Greg.

"Afrocentricity as a Quest for Cultural Unity: Reading Diop in English" . National Association for African American Studies. Archived from the original on 12 December 2007 . Retrieved 13 November 2007 .

^ De-Westernizing Communication: Strategies for Neutralizing Cultural Myths .

^ Olaniyan, T. (2006). "From Black Aesthetics To Afrocentrism (or, A Small History of an African And African American Discursivepractice)".

West Africa Review .

ISSN 1525-4488 .

^ Victor Oguejiofor Okafor, "The Place of Africalogy in the University Curriculum", Journal of Black Studies , vol. 26 no. 6, July 1999, pp. 688–712.

^ Kete Asante, Molefi, "Afrocentricity: Toward a New Understanding of African Thought in this Millennium" , University of Liverpool, 2 August 2000, accessed 11 February 2009 Archived 2 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Woodson, Dr. Carter G. (1933).

The Mis-Education of the Negro . Khalifah's Booksellers & Associates.

^ Akbar, Dr. Na'im (1998).

^ Peters, Ronald Edward (ed.), Africentric Approaches to Christian Ministry: Strengthening Urban Congregations in African American Communities , University Press of America (2006), ISBN 978-0-7618-3264-5 .

^ Jaynes, Gerald D., ed. (2005).

Encyclopedia of African American society .

Thousand Oaks, California : SAGE Publications . p. 420.

ISBN 1452265410 . Retrieved 26 September 2015 .

^ Alexander, Ron (30 December 1983).

"The Evening Hours" .

The New York Times " . Retrieved 15 December 2006 .

^ Karenga, Maulana (1967). "Religion". In Clyde Halisi, James Mtume. The Quotable Karenga. Los Angeles: University of Sankore Press. pp. 25. 23769.8.

^ Mugane, John M. (15 July 2015).

The Story of Swahili .

Athens, Ohio : Ohio University Press . p. 255.

ISBN 978-0-89680-489-0 .

^ Leonardo, Zeus (2005).

Critical Pedagogy and Race , p. 129 ISBN 1-4051-2968-9 .

^ a b Hiernaux, J. (1974).

The People of Africa . Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

^ Hassan, F.A. (1988). "The Predynastic of Egypt".

Journal of World Prehistory .

2 (2): 135– 185.

doi : 10.1007/BF00975416 .

JSTOR 25800540 .

S2CID 153321928 .

^ Keita, S. (1992). "Further Studies of Crania From Ancient Northern Africa: An Analysis of Crania From First Dynasty Egyptian Tombs, Using Multiple Discriminant Functions".

American Journal of Physical Anthropology .

87 (3): 245– 54.

Bibcode : 1992AJPA...87..245K .

doi : 10.1002/ajpa.1330870302 .

PMID 1562056 .

^ Jean Vercoutter, The Peopling of Ancient Egypt and the Deciphering Meroitic Script . Paris: UNESCO, 1978, pp. 15–36.

^ a b c Ortiz de Montellano, Bernardo ; Gabriel Haslip Viera; Warren Barbour (1997). "They were NOT here before Columbus: Afrocentric hyper-diffusionism in the 1990s".

Ethnohistory .

44 (2): 199– 234.

doi : 10.2307/483368 .

JSTOR 483368 .

^ Sherwin, Elisabeth.

"Clarence Walker encourages black Americans to discard Afrocentrism" . Davis Community Network.

Archived from the original on 17 October 2007 . Retrieved 13 November 2007 .

^ Diop, C.A. (1964). "Evolution of the Negro world' ".

23 (51): 5– 15.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Bruce Williams, "The lost pharaohs of Nubia", in Ivan van Sertima (ed.), Egypt Revisited (New Brunswick, NJ, Transaction, 1993).

^ Van Sertima, Ivan (1994).

Egypt, Child of Africa . Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 1-56000-792-3 .

^ Smith, Stuart Tyson (2001). Redford, Donald (ed.).

The Oxford encyclopedia of ancient Egypt . Vol. 3.

Oxford University Press . pp.

27– 28.

^ Fritze, Ronald H. (4 February 2021).

Egyptomania: A History of Fascination, Obsession and Fantasy . Reaktion Books. p. 333.

ISBN 978-1-78023-685-8 .

Mainstream Egyptologists and other scholars strongly object to Afrocentric Egyptology. It is viewed as a 'therapeutic mythology' that is not based on convincing evidence or persuasive interpretations.

^ "Author Page" .

openDemocracy . 23 June 2012 . Retrieved 7 May 2020 .

^ Howe, Stephen (1998).

Afrocentrism: Mythical Pasts and Imagined Homes . Verso. p. 137.

ISBN 9781859848739 .

^ Cornell University Courses of Study . Cornell University. 1996. p. 423.

We shall then read from the works of "Afrocentrist" writers of history including Chancellor Williams, Yosef ben Yochanen and Chiekh Anta Diop as well as those of sympathetic scholars such as St. Clair Drake and Shomarka Keita.

^ Kamugisha, Aaron (July 2003).

"Finally in Africa? Egypt, from Diop to Celenko" .

Race & Class .

45 (1): 31– 60.

doi : 10.1177/0306396803045001002 .

ISSN 0306-3968 .

S2CID 145514370 .

^ "Finally in Africa? Egypt, from Diop to Celenko" .

SEYFETTİN . 16 January 2007.

^ Keita, S. O. Y. (1993).

"Studies and Comments on Ancient Egyptian Biological Relationships" .

History in Africa .

20 : 129– 154.

doi : 10.2307/3171969 .

ISSN 0361-5413 .

JSTOR 3171969 .

S2CID 162330365 .

^ Keita Shomarka. (2022).

"Ancient Egyptian "Origins and "Identity" In Ancient Egyptian society : challenging assumptions, exploring approaches . Abingdon, Oxon. pp.

124– 135.

ISBN 978-0367434632 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Celenko, Theodore (1996).

Egypt in Africa . Indianapolis, Ind.: Indianapolis Museum of Art. pp.

1– 134.

ISBN 0936260645 .

^ UNESCO, "Symposium on the Peopling of Ancient Egypt and the Deciphering of the Meroitic Script; Proceedings", (Paris, 1978), pp. 3–134.

^ Ancient civilizations of Africa (Abridged ed.). London [England]: J. Currey. 1990. pp.

43– 46.

ISBN 0852550928 .

^ Mokhtar, Gamal (1990).

Ancient Civilizations of Africa (Unesco International Scientific Committee for the Drafting of a General History of Africa) . Currey. p. 33.

ISBN 978-0-85255-092-2 .

^ The peopling of ancient Egypt and the deciphering of Meroitic script : proceedings of the symposium held in Cairo from 28 January to 3 February 1974 . Paris: Unesco. 1978. pp. 86, 93– 94, 99.

ISBN 92-3-101605-9 .

^ AgustÃ (2007). "Advancing Biocultural Perspectives: Optimism from a Workshop".

Anthropology News .

48 (9): 19– 20.

doi : 10.1525/an.2007.48.9.19 .

; see also "Forensic Misclassification of Ancient Nubian Crania: Implications for Assumptions About Human Variation", Frank L'Engle Williams, Robert L. Belcher, George J. Armelago's, Current Anthropology. (2005); An Analysis of Crania From Tell-Duweir Using Multiple Discriminant Functions, S. O. Y. Keita, American Journal of Physical Anthropology , 75: 375–390 (1988); "Interpreting African Genetic Diversity, S. O. Y. Keita & Rick Kittles, African Archaeological Review , Vol. 16, No. 2 (1999); "Race": Confusion About Zoological and Social Taxonomies, and Their Places in Science", S. O. Y. Keita, A. J. Boyce, Field Museum of Chicago Institute of Biological Anthropology, Oxford University, American Journal of Human Biology , 13: 569–575 (2001).

^ Samil, Nehar (2021).

"Claims that Ancient Egyptians were black untrue: Zahi Hawass" .

Daily News Egypt . Retrieved 8 September 2022 .

^ "Egyptians Create Viral Hashtag Against Kevin Hart's Cairo Performance" . 14 August 2024.

^ Smith, Stuart Tyson (1 January 2008).

"Review of From Slave to Pharaoh: The Black Experience of Ancient Egypt by Donald Redford" .

Near Eastern Archaeology 71:3 .

^ Egypt in its African context : proceedings of the conference held at the Manchester Museum, University of Manchester, 2–4 October 2009 . Oxford: Archaeopress. 2011. pp.

7– 9.

ISBN 978-1407307602 .

^ a b Lovett, Miranda (21 July 2020).

"Reflecting on the Rise of the Hoteps" .

Sapiens . Retrieved 7 July 2021 .

^ Young, Damon (5 March 2016).

"Hotep, Explained" .

The Root . Retrieved 7 July 2021 .

^ Sheffield, Matthew (23 April 2018).

"Laura Ingraham meets the Afrocentric "alt-right" — and it's every bit as weird as it sounds" .

Salon . Retrieved 7 July 2021 .

^ Bastién, Angelica Jade (17 October 2016).

" 'Insecure' Season 1, Episode 2: Failure to Change" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 7 July 2021 .

^ Bowen, Sesali (8 May 2018).

"What Dear White People Got Right About Hoteps" .

refinery29 . Retrieved 7 July 2021 .

^ Maku, Bright (6 February 2023).

"Alkebulan: Understanding the origins behind Africa's original name" .

Skabash!

. Retrieved 10 May 2024 .

^ "The Ancient Name for Africa was "Alkebulan" meaning "Mother of Mankind" " .

The African History . 3 July 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2024 .

^ "Alkebulan: The Original Name Of Africa And How To Pronounce It" .

Africa Global Radio . 15 March 2022 . Retrieved 10 May 2024 .

^ Jacobs, Frank (11 November 2014).

"Africa, uncolonized: a detailed look at an alternate continent" .

Big Think . Retrieved 10 May 2024 .

^ Early, Gerald (17 May 2002).

"Afrocentrism" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2 August 2022 .

^ Yaacov Shavit, History in Black: African-Americans in Search of an Ancient Past , Frank Cass Publishers, 2001, pp. vii.

^ a b Stearns, Peter N. (2008).

The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern World: 1750 to the Present . Oxford University Press. p. 59.

ISBN 978-0-19-517632-2 .

Opponents of Afrocentrism claim that this approach is entrenched in myth and fantasy. Mary Lefkowitz, in Not Out of Africa , argues that Afrocentrism is grounded in identity politics and not in sound scholarship.

^ a b * Afrocentrism by Robert Todd Carroll , Skeptic's Dictionary .

^ Robert Todd Carroll (2003), The Skeptic's Dictionary: A Collection of Strange Beliefs, Amusing Deceptions, and Dangerous Delusions , New York: John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 0-471-27242-6 (paperback). p. 148 ^ Lefkowitz 1996, pp. 125–126, 137–141 ^ Lefkowitz, Mary R. (1996).

Not out of Africa : how Afrocentrism became an excuse to teach myth as history . New York. p. 242.

ISBN 046509838X .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Ibrahim Sundiata, "The Argument We Are Really Having" , American Historical Review , (1996).

^ a b Hope Felder, Cain (1994).

"Afrocentrism, the Bible, and the Politics of Difference" .

The Princeton Seminary Bulletin .

XV (2).

^ a b Nathan Glazer, We Are All Multiculturalists Now , Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997 ISBN 0-674-94836-X .

^ Adisa A. Alkebulan, "Defending the Paradigm", Journal of Black Studies , Vol. 37, No. 3, pp. 410–427 (2007).

^ Meier, August, "Review: Mary Lefkowitz, Not out of Africa: How Afrocentrism became an Excuse to Teach Myth as History " , Journal of American History , December 1996.

^ Maghan Keita, Race and the Writing of History: Riddling the Sphinx , p. 7.

^ Africawithin.com .

^ Clarke, John Henrik .

"Cheikh Anta Diop and the New Light on African History" .

nbufront.org . National Black United Front. Archived from the original on 19 February 2009 . Retrieved 15 October 2015 .

^ "Cheikh Anta Diop, The Pharoah [sic] of Knowledge" . Archived from the original on 13 June 2007 . Retrieved 15 October 2015 .

^ Rashidi, Runoko .

"The Global African Presence" .

cwo.com . Archived from the original on 14 January 2012 . Retrieved 15 October 2015 .

^ Sertima, Ivan Van .

"Journal of African Civilizations" .

cwo.com . Archived from the original on 26 April 2006 . Retrieved 15 October 2015 .

Literature Primary Ani, Marimba (1994).

Yurugu: An African-centered Critique of European Thought and Behavior . Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press.

ISBN 0-86543-248-1 .

Asante, Molefi Kete (1988).

Afrocentricity (rev. ed.). Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press.

ISBN 0-86543-067-5 .

Asante, Molefi Kete (1990).

Kemet, Afrocentricity, and Knowledge . Trenton, N.J.: Africa World Press.

ISBN 0-86543-188-4 .

Asante, Molefi Kete (1998).

The Afrocentric Idea . Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

ISBN 1-56639-594-1 .

Asante, Molefi Kete (2007). An Afrocentric Manifesto. Cambridge: Polity Press.

ISBN 978-07456-4102-7 Karenga, Maulana (1993).

Introduction to Black Studies (2nd ed.). Los Angeles: University of Sankore Press.

ISBN 0-943412-16-1 .

Kershaw, Terry (1992). " "Afrocentrism and the Afrocentric method." Western Journal of Black Studies ".

16 (3): 160– 168.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) Secondary Adeleke, Tunde. (2009). The Case Against Afrocentrism. University Press of Mississippi.

ISBN 978-1-60473-293-1 Bailey, Randall C., ed. (2003).

Yet With a Steady Beat: Contemporary U.S. Afrocentric Biblical Interpretation . Society of Biblical Literature.

Berlinerblau, Jacques (1999).

Heresy in the University: The Black Athena Controversy and the Responsibilities of American Intellectuals . Rutgers University Press.

Binder, Amy J. (2002).

Contentious curricula: Afrocentrism and creationism in American public schools . Princeton University Press.

Browder, Anthony T. (1992).

Nile Valley Contributions To Civilization: Exploding the Myths, Volume 1 . Washington, DC: Institute of Karmic Guidance.

Henderson, Errol Anthony (1995).

Afrocentrism and World Politics: towards a new paradigm . Westport, Connecticut: Praeger.

Henke, Holger; Reno, Fred, eds. (2003).

Modern political culture in the Caribbean . University of the West Indies Press.

Howe, Stephen (1998).

Afrocentrism: mythical pasts and imagined homes . London: Verso.

ISBN 9781859848739 .

Konstan, David. "Inventing Ancient Greece: [Review article]", History and Theory , Vol. 36, No. 2. (May 1997), pp. 261–269.

Lefkowitz, Mary (1996).

History Lesson: A Race Odyssey . Yale University Press.

ISBN 0-300-12659-X .

Lefkowitz, Mary (1996).

Not Out of Africa: How Afrocentrism Became an Excuse to Teach Myth as History . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 0-465-09837-1 .

Lefkowitz, Mary R.; Guy MacLean Rogers, eds. (1996).

Black Athena Revisited . University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 0-8078-4555-8 .

Moses, Wilson Jeremiah (1998).

Afrotopia: the roots of African American popular history . Cambridge University Press.

Sniderman, Paul M.; Piazza, Thomas (2002).

Black Pride and Black Prejudice . Princeton University Press.

Walker, Clarence E. (2000).

We Can't Go Home Again: An Argument about Afrocentrism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-509571-5 .

External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Afrocentrism .

Afrocentricity Archived 23 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine by Molefi Kete Asante , asante.net "The Afrocentric Hustle" Stanley Crouch comments on the emergence of Afrocentric thought in the African American community.

Afrocentrism: The Argument We're Really Having by Ibrahim Sundiata ankhonline.com (in French) v t e Pan-Africanism Ideology Variants African nationalism African socialism Afrocentrism Anti-imperialism Anti-Western sentiment Black nationalism Garveyism Nkrumaism Sankarism Uhuru Movement Zikism Concepts African century Black power Négritude Ubuntu Ujamaa United States of Africa Proponents Politicians Dennis Akumu Idi Amin Nnamdi Azikiwe Amílcar Cabral David Comissiong Jean-Jacques Dessalines Anténor Firmin Muammar Gaddafi Marcus Garvey Alieu Ebrima Cham Joof Kenneth Kaunda Modibo Keïta Jomo Kenyatta Toussaint Louverture Patrice Lumumba Samora Machel Ochola Ogaye Mak'Anyengo Thabo Mbeki Tom Mboya Robert Mugabe Abdias do Nascimento Gamal Abdel Nasser Kwame Nkrumah Julius Nyerere John Nyathi Pokela Thomas Sankara Ahmed Sékou Touré Haile Selassie Robert Sobukwe I. T. A. Wallace-Johnson Others Marimba Ani Molefi Kete Asante Steve Biko Edward Wilmot Blyden Stokely Carmichael Aimé Césaire John Henrik Clarke Martin R. Delany Cheikh Anta Diop W. E. B. Du Bois Frantz Fanon Amy Ashwood Garvey John G. Jackson Leonard Jeffries Yosef Ben-Jochannan Maulana Karenga Alice Kinloch Fela Kuti Malcolm X Archie Mafeje Ali Mazrui Zephania Mothopeng George Padmore Motsoko Pheko Runoko Rashidi Paul Robeson Randall Robinson Walter Rodney Burning Spear Issa Laye Thiaw Frances Cress Welsing Henry Sylvester Williams Amos N. Wilson Omali Yeshitela Organizations Educational African Leadership Academy African Leadership University Political African Unification Front African Union All-African People's Revolutionary Party All-African Trade Union Federation Conseil de l'Entente Convention People's Party East African Community Economic Freedom Fighters First Pan-African Conference International African Service Bureau Organisation of African Trade Union Unity Organisation of African Unity Pan African Association Pan-African Freedom Movement for East and Central Africa Pan-African Congress Pan Africanist Congress of Azania Popular and Social League of the Great Sahara Tribes Rassemblement Démocratique Africain Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League ZANU–PF Symbols Black Star of Africa Le Marron Inconnu Lion of Judah Pan-African colours Pan-African flag Dynamics Ethnic groups of Africa Languages of Africa Religion in Africa Conflicts in Africa Related African philosophy African-American leftism Africanization All-African Peoples' Conference East African Federation Kwanzaa Union of African States United States of Africa United States of Latin Africa Year of Africa Pan-Africanism category Africa category Pan-Africanism portal Africa portal v t e Ethnocentrism Regional variants Afrocentrism Americentrism Asiacentrism Indocentrism Sinocentrism Little China Eurocentrism Anglocentrism Germanocentrism Hellenocentrism Related phenomena Anthropocentrism Chronocentrism Colonial mentality Exceptionalism Template Geocentrism Religiocentrism Sentiocentrism Xenocentrism Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Spain Poland Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐x8qdk
Cached time: 20250814215933
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.178 seconds
Real time usage: 1.391 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9367/1000000
Revision size: 67392/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 272032/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18846/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 29/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 336650/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.761/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19609517/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1199.153      1 -total
 29.15%  349.522      1 Template:Reflist
 22.29%  267.260     44 Template:Cite_book
 12.21%  146.447     20 Template:Fix
  7.90%   94.777     10 Template:Citation_needed
  7.60%   91.099      1 Template:In_lang
  7.50%   89.904      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.38%   88.442      1 Template:Pan-African
  6.36%   76.318     14 Template:Cite_journal
  6.07%   72.776      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:194624:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215933 and revision id 1302140003. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Afrocentrism&oldid=1302140003 " Categories : Afrocentrism African-American culture Black Power Ethnocentrism Geocultural perspectives Pan-Africanism Political neologisms Pseudohistory Historical revisionism African-American-related controversies Anti–Middle Eastern sentiment Africana philosophy Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from June 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from December 2017 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2022 Articles lacking reliable references from January 2021 Articles with French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 16:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Afrocentrism 25 languages Add topic

