Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Principles of waste management Toggle Principles of waste management subsection 1.1 Waste hierarchy 1.2 Life-cycle of a product 1.3 Resource efficiency 1.4 Polluter-pays principle 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 United Kingdom 2.2 United States 3 Waste handling and transport Toggle Waste handling and transport subsection 3.1 Waste handling and transport 3.2 Waste segregation 4 Hazards of waste management 5 Financial models 6 Disposal methods Toggle Disposal methods subsection 6.1 Landfill 6.2 Incineration 7 Recycling 8 Re-use Toggle Re-use subsection 8.1 Biological reprocessing 8.2 Energy recovery 8.3 Pyrolysis 8.4 Resource recovery 8.5 Waste valorization 9 Liquid waste-management Toggle Liquid waste-management subsection 9.1 Industrial wastewater 9.2 Sewage sludge treatment 10 Avoidance and reduction methods 11 International waste trade 12 Challenges in developing countries 13 Technologies 14 Statistics and trends 15 Waste management by region Toggle Waste management by region subsection 15.1 China 15.2 Hungary 15.3 Morocco 15.4 San Francisco 15.5 Turkey 15.6 United Kingdom 15.7 Zambia 16 E-waste Toggle E-waste subsection 16.1 Transboundary movement of e-waste 17 Scientific journals 18 See also 19 Notes 20 References 21 Bibliography 22 External links Toggle the table of contents Waste management 63 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu বাংলা Banjar Български Català Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Latgaļu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Xitsonga ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Ghanaian Pidgin Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Activities and actions required to manage waste from its source to its final disposal For the company, see Waste Management (corporation) . For other uses, see Waste management (disambiguation) .

"Waste disposal" redirects here. For the kitchen device, see Garbage disposal unit .

Not to be confused with Sanitary engineering .

Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e A specialized trash collection truck providing regular municipal trash collection in a neighborhood in Stockholm , Sweden Waste pickers burning e-waste in Agbogbloshie , a site near Accra in Ghana that processes large volumes of international electronic waste. The pickers burn the plastics off of materials and collect the metals for recycling, However, this process exposes pickers and their local communities to toxic fumes.

Containers for consumer waste collection at the Gdańsk University of Technology A recycling and waste-to-energy plant for waste that is not exported Waste management or waste disposal includes the processes and actions required to manage waste from its inception to its final disposal .

[ 1 ] This includes the collection , transport , treatment , and disposal of waste, together with monitoring and regulation of the waste management process and waste-related laws , technologies, and economic mechanisms.

Waste can either be solid, liquid, or gases and each type has different methods of disposal and management. Waste management deals with all types of waste, including industrial , chemical , municipal , organic , biomedical , and radioactive wastes . In some cases, waste can pose a threat to human health.

[ 2 ] Health issues are associated with the entire process of waste management. Health issues can also arise indirectly or directly: directly through the handling of solid waste, and indirectly through the consumption of water, soil, and food.

[ 2 ] Waste is produced by human activity, for example, the extraction and processing of raw materials.

[ 3 ] Waste management is intended to reduce the adverse effects of waste on human health , the environment , planetary resources, and aesthetics .

The aim of waste management is to reduce the dangerous effects of such waste on the environment and human health. A big part of waste management deals with municipal solid waste , which is created by industrial, commercial, and household activity.

[ 4 ] Waste management practices are not the same across countries ( developed and developing nations ); regions ( urban and rural areas ), and residential and industrial sectors can all take different approaches.

[ 5 ] Proper management of waste is important for building sustainable and liveable cities, but it remains a challenge for many developing countries and cities. A report found that effective waste management is relatively expensive, usually comprising 20%–50% of municipal budgets. Operating this essential municipal service requires integrated systems that are efficient, sustainable, and socially supported.

[ 6 ] A large portion of waste management practices deal with municipal solid waste (MSW) which is the bulk of the waste that is created by household, industrial, and commercial activity.

[ 7 ] According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), municipal solid waste is expected to reach approximately 3.4 Gt by 2050; however, policies and lawmaking can reduce the amount of waste produced in different areas and cities of the world.

[ 8 ] Measures of waste management include measures for integrated techno-economic mechanisms [ 9 ] of a circular economy , effective disposal facilities, export and import control [ 10 ] [ 11 ] and optimal sustainable design of products that are produced.

In the first systematic review of the scientific evidence around global waste, its management, and its impact on human health and life, authors concluded that about a fourth of all the municipal solid terrestrial waste is not collected and an additional fourth is mismanaged after collection, often being burned in open and uncontrolled fires – or close to one billion tons per year when combined. They also found that broad priority areas each lack a "high-quality research base", partly due to the absence of "substantial research funding ", which motivated scientists often require.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Electronic waste (ewaste) includes discarded computer monitors, motherboards, mobile phones and chargers, compact discs (CDs), headphones, television sets, air conditioners and refrigerators. According to the Global E-waste Monitor 2017, India generates ~ 2 million tonnes (Mte) of e-waste annually and ranks fifth among the e-waste producing countries, after the United States , the People's Republic of China , Japan and Germany .

[ 14 ] Effective 'Waste Management' involves the practice of '7R' - 'R'efuse, 'R'educe', 'R'euse, 'R'epair, 'R'epurpose , 'R'ecycle and 'R'ecover. Amongst these '7R's, the first two ('Refuse' and 'Reduce') relate to the non-creation of waste - by refusing to buy non-essential products and by reducing consumption. The next two ('Reuse' and 'Repair') refer to increasing the usage of the existing product, with or without the substitution of certain parts of the product. 'Repurpose' and 'Recycle' involve maximum usage of the materials used in the product, and 'Recover' is the least preferred and least efficient waste management practice involving the recovery of embedded energy in the waste material. For example, burning the waste to produce heat (and electricity from heat).

[ 15 ] Principles of waste management [ edit ] Diagram of the waste hierarchy Waste hierarchy [ edit ] The waste hierarchy refers to the "3 Rs" Reduce , Reuse and Recycle , which classifies waste management strategies according to their desirability in terms of waste minimisation . The waste hierarchy is the bedrock of most waste minimization strategies. The aim of the waste hierarchy is to extract the maximum practical benefits from products and to generate the minimum amount of end waste; see: resource recovery .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The waste hierarchy is represented as a pyramid because the basic premise is that policies should promote measures to prevent the generation of waste. The next step or preferred action is to seek alternative uses for the waste that has been generated, i.e., by re-use. The next is recycling which includes composting. Following this step is material recovery and waste-to-energy . The final action is disposal, in landfills or through incineration without energy recovery . This last step is the final resort for waste that has not been prevented, diverted, or recovered.

[ 18 ] [ page needed ] The waste hierarchy represents the progression of a product or material through the sequential stages of the pyramid of waste management. The hierarchy represents the latter parts of the life-cycle for each product.

[ 19 ] Life-cycle of a product [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( May 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section may incorporate text from a large language model .

Such text potentially includes hallucinated information or fictitious references .

Copyright violations or claims lacking verification must be removed . Please see the associated project page for additional guidance.

( August 2025 ) The life-cycle of a product, often referred to as the product lifecycle , encompasses several key stages that begin with the design phase and proceed through manufacture, distribution, and primary use. After these initial stages, the product moves through the waste hierarchy's stages of reduce, reuse, and recycle. Each phase in this lifecycle presents unique opportunities for policy intervention, allowing stakeholders to rethink the necessity of the product, redesign it to minimize its waste potential, and extend its useful life.

During the design phase, considerations can be made to ensure that products are created with fewer resources, are more durable, and are easier to repair or recycle. This stage is critical for embedding sustainability into the product from the outset. Designers can select materials that have lower environmental impacts and create products that require less energy and resources to produce.

[ 20 ] Manufacturing offers another crucial point for reducing waste and conserving resources. Innovations in production processes can lead to more efficient use of materials and energy, while also minimizing the generation of by-products and emissions. Adopting cleaner production techniques and improving manufacturing efficiency can significantly reduce the environmental footprint of a product.

Distribution involves the logistics of getting the product from the manufacturer to the consumer. Optimizing this stage can involve reducing packaging, choosing more sustainable transportation methods, and improving supply chain efficiencies to lower the overall environmental impact. Efficient logistics planning can also help in reducing fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions associated with the transport of goods.

The primary use phase of a product's lifecycle is where consumers interact with the product. Policies and practices that encourage responsible use, regular maintenance, and the proper functioning of products can extend their lifespan, thus reducing the need for frequent replacements and decreasing overall waste.

Once the product reaches the end of its primary use, it enters the waste hierarchy's stages. The first stage, reduction, involves efforts to decrease the volume and toxicity of waste generated. This can be achieved by encouraging consumers to buy less, use products more efficiently, and choose items with minimal packaging.

The reuse stage encourages finding alternative uses for products, whether through donation, resale, or repurposing. Reuse extends the life of products and delays their entry into the waste stream.

Recycling, the final preferred stage, involves processing materials to create new products, thus closing the loop in the material lifecycle. Effective recycling programs can significantly reduce the need for virgin materials and the environmental impacts associated with extracting and processing those materials.

[ 21 ] Product life-cycle analysis (LCA) is a comprehensive method for evaluating the environmental impacts associated with all stages of a product's life. By systematically assessing these impacts, LCA helps identify opportunities to improve environmental performance and resource efficiency. Through optimizing product designs, manufacturing processes, and end-of-life management, LCA aims to maximize the use of the world's limited resources and minimize the unnecessary generation of waste.

In summary, the product lifecycle framework underscores the importance of a holistic approach to product design, use, and disposal. By considering each stage of the lifecycle and implementing policies and practices that promote sustainability, it is possible to significantly reduce the environmental impact of products and contribute to a more sustainable future.

Resource efficiency [ edit ] Main article: resource efficiency Resource efficiency reflects the understanding that global economic growth and development can not be sustained at current production and consumption patterns. Globally, humanity extracts more resources to produce goods than the planet can replenish. Resource efficiency is the reduction of the environmental impact from the production and consumption of these goods, from final raw material extraction to the last use and disposal.

Polluter-pays principle [ edit ] The polluter-pays principle mandates that the polluting parties pay for the impact on the environment. With respect to waste management, this generally refers to the requirement for a waste generator to pay for appropriate disposal of the unrecoverable materials.

[ 22 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of waste management Throughout most of history, the amount of waste generated by humans was insignificant due to low levels of population density and exploitation of natural resources . Common waste produced during pre-modern times was mainly ashes and human biodegradable waste , and these were released back into the ground locally, with minimum environmental impact . Tools made out of wood or metal were generally reused or passed down through the generations.

However, some civilizations have been more profligate in their waste output than others. In particular, the Maya of Central America had a fixed monthly ritual, in which the people of the village would gather together and burn their rubbish in large dumps.

[ 23 ] [ irrelevant citation ] In the Ashanti Empire by the 19th century, there existed a Public Works Department that was responsible for sanitation in Kumasi and its suburbs. They kept the streets clean daily and commanded civilians to keep their compounds clean and weeded.

[ 24 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Edwin Chadwick 's 1842 report The Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population was influential in securing the passage of the first legislation aimed at waste clearance and disposal.

Following the onset of the Industrial Revolution , industrialisation, and the sustained urban growth of large population centres in England , the buildup of waste in the cities caused a rapid deterioration in levels of sanitation and the general quality of urban life. The streets became choked with filth due to the lack of waste clearance regulations.

[ 25 ] Calls for the establishment of municipal authority with waste removal powers occurred as early as 1751, when Corbyn Morris in London proposed that "... as the preservation of the health of the people is of great importance, it is proposed that the cleaning of this city, should be put under one uniform public management, and all the filth be...conveyed by the Thames to proper distance in the country".

[ 26 ] However, it was not until the mid-19th century, spurred by increasingly devastating cholera outbreaks and the emergence of a public health debate that the first legislation on the issue emerged. Highly influential in this new focus was the report The Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population in 1842 [ 27 ] of the social reformer , Edwin Chadwick , in which he argued for the importance of adequate waste removal and management facilities to improve the health and wellbeing of the city's population.

In the UK, the Nuisance Removal and Disease Prevention Act of 1846 began what was to be a steadily evolving process of the provision of regulated waste management in London.

[ 28 ] The Metropolitan Board of Works was the first citywide authority that centralized sanitation regulation for the rapidly expanding city, and the Public Health Act 1875 made it compulsory for every household to deposit their weekly waste in "moveable receptacles" for disposal—the first concept for a dustbin .

[ 29 ] Manlove, Alliott & Co. Ltd.

1894 destructor furnace. The use of incinerators for waste disposal became popular in the late 19th century.

The dramatic increase in waste for disposal led to the creation of the first incineration plants, or, as they were then called, "destructors". In 1874, the first incinerator was built in Nottingham by Manlove, Alliott & Co. Ltd.

to the design of Alfred Fryer.

[ 26 ] However, these were met with opposition on account of the large amounts of ash they produced and which wafted over the neighbouring areas.

[ 30 ] Similar municipal systems of waste disposal sprung up at the turn of the 20th century in other large cities of Europe and North America.

Early garbage removal trucks were simply open-bodied dump trucks pulled by a team of horses. They became motorized in the early part of the 20th century and the first closed-body trucks to eliminate odours with a dumping lever mechanism were introduced in the 1920s in Britain.

[ 31 ] These were soon equipped with 'hopper mechanisms' where the scooper was loaded at floor level and then hoisted mechanically to deposit the waste in the truck. The Garwood Load Packer was the first truck in 1938, to incorporate a hydraulic compactor.

United States [ edit ] Further information: Pollution , History of municipal treatment of drinking water , Environmental history of the United States , and Urban resilience Waste management in the United States dates back to colonial times, with New Amsterdam (now New York City) making it illegal to throw waste into the street as early as 1654. In the mid 1700s, Benjamin Franklin started the first waste collection and street-cleaning service in the History of Philadelphia . He wrote and distributed papers explaining the benefits of clean streets, convincing residents to pay a small fee for regular cleaning. His efforts led to the paving and cleaning of Philadelphia’s streets, making them more accessible and reducing dust and debris. His advocacy contributed to the passage of a 1762 law regulating street maintenance.

[ 32 ] Historian Martin Melosi outlines the history of American urban sanitation through three distinct phases, each defined by evolving concerns about water supply, sewerage, and waste disposal: [ 33 ] The Age of Miasmas (Colonial Era–1880): As cities rapidly expanded, particularly after 1830, sanitation became a pressing issue. Influenced by English beliefs, American officials mistakenly blamed epidemic diseases on “ miasmas ”—unpleasant odors from accumulated filth. They focused on improving water supply and building mile after mile of sewers through residential neighborhoods to handle wastewater removal. No miasma supposedly meant no disease. Throughout the 1800s, cities typically relied on animals for organic waste disposal—even New York City used piggeries, with thousands of pigs roaming freely through the streets consuming city refuse.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] The Bacteriological Revolution (1880–1945): Melosi finds that scientific breakthroughs in Europe revealed that germs, not miasmas, caused epidemics. This led to more effective disease prevention strategies and the development of comprehensive sanitation systems based on pure water supplies. Cities also began experimenting with solid waste disposal methods, particularly to manage the mountains of human and horse waste. However, they were late to deal with smoke pollution and they ignored industrial chemicals.  In 1895, New York City became the first American city with public-sector garbage management.

[ 36 ] By the late 1880s the city government in Chicago hired 225 st teams, which gathered over 2,000 cubic yards of refuse daily. In Manhattan in New York City, individual scavengers carted away over 600 tons of garbage every day, and in the summer, over 1000 tons a day. The era of terrible epidemics such as cholera practically ended. (The worldwide " Spanish flu " epidemic  of 1919 was a major killer that was not caused by urban waste.

[ 37 ] ) The New Ecology (Since 1945): Continued urban expansion, Melosi argues, has strained sanitation infrastructure, requiring costly cleanup and repairs. Since the 1960s, growing environmental awareness has broadened concerns beyond biological pollutants to include industrial and chemical contaminants. In 1962 Rachel Carson reached a huge popular audience with Silent Spring that warned that pesticides especially DDT were greatly damaging the environment--spring was eerily quiet because DDT was killing the songbirds. Public opinion forced wave after wave of government interventions from the national level, such as the Environmental Protection Agency .

[ 38 ] Waste handling and transport [ edit ] Main articles: Waste collection vehicle , Waste collector , and Waste sorting Moulded plastic, wheeled waste bin in Berkshire , England Waste collection methods vary widely among different countries and regions. Domestic waste collection services are often provided by local government authorities, or by private companies for industrial and commercial waste. Some areas, especially those in less developed countries, do not have formal waste-collection systems.

Waste handling and transport [ edit ] Curbside collection is the most common method of disposal in most European countries, Canada, New Zealand, the United States, and many other parts of the developed world in which waste is collected at regular intervals by specialised trucks. This is often associated with curb-side waste segregation. In rural areas, waste may need to be taken to a transfer station. Waste collected is then transported to an appropriate disposal facility. 
In some areas, vacuum collection is used in which waste is transported from the home or commercial premises by vacuum along small bore tubes. Systems are in use in Europe and North America.

Main article: Automated vacuum collection In some jurisdictions, unsegregated waste is collected at the curb-side or from waste transfer stations and then sorted into recyclables and unusable waste. Such systems are capable of sorting large volumes of solid waste, salvaging recyclables, and turning the rest into bio-gas and soil conditioners. 
In San Francisco , the local government established its Mandatory Recycling and Composting Ordinance in support of its goal of "Zero waste by 2020", requiring everyone in the city to keep recyclables and compostables out of the landfill. The three streams are collected with the curbside "Fantastic 3" bin system – blue for recyclables, green for compostables, and black for landfill-bound materials – provided to residents and businesses and serviced by San Francisco's sole refuse hauler, Recology. The city's "Pay-As-You-Throw" system charges customers by the volume of landfill-bound materials, which provides a financial incentive to separate recyclables and compostables from other discards. The city's Department of the Environment's Zero Waste Program has led the city to achieve 80% diversion, the highest diversion rate in North America.

[ 39 ] Other businesses such as Waste Industries use a variety of colors to distinguish between trash and recycling cans. In addition, in some areas of the world the disposal of municipal solid waste can cause environmental strain due to official not having benchmarks that help measure the environmental sustainability of certain practices.

[ 40 ] Waste segregation [ edit ] Further information: Waste separation Recycling point at the Gdańsk University of Technology This is the separation of wet waste and dry waste. The purpose is to recycle dry waste easily and to use wet waste as compost. When segregating waste, the amount of waste that gets landfilled reduces considerably, resulting in lower levels of air and water pollution. Importantly, waste segregation should be based on the type of waste and the most appropriate treatment and disposal. This also makes it easier to apply different processes to the waste, like composting, recycling, and incineration. It is important to practice waste management and segregation as a community. One way to practice waste management is to ensure there is awareness. The process of waste segregation should be explained to the community.

[ 41 ] Segregated waste is also often cheaper to dispose of because it does not require as much manual sorting as mixed waste. There are a number of important reasons why waste segregation is important such as legal obligations, cost savings, and protection of human health and the environment. Institutions should make it as easy as possible for their staff to correctly segregate their waste. This can include labelling, making sure there are enough accessible bins, and clearly indicating why segregation is so important.

[ 42 ] Labeling is especially important when dealing with nuclear waste due to how much harm to human health the excess products of the nuclear cycle can cause.

[ 43 ] Hazards of waste management [ edit ] There are multiple facets of waste management that all come with hazards, both for those around the disposal site and those who work within waste management. Exposure to waste of any kind can be detrimental to the health of the individual, primary conditions that worsen with exposure to waste are asthma and tuberculosis .

[ 44 ] The exposure to waste on an average individual is highly dependent on the conditions around them, those in less developed or lower income areas are more susceptible to the effects of waste product, especially though chemical waste.

[ 45 ] The range of hazards due to waste is extremely large and covers every type of waste, not only chemical. There are many different guidelines to follow for disposing different types of waste.

[ 46 ] Diagram showing the multiple ways that incineration is hazardous to the population The hazards of incineration are a large risk to many variable communities, including underdeveloped countries and countries or cities with little space for landfills or alternatives. Burning waste is an easily accessible option for many people around the globe, it has even been encouraged by the World Health Organization when there is no other option.

[ 47 ] Because burning waste is rarely paid attention to, its effects go unnoticed. The release of hazardous materials and CO 2 when waste is burned is the largest hazard with incineration.

[ 48 ] Financial models [ edit ] In most developed countries, domestic waste disposal is funded from a national or local tax which may be related to income, or property values. Commercial and industrial waste disposal is typically charged for as a commercial service, often as an integrated charge which includes disposal costs. This practice may encourage disposal contractors to opt for the cheapest disposal option such as landfill rather than the environmentally best solution such as re-use and recycling.

Financing solid waste management projects can be overwhelming for the city government, especially if the government see it as an important service they should render to the citizen. Donors and grants are a funding mechanism that is dependent on the interest of the donor organization. As much as it is a good way to develop a city's waste management infrastructure, attracting and utilizing grants is solely reliant on what the donor considers important. Therefore, it may be a challenge for a city government to dictate how the funds should be distributed among the various aspect of waste management.

[ 49 ] An example of a country that enforces a waste tax is Italy . The tax is based on two rates: fixed and variable. The fixed rate is based on the size of the house while the variable is determined by the number of people living in the house.

[ 50 ] The World Bank finances and advises on solid waste management projects using a diverse suite of products and services, including traditional loans, results-based financing, development policy financing, and technical advisory. World Bank-financed waste management projects usually address the entire lifecycle of waste right from the point of generation to collection and transportation, and finally treatment and disposal.

[ 6 ] Disposal methods [ edit ] Landfill [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Landfill .

[ edit ] A landfill [ a ] is a site for the disposal of waste materials. It is the oldest and most common form of waste disposal , although the systematic burial of waste with daily, intermediate, and final covers only began in the 1940s. In the past, waste was simply left in piles or thrown into pits (known in archeology as middens ).

Landfills take up a lot of land and pose environmental risks. Some landfill sites are used for waste management purposes, such as temporary storage, consolidation, and transfer, or for various stages of processing waste material, such as sorting, treatment, or recycling . Unless they are stabilized, landfills may undergo severe shaking or soil liquefaction during an earthquake . Once full, the area over a landfill site may be reclaimed for other uses.

Both active and restored landfill sites can have significant environmental impacts which can persist for many years. These include the release of gases that contribute to climate change and the discharge of liquid leachates containing high concentrations of polluting materials.

A landfill compaction vehicle in action.

Spittelau incineration plant in Vienna Incineration [ edit ] Main article: Incineration Tarastejärvi Incineration Plant in Tampere , Finland Incineration is a disposal method in which solid organic wastes are subjected to combustion so as to convert them into residue and gaseous products. This method is useful for the disposal of both municipal solid waste and solid residue from wastewater treatment. This process reduces the volume of solid waste by 80 to 95 percent.

[ 51 ] Incineration and other high-temperature waste treatment systems are sometimes described as " thermal treatment ". Incinerators convert waste materials into heat , gas , steam , and ash .

Incineration is carried out both on a small scale by individuals and on a large scale by industry. It is used to dispose of solid, liquid, and gaseous waste. It is recognized as a practical method of disposing of certain hazardous waste materials (such as biological medical waste ). Incineration is a controversial method of waste disposal, due to issues such as the emission of gaseous pollutants including substantial quantities of carbon dioxide .

Incineration is common in countries such as Japan where land is more scarce, as the facilities generally do not require as much area as landfills.

Waste-to-energy (WtE) or energy-from-waste (EfW) are broad terms for facilities that burn waste in a furnace or boiler to generate heat, steam, or electricity. Combustion in an incinerator is not always perfect and there have been concerns about pollutants in gaseous emissions from incinerator stacks. Particular concern has focused on some very persistent organic compounds such as dioxins , furans , and PAHs , which may be created and which may have serious environmental consequences and some heavy metals such as mercury [ 52 ] and lead which can be volatilised in the combustion process.

Recycling [ edit ] Main article: Recycling Steel crushed and baled for recycling Recycling is a resource recovery practice that refers to the collection and reuse of waste materials such as empty beverage containers. This process involves breaking down and reusing materials that would otherwise be gotten rid of as trash. There are numerous benefits of recycling, and with so many new technologies making even more materials recyclable, it is possible to clean up the Earth.

[ 53 ] Recycling not only benefits the environment but also positively affects the economy. The materials from which the items are made can be made into new products.

[ 54 ] Materials for recycling may be collected separately from general waste using dedicated bins and collection vehicles, a procedure called kerbside collection . In some communities, the owner of the waste is required to separate the materials into different bins (e.g. for paper, plastics, metals) prior to its collection. In other communities, all recyclable materials are placed in a single bin for collection, and the sorting is handled later at a central facility. The latter method is known as " single-stream recycling ".

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] A recycling point in Lappajärvi , Finland The most common consumer products recycled include aluminium such as beverage cans, copper such as wire, steel from food and aerosol cans, old steel furnishings or equipment, rubber tyres , polyethylene and PET bottles, glass bottles and jars, paperboard cartons , newspapers , magazines and light paper, and corrugated fiberboard boxes.

PVC , LDPE , PP , and PS (see resin identification code ) are also recyclable. These items are usually composed of a single type of material, making them relatively easy to recycle into new products. The recycling of complex products (such as computers and electronic equipment) is more difficult, due to the additional dismantling and separation required.

The type of material accepted for recycling varies by city and country. Each city and country has different recycling programs in place that can handle the various types of recyclable materials. However, certain variation in acceptance is reflected in the resale value of the material once it is reprocessed. Some of the types of recycling include waste paper and cardboard, plastic recycling , metal recycling , electronic devices, wood recycling , glass recycling , cloth and textile and so many more.

[ 57 ] In July 2017, the Chinese government announced an import ban of 24 categories of recyclables and solid waste , including plastic , textiles and mixed paper, placing tremendous impact on developed countries globally, which exported directly or indirectly to China.

[ 58 ] Re-use [ edit ] Biological reprocessing [ edit ] Main articles: Composting , Home composting , Anaerobic digestion , and Microbial fuel cell An active compost heap Recoverable materials that are organic in nature, such as plant material , food scraps, and paper products, can be recovered through composting and digestion processes to decompose the organic matter. The resulting organic material is then recycled as mulch or compost for agricultural or landscaping purposes. In addition, waste gas from the process (such as methane) can be captured and used for generating electricity and heat (CHP/cogeneration) maximising efficiencies. There are different types of composting and digestion methods and technologies. They vary in complexity from simple home compost heaps to large-scale industrial digestion of mixed domestic waste. The different methods of biological decomposition are classified as aerobic or anaerobic methods. Some methods use the hybrids of these two methods. The anaerobic digestion of the organic fraction of solid waste is more environmentally effective than landfill, or incineration.

[ 59 ] The intention of biological processing in waste management is to control and accelerate the natural process of decomposition of organic matter. (See resource recovery ).

Energy recovery [ edit ] Main article: Waste-to-energy Energy recovery from waste is the conversion of non-recyclable waste materials into usable heat, electricity, or fuel through a variety of processes, including combustion, gasification, pyrolyzation, anaerobic digestion, and landfill gas recovery.

[ 60 ] This process is often called waste-to-energy. Energy recovery from waste is part of the non-hazardous waste management hierarchy. Using energy recovery to convert non-recyclable waste materials into electricity and heat, generates a renewable energy source and can reduce carbon emissions by offsetting the need for energy from fossil sources as well as reduce methane generation from landfills.

[ 60 ] Globally, waste-to-energy accounts for 16% of waste management.

[ 61 ] The energy content of waste products can be harnessed directly by using them as a direct combustion fuel, or indirectly by processing them into another type of fuel. Thermal treatment ranges from using waste as a fuel source for cooking or heating and the use of the gas fuel (see above), to fuel for boilers to generate steam and electricity in a turbine .

Pyrolysis and gasification are two related forms of thermal treatment where waste materials are heated to high temperatures with limited oxygen availability. The process usually occurs in a sealed vessel under high pressure . Pyrolysis of solid waste converts the material into solid, liquid, and gas products. The liquid and gas can be burnt to produce energy or refined into other chemical products (chemical refinery). The solid residue (char) can be further refined into products such as activated carbon . Gasification and advanced Plasma arc gasification are used to convert organic materials directly into a synthetic gas ( syngas ) composed of carbon monoxide and hydrogen . The gas is then burnt to produce electricity and steam .
An alternative to pyrolysis is high-temperature and pressure supercritical water decomposition (hydrothermal monophasic oxidation).

Pyrolysis [ edit ] Main article: Pyrolysis Pyrolysis is often used to convert many types of domestic and industrial residues into a recovered fuel. Different types of waste input (such as plant waste, food waste, tyres) placed in the pyrolysis process potentially yield an alternative to fossil fuels.

[ 62 ] Pyrolysis is a process of thermo-chemical decomposition of organic materials by heat in the absence of stoichiometric quantities of oxygen ; the decomposition produces various hydrocarbon gases.

[ 63 ] During pyrolysis, the molecules of an object vibrate at high frequencies to the extent that molecules start breaking down. The rate of pyrolysis increases with temperature . In industrial applications, temperatures are above 430 °C (800 °F).

[ 64 ] Slow pyrolysis produces gases and solid charcoal.

[ 65 ] Pyrolysis holds promise for conversion of waste biomass into useful liquid fuel. Pyrolysis of waste wood and plastics can potentially produce fuel. The solids left from pyrolysis contain metals, glass, sand, and pyrolysis coke which does not convert to gas. Compared to the process of incineration, certain types of pyrolysis processes release less harmful by-products that contain alkali metals, sulphur, and chlorine. However, pyrolysis of some waste yields gases which impact the environment such as HCl and SO 2 .

[ 66 ] Resource recovery [ edit ] Main article: Resource recovery Resource recovery is the systematic diversion of waste, which was intended for disposal, for a specific next use.

[ 67 ] It is the processing of recyclables to extract or recover materials and resources, or convert to energy.

[ 68 ] These activities are performed at a resource recovery facility.

[ 68 ] Resource recovery is not only environmentally important, but it is also cost-effective.

[ 69 ] It decreases the amount of waste for disposal, saves space in landfills, and conserves natural resources.

[ 69 ] Resource recovery, an alternative approach to traditional waste management, utilizes life cycle analysis (LCA) to evaluate and optimize waste handling strategies. Comprehensive studies focusing on mixed municipal solid waste (MSW) have identified a preferred pathway for maximizing resource efficiency and minimizing environmental impact, including effective waste administration and management, source separation of waste materials, efficient collection systems, reuse and recycling of non-organic fractions, and processing of organic material through anaerobic digestion.

As an example of how resource recycling can be beneficial, many items thrown away contain metals that can be recycled to create a profit, such as the components in circuit boards. Wood chippings in pallets and other packaging materials can be recycled into useful products for horticulture. The recycled chips can cover paths, walkways, or arena surfaces.

Application of rational and consistent waste management practices can yield a range of benefits including: Economic – Improving economic efficiency through the means of resource use, treatment, and disposal and creating markets for recycles can lead to efficient practices in the production and consumption of products and materials resulting in valuable materials being recovered for reuse and the potential for new jobs and new business opportunities.

Social – By reducing adverse impacts on health through proper waste management practices, the resulting consequences are more appealing to civic communities. Better social advantages can lead to new sources of employment and potentially lift communities out of poverty, especially in some of the developing poorer countries and cities.

Environmental – Reducing or eliminating adverse impacts on the environment through reducing, reusing, recycling, and minimizing resource extraction can result in improved air and water quality and help in the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions .

Inter-generational Equity – Following effective waste management practices can provide subsequent generations a more robust economy, a fairer and more inclusive society and a cleaner environment.

[ 18 ] [ page needed ] Waste valorization [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Waste valorization .

[ edit ] Waste valorization, beneficial reuse, beneficial use, value recovery or waste reclamation [ 70 ] is the process of waste products or residues from an economic process being valorized (given economic value), by reuse or recycling in order to create economically useful materials.

[ 71 ] [ 70 ] [ 72 ] The term comes from practices in sustainable manufacturing and economics , industrial ecology and waste management. The term is usually applied in industrial processes where residue from creating or processing one good is used as a raw material or energy feedstock for another industrial process.

[ 70 ] [ 72 ] Industrial wastes in particular are good candidates for valorization because they tend to be more consistent and predictable than other waste, such as household waste .

[ 70 ] [ 73 ] Historically, most industrial processes treated waste products as something to be disposed of, causing industrial pollution unless handled properly.

[ citation needed ] However, increased regulation of residual materials and socioeconomic changes, such as the introduction of ideas about sustainable development and circular economy in the 1990s and 2000s increased focus on industrial practices to recover these resources as value add materials.

[ 74 ] Academics focus on finding economic value to reduce environmental impact of other industries as well, for example the development of non-timber forest products to encourage conservation.

[ citation needed ] Liquid waste-management [ edit ] Liquid waste is an important category of waste management because it is so difficult to deal with. Unlike solid wastes, liquid wastes cannot be easily picked up and removed from an environment. Liquid wastes spread out, and easily pollute other sources of liquid if brought into contact. This type of waste also soaks into objects like soil and groundwater. This in turn carries over to pollute the plants, the animals in the ecosystem, as well as the humans within the area of the pollution.

[ 75 ] Industrial wastewater [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Industrial wastewater treatment .

[ edit ] Wastewater from an industrial process can be converted at a treatment plant to solids and treated water for reuse.

Industrial wastewater treatment describes the processes used for treating wastewater that is produced by industries as an undesirable by-product. After treatment, the treated industrial wastewater (or effluent) may be reused or released to a sanitary sewer or to a surface water in the environment. Some industrial facilities generate wastewater that can be treated in sewage treatment plants . Most industrial processes, such as petroleum refineries , chemical and petrochemical plants have their own specialized facilities to treat their wastewaters so that the pollutant concentrations in the treated wastewater comply with the regulations regarding disposal of wastewaters into sewers or into rivers, lakes or oceans .

[ 76 ] : 1412 This applies to industries that generate wastewater with high concentrations of organic matter (e.g. oil and grease), toxic pollutants (e.g. heavy metals, volatile organic compounds ) or nutrients such as ammonia .

[ 77 ] : 180 Some industries install a pre-treatment system to remove some pollutants (e.g., toxic compounds), and then discharge the partially treated wastewater to the municipal sewer system.

[ 78 ] : 60 Most industries produce some wastewater . Recent trends have been to minimize such production or to recycle treated wastewater within the production process. Some industries have been successful at redesigning their manufacturing processes to reduce or eliminate pollutants.

[ 79 ] Sources of industrial wastewater include battery manufacturing, chemical manufacturing, electric power plants, food industry , iron and steel industry, metal working, mines and quarries, nuclear industry, oil and gas extraction , petroleum refining and petrochemicals , pharmaceutical manufacturing, pulp and paper industry , smelters, textile mills , industrial oil contamination , water treatment and wood preserving . Treatment processes include brine treatment, solids removal (e.g. chemical precipitation, filtration), oils and grease removal, removal of biodegradable organics, removal of other organics, removal of acids and alkalis, and removal of toxic materials.

Sewage sludge treatment [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Sewage sludge treatment .

[ edit ] Sludge treatment in anaerobic digesters at a sewage treatment plant in Cottbus , Germany Sewage sludge treatment describes the processes used to manage and dispose of sewage sludge produced during sewage treatment . Sludge treatment is focused on reducing sludge weight and volume to reduce transportation and disposal costs, and on reducing potential health risks of disposal options. Water removal is the primary means of weight and volume reduction, while pathogen destruction is frequently accomplished through heating during thermophilic digestion, composting , or incineration . The choice of a sludge treatment method depends on the volume of sludge generated, and comparison of treatment costs required for available disposal options. Air-drying and composting may be attractive to rural communities, while limited land availability may make aerobic digestion and mechanical dewatering preferable for cities, and economies of scale may encourage energy recovery alternatives in metropolitan areas.

Sludge is mostly water with some amounts of solid material removed from liquid sewage. Primary sludge includes settleable solids removed during primary treatment in primary clarifiers . Secondary sludge is sludge separated in secondary clarifiers that are used in secondary treatment bioreactors or processes using inorganic oxidizing agents . In intensive sewage treatment processes, the sludge produced needs to be removed from the liquid line on a continuous basis because the volumes of the tanks in the liquid line have insufficient volume to store sludge.

[ 80 ] This is done in order to keep the treatment processes compact and in balance (production of sludge approximately equal to the removal of sludge). The sludge removed from the liquid line goes to the sludge treatment line. Aerobic processes (such as the activated sludge process) tend to produce more sludge compared with anaerobic processes. On the other hand, in extensive (natural) treatment processes, such as ponds and constructed wetlands , the produced sludge remains accumulated in the treatment units (liquid line) and is only removed after several years of operation.

[ 81 ] Sludge treatment options depend on the amount of solids generated and other site-specific conditions. Composting is most often applied to small-scale plants with aerobic digestion for mid-sized operations, and anaerobic digestion for the larger-scale operations. The sludge is sometimes passed through a so-called pre-thickener which de-waters the sludge. Types of pre-thickeners include centrifugal sludge thickeners, [ 82 ] rotary drum sludge thickeners and belt filter presses.

[ 83 ] Dewatered sludge may be incinerated or transported offsite for disposal in a landfill or use as an agricultural soil amendment.

[ 84 ] Energy may be recovered from sludge through methane gas production during anaerobic digestion or through incineration of dried sludge, but energy yield is often insufficient to evaporate sludge water content or to power blowers, pumps, or centrifuges required for dewatering. Coarse primary solids and secondary sewage sludge may include toxic chemicals removed from liquid sewage by sorption onto solid particles in clarifier sludge. Reducing sludge volume may increase the concentration of some of these toxic chemicals in the sludge.

[ 85 ] Avoidance and reduction methods [ edit ] Main article: Waste minimization An important method of waste management is the prevention of waste material being created, also known as waste reduction . Waste minimization is reducing the quantity of hazardous wastes achieved through a thorough application of innovative or alternative procedures.

[ 86 ] Methods of avoidance include reuse of second-hand products, repairing broken items instead of buying new ones, designing products to be refillable or reusable (such as cotton instead of plastic shopping bags), encouraging consumers to avoid using disposable products (such as disposable cutlery ), removing any food/liquid remains from cans and packaging, [ 87 ] and designing products that use less material to achieve the same purpose (for example, lightweighting of beverage cans).

[ 88 ] International waste trade [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Global waste trade .

[ edit ] The global waste trade is the international trade of waste between countries for further treatment , disposal , or recycling . Toxic or hazardous wastes are often imported by developing countries from developed countries.

The World Bank Report What a Waste: A Global Review of Solid Waste Management , describes the amount of solid waste produced in a given country. Specifically, countries which produce more solid waste are more economically developed and more industrialized.

[ 89 ] The report explains that "Generally, the higher the economic development and rate of urbanization, the greater the amount of solid waste produced." [ 89 ] Therefore, countries in the Global North , which are more economically developed and urbanized, produce more solid waste than Global South countries.

[ 89 ] Current international trade flows of waste follow a pattern of waste being produced in the Global North and being exported to and disposed of in the Global South. Multiple factors affect which countries produce waste and at what magnitude, including geographic location, degree of industrialization , and level of integration into the global economy.

Numerous scholars and researchers have linked the sharp increase in waste trading and the negative impacts of waste trading to the prevalence of neoliberal economic policy .

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] With the major economic transition towards neoliberal economic policy in the 1980s, the shift towards "free-market" policy has facilitated the sharp increase in the global waste trade.

Henry Giroux , Chair of Cultural Studies at McMaster University, gives his definition of neoliberal economic policy: "Neoliberalism ...removes economics and markets from the discourse of social obligations and social costs. ...As a policy and political project, neoliberalism is wedded to the privatization of public services, selling off of state functions, deregulation of finance and labor, elimination of the welfare state and unions, liberalization of trade in goods and capital investment, and the marketization and commodification of society." [ 94 ] Given this economic platform of privatization, neoliberalism is based on expanding free-trade agreements and establishing open-borders to international trade markets.

Trade liberalization , a neoliberal economic policy in which trade is completely deregulated , leaving no tariffs, quotas, or other restrictions on international trade, is designed to further developing countries' economies and integrate them into the global economy. Critics claim that although free-market trade liberalization was designed to allow any country the opportunity to reach economic success, the consequences of these policies have been devastating for Global South countries, essentially crippling their economies in a servitude to the Global North.

[ 95 ] Even supporters such as the International Monetary Fund , “progress of integration has been uneven in recent decades.” [ 96 ] Specifically, developing countries have been targeted by trade liberalization policies to import waste as a means of economic expansion .

[ 97 ] The guiding neoliberal economic policy argues that the way to be integrated into the global economy is to participate in trade liberalization and exchange in international trade markets.

[ 97 ] Their claim is that smaller countries, with less infrastructure, less wealth, and less manufacturing ability, should take in hazardous wastes as a way to increase profits and stimulate their economies.

[ 97 ] Challenges in developing countries [ edit ] Areas with developing economies often experience exhausted waste collection services and inadequately managed and uncontrolled dumpsites. The problems are worsening.

[ 18 ] [ page needed ] [ 98 ] Problems with governance complicate the situation. Waste management in these countries and cities is an ongoing challenge due to weak institutions, chronic under-resourcing, and rapid urbanization.

[ 18 ] [ page needed ] All of these challenges, along with the lack of understanding of different factors that contribute to the hierarchy of waste management, affect the treatment of waste.

[ 99 ] [ full citation needed ] In developing countries, waste management activities are usually carried out by the poor, for their survival. It has been estimated that 2% of the population in Asia, Latin America, and Africa are dependent on waste for their livelihood. Family organized, or individual manual scavengers are often involved with waste management practices with very little supportive network and facilities with increased risk of health effects. Additionally, this practice prevents their children from further education. The participation level of most citizens in waste management is very low, residents in urban areas are not actively involved in the process of waste management.

[ 100 ] Technologies [ edit ] See also: Environmental monitoring , Border control , and Materials recovery facility Traditionally, the waste management industry has been a late adopter of new technologies such as RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) tags, GPS and integrated software packages which enable better quality data to be collected without the use of estimation or manual data entry.

[ 101 ] This technology has been used widely by many organizations in some industrialized countries. Radiofrequency identification is a tagging system for automatic identification of recyclable components of municipal solid waste streams.

[ 102 ] Smart waste management has been implemented in several cities, including San Francisco, Varde or Madrid.

[ 103 ] Waste containers are equipped with level sensors . When the container is almost full, the sensor warns the pickup truck, which can thus trace its route servicing the fullest containers and skipping the emptiest ones.

[ 104 ] Statistics and trends [ edit ] The "Global Waste Management Outlook 2024," supported by the Environment Fund - UNEP ’s core financial fund, and jointly published with the International Solid Waste Association (ISWA), provides a comprehensive update on the trajectory of global waste generation and the escalating costs of waste management since 2018. The report predicts municipal solid waste to rise from 2.3 billion tonnes in 2023 to 3.8 billion tonnes by 2050. The direct global cost of waste management was around USD 252 billion in 2020, which could soar to USD 640.3 billion annually by 2050 if current practices continue without reform. Incorporating life cycle assessments, the report contrasts scenarios from maintaining the status quo to fully adopting zero waste and circular economy principles. It indicates that effective waste prevention and management could cap annual costs at USD 270.2 billion by 2050, while a circular economy approach could transform the sector into a net positive, offering a potential annual gain of USD 108.5 billion. To prevent the direst outcomes, the report calls for immediate action across multiple sectors, including development banks, governments, municipalities, producers, retailers, and citizens, providing targeted strategies for waste reduction and improved management practices.

[ 105 ] Waste generated by country, 2020 [ 106 ] [ These countries need to be sorted into English alphabetical order.

] Country or territory GDP (USD) Population Total waste generated (tonnes) Share of population living in urban areas Waste generated per capita (kg) Aruba 35,563 103,187 88,132 44% 854 Afghanistan 2,057 34,656,032 5,628,525 26% 162 Angola 8,037 25,096,150 4,213,644 67% 168 Albania 13,724 2,854,191 1,087,447 62% 381 Andorra 43,712 82,431 43,000 88% 522 United Arab Emirates 67,119 9,770,529 5,617,682 87% 575 Argentina 23,550 42,981,516 17,910,550 92% 417 Armenia 11,020 2,906,220 492,800 63% 170 American Samoa 11,113 55,599 18,989 87% 342 Antigua and Barbuda 17,966 96,777 30,585 24% 316 Australia 47,784 23,789,338 13,345,000 86% 561 Austria 56,030 8,877,067 5,219,716 59% 588 Azerbaijan 14,854 9,649,341 2,930,349 56% 304 Burundi 840 6,741,569 1,872,016 14% 278 Belgium 51,915 11,484,055 4,765,883 98% 415 Benin 2,227 5,521,763 685,936 48% 124 Burkina Faso 1,925 18,110,624 2,575,251 31% 142 Bangladesh 3,196 155,727,056 14,778,497 38% 95 Bulgaria 22,279 7,025,037 2,859,190 76% 407 Bahrain 47,938 1,425,171 951,943 90% 668 Bahamas 35,400 386,838 264,000 83% 682 Bosnia and Herzegovina 12,671 3,535,961 1,248,718 49% 353 Belarus 18,308 9,489,616 4,280,000 79% 451 Belize 7,259 359,288 101,379 46% 282 Bermuda 80,982 64,798 82,000 100% 1,265 Bolivia 7,984 10,724,705 2,219,052 70% 207 Brazil 14,596 208,494,896 79,069,584 87% 379 Barbados 15,445 280,601 174,815 31% 623 Brunei 60,866 423,196 216,253 78% 511 Bhutan 6,743 686,958 111,314 42% 162 Botswana 14,126 2,014,866 210,854 71% 105 Central African Republic 823 4,515,392 1,105,983 42% 245 Canada 47,672 35,544,564 25,103,034 82% 706 Switzerland 68,394 8,574,832 6,079,556 74% 709 Channel Islands 46,673 164,541 178,933 31% 1,087 Chile 20,362 16,829,442 6,517,000 88% 387 China 16,092 1,400,050,048 395,081,376 61% 282 Côte d'Ivoire 3,661 20,401,332 4,440,814 52% 218 Cameroon 3,263 21,655,716 3,270,617 58% 151 Democratic Republic of the Congo 1,056 78,736,152 14,385,226 46% 183 Republic of the Congo 4,900 2,648,507 451,200 68% 170 Colombia 12,523 46,406,648 12,150,120 81% 262 Comoros 2,960 777,424 91,013 29% 117 Cape Verde 6,354 513,979 132,555 67% 258 Costa Rica 18,169 4,757,575 1,460,000 81% 307 Cuba 12,985 11,303,687 2,692,692 77% 238 Curaçao 27,504 153,822 24,704 89 161 Cayman Islands 66,207 59,172 60,000 100% 1,014 Cyprus 39,545 1,198,575 769,485 67% 642 Germany 53,785 83,132,800 50,627,876 77% 609 Djibouti 6,597 746,221 114,997 78% 154 Dominica 11,709 72,400 13,176 71% 182 Denmark 57,821 5,818,553 4,910,859 88% 844 Dominican Republic 15,328 10,528,394 4,063,910 83% 386 Algeria 11,826 40,606,052 12,378,740 74% 305 Ecuador 11,896 16,144,368 5,297,211 64% 328 Egypt 10,301 87,813,256 21,000,000 43% 239 Eritrea 1,715 4,474,690 726,957 41% 162 Spain 40,986 47,076,780 22,408,548 81% 476 Estonia 36,956 1,326,590 489,512 69% 369 Ethiopia 1,779 99,873,032 6,532,787 22% 65 Finland 48,814 5,520,314 3,124,498 86% 566 Fiji 10,788 867,086 189,390 57% 218 France 46,110 67,059,888 36,748,820 81% 548 Faroe Islands 44,403 48,842 61,000 42% 1,249 Federated States of Micronesia 3,440 104,937 26,040 23% 248 Gabon 18,515 1,086,137 238,102 90% 219 United Kingdom 46,290 66,460,344 30,771,140 84% 463 Georgia 12,605 3,717,100 800,000 59% 215 Ghana 3,093 21,542,008 3,538,275 57% 164 Gibraltar 43,712 33,623 16,954 100% 504 Guinea 1,623 8,132,552 596,911 37% 73 Gambia 2,181 1,311,349 193,441 63% 148 Guinea-Bissau 1,800 1,770,526 289,514 44% 164 Equatorial Guinea 24,827 1,221,490 198,443 73% 162 Greece 30,465 10,716,322 5,615,353 80% 524 Grenada 13,208 105,481 29,536 37% 280 Greenland 43,949 56,905 50,000 87% 879 Guatemala 8,125 16,252,429 2,756,741 52% 170 Guam 59,075 159,973 141,500 95% 885 Guyana 9,812 746,556 179,252 27% 240 Hong Kong 57,216 7,305,700 5,679,816 100% 777 Honduras 5,396 9,112,867 2,162,028 58% 237 Croatia 28,829 4,067,500 1,810,038 58% 445 Haiti 2,953 10,847,334 2,309,852 57% 213 Hungary 32,643 9,769,949 3,780,970 72% 387 Indonesia 10,531 261,115,456 65,200,000 57% 250 Isle of Man 44,204 80,759 50,551 53% 626 India 6,497 1,352,617,344 189,750,000 35% 140 Ireland 83,389 4,867,316 2,910,655 64% 598 Iran 14,536 80,277,424 17,885,000 76% 223 Iraq 10,311 36,115,648 13,140,000 71% 364 Iceland 55,274 343,400 225,270 94% 656 Israel 37,688 8,380,100 5,400,000 93% 644 Italy 42,420 60,297,396 30,088,400 71% 499 Jamaica 9,551 2,881,355 1,051,695 56% 365 Jordan 10,413 8,413,464 2,529,997 91% 301 Japan 41,310 126,529,104 42,720,000 92% 338 Kazakhstan 22,703 16,791,424 4,659,740 58% 278 Kenya 3,330 41,350,152 5,595,099 28% 135 Kyrgyzstan 4,805 5,956,900 1,113,300 37% 187 Cambodia 3,364 15,270,790 1,089,000 24% 71 Kiribati 2,250 114,395 35,724 56% 312 Saint Kitts and Nevis 25,569 54,288 32,892 31% 606 South Korea 42,105 51,606,632 20,452,776 81% 396 Kuwait 58,810 2,998,083 1,750,000 100% 584 Laos 6,544 6,663,967 351,900 36% 53 Lebanon 16,967 5,603,279 2,040,000 89% 364 Liberia 1,333 3,512,932 564,467 52% 161 Libya 8,480 6,193,501 2,147,596 81% 347 Saint Lucia 14,030 177,206 77,616 19% 438 Liechtenstein 45,727 36,545 32,382 14% 886 Sri Lanka 12,287 21,203,000 2,631,650 19% 124 Lesotho 1,979 1,965,662 73,457 29% 37 Lithuania 37,278 2,786,844 1,315,390 68% 472 Luxembourg 114,323 619,896 490,338 91% 791 Latvia 30,982 1,912,789 839,714 68% 439 Macau 117,336 612,167 377,942 100% 617 Morocco 6,915 34,318,080 6,852,000 64% 200 Monaco 43,712 37,783 46,000 100% 1,217 Moldova 10,361 3,554,108 3,981,200 43% 1,120 Madagascar 1,566 24,894,552 3,768,759 39% 151 Maldives 17,285 409,163 211,506 41% 517 Mexico 19,332 125,890,952 53,100,000 81% 422 Marshall Islands 3,629 52,793 8,614 78% 163 North Macedonia 16,148 2,082,958 626,970 58% 301 Mali 2,008 16,006,670 1,937,354 44% 121 Malta 43,708 502,653 348,841 95% 694 Myanmar 1,094 46,095,464 4,677,307 31% 101 Montenegro 20,753 622,227 329,780 67% 530 Mongolia 10,940 3,027,398 2,900,000 69% 958 Northern Mariana Islands 60,956 54,036 32,761 92% 606 Mozambique 1,217 27,212,382 2,500,000 37% 92 Mauritania 4,784 3,506,288 454,000 55% 129 Mauritius 20,647 1,263,473 438,000 41% 347 Malawi 999 16,577,147 1,297,844 17% 78 Malaysia 23,906 30,228,016 12,982,685 77% 429 Namibia 6,153 1,559,983 256,729 52% 165 New Caledonia 57,330 278,000 108,157 72% 389 Niger 1,038 8,842,415 1,865,646 17% 211 Nigeria 4,690 154,402,176 27,614,830 52% 179 Nicaragua 4,612 5,737,723 1,528,816 59% 266 Netherlands 56,849 17,332,850 8,805,088 92% 508 Norway 64,962 5,347,896 4,149,967 83% 776 Nepal 2,902 28,982,772 1,768,977 21% 61 Nauru 11,167 13,049 6,192 100% 475 New Zealand 41,857 4,692,700 3,405,000 87% 726 Oman 30,536 3,960,925 1,734,885 86% 438 Pakistan 4,571 193,203,472 30,760,000 37% 159 Panama 28,436 3,969,249 1,472,262 68% 371 Peru 11,877 30,973,354 8,356,711 78% 270 Philippines 7,705 103,320,224 14,631,923 47% 142 Palau 18,275 21,503 9,427 81% 438 Papua New Guinea 3,912 7,755,785 1,000,000 13% 129 Poland 33,222 37,970,872 12,758,213 60% 336 Puerto Rico 34,311 3,473,181 4,170,953 94% 1,201 Portugal 34,962 10,269,417 5,268,211 66% 513 Paraguay 11,810 6,639,119 1,818,501 62% 274 Palestine 5,986 4,046,901 1,387,000 77% 343 French Polynesia 60,956 273,528 147,000 62% 537 Qatar 96,262 2,109,568 1,000,990 99% 475 Romania 29,984 19,356,544 5,419,833 54% 280 Russia 26,013 143,201,680 60,000,000 75% 419 Rwanda 1,951 11,917,508 4,384,969 17% 368 Saudi Arabia 48,921 31,557,144 16,125,701 84% 511 Sudan 4,192 38,647,804 2,831,291 35% 73 Senegal 3,068 15,411,614 2,454,059 48% 159 Singapore 97,341 5,703,600 1,870,000 100% 328 Solomon Islands 2,596 563,513 179,972 25% 319 Sierra Leone 1,238 5,439,695 610,222 43% 112 El Salvador 7,329 6,164,626 1,648,996 73% 267 San Marino 58,806 33,203 17,175 97% 517 Somalia 1,863 14,317,996 2,326,099 46% 162 Serbia 18,351 6,944,975 2,347,402 56% 338 South Sudan 1,796 11,177,490 2,680,681 20% 240 São Tomé and Príncipe 3,721 191,266 25,587 74% 134 Suriname 16,954 526,103 78,620 66% 149 Slovakia 31,966 5,454,073 2,296,165 54% 421 Slovenia 39,038 2,087,946 1,052,325 55% 504 Sweden 52,609 10,285,453 4,618,169 88% 449 Eswatini 8,321 1,343,098 218,199 24% 162 Seychelles 23,303 88,303 48,000 58% 544 Syria 8,587 20,824,892 4,500,000 55% 216 Chad 1,733 11,887,202 1,358,851 24% 114 Togo 1,404 7,228,915 1,109,030 43% 153 Thailand 16,302 68,657,600 26,853,366 51% 391 Tajikistan 2,616 8,177,809 1,787,400 28% 219 Turkmenistan 11,471 5,366,277 500,000 53% 93 Timor-Leste 3,345 1,268,671 63,875 31% 50 Tonga 5,636 104,951 17,238 23% 164 Trinidad and Tobago 28,911 1,328,100 727,874 53% 548 Tunisia 10,505 11,143,908 2,700,000 70% 242 Turkey 28,289 83,429,616 35,374,156 76% 424 Tuvalu 3,793 11,097 3,989 64% 360 Tanzania 2,129 49,082,996 9,276,995 35% 189 Uganda 1,972 35,093,648 7,045,050 25% 201 Ukraine 11,535 45,004,644 15,242,025 70% 339 Uruguay 20,588 3,431,552 1,260,140 96% 367 United States of America 61,498 326,687,488 265,224,528 83% 812 Uzbekistan 5,164 29,774,500 4,000,000 50% 134 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 11,972 109,455 31,561 53% 288 Venezuela 14,270 29,893,080 9,779,093 88% 327 British Virgin Islands 24,216 20,645 21,099 49% 1,022 United States Virgin Islands 30,437 105,784 146,500 96% 1,385 Vietnam 5,089 86,932,496 9,570,300 37% 110 Vanuatu 3,062 270,402 70,225 26% 260 Samoa 6,211 187,665 27,399 18% 146 Yemen 8,270 27,584,212 4,836,820 38% 175 South Africa 12,667 51,729,344 18,457,232 67% 357 Zambia 3,201 14,264,756 2,608,268 45% 183 Zimbabwe 3,191 12,500,525 1,449,752 32% 116 Waste management by region [ edit ] China [ edit ] Municipal solid waste generation shows spatiotemporal variation. In spatial distribution, the point sources in eastern coastal regions are quite different. Guangdong, Shanghai and Tianjin produced MSW of 30.35, 7.85 and 2.95 Mt, respectively. In temporal distribution, during 2009–2018, Fujian province showed a 123% increase in MSW generation while Liaoning province showed only 7% increase, whereas Shanghai special zone had a decline of −11% after 2013. MSW composition characteristics are complicated. The major components such as kitchen waste, paper and rubber & plastics in different eastern coastal cities have fluctuation in the range of 52.8–65.3%, 3.5–11.9%, and 9.9–19.1%, respectively. Treatment rate of consumption waste is up to 99% with a sum of 52% landfill, 45% incineration, and 3% composting technologies, indicating that landfill still dominates MSW treatment.

[ 107 ] Hungary [ edit ] Hungary's first waste prevention program was  their 2014-2020 national waste management plan. Their current program (2021-2027) is financed by European Union and international grants, domestic co-financing, product charges, and landfill taxes.

[ 108 ] Morocco [ edit ] Morocco has seen benefits from implementing a $300 million sanitary landfill system. While it might appear to be a costly investment, the country's government predicts that it has saved them another $440 million in damages, or consequences of failing to dispose of waste properly.

[ 109 ] San Francisco [ edit ] San Francisco started to make changes to their waste management policies in 2009 with the expectation to be zero waste by 2030.

[ 110 ] Council made changes such as making recycling and composting a mandatory practice for businesses and individuals, banning Styrofoam and plastic bags, putting charges on paper bags, and increasing garbage collection rates.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] Businesses are fiscally rewarded for correct disposal of recycling and composting and taxed for incorrect disposal. Besides these policies, the waste bins were manufactured in various sizes. The compost bin is the largest, the recycling bin is second, and the garbage bin is the smallest. This encourages individuals to sort their waste thoughtfully with respect to the sizes. These systems are working because they were able to divert 80% of waste from the landfill, which is the highest rate of any major U.S. city.

[ 110 ] Despite all these changes, Debbie Raphael, director of the San Francisco Department of the Environment, states that zero waste is still not achievable until all products are designed differently to be able to be recycled or compostable.

[ 110 ] Turkey [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Waste management in Turkey .

[ edit ] This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( January 2022 ) Turkey generates about 30 million tons of solid municipal waste per year; the annual amount of waste generated per capita amounts to about 400 kilograms.

[ 112 ] According to Waste Atlas , Turkey's waste collection coverage rate is 77%, whereas its unsound waste disposal rate is 69%.

[ 112 ] While the country has a strong legal framework in terms of laying down common provisions for waste management, the implementation process has been considered slow since the beginning of 1990s.

United Kingdom [ edit ] See also: Food waste in the United Kingdom Waste management policy in England is the responsibility of the Department of the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA). In England, the "Waste Management Plan for England" presents a compilation of waste management policies.

[ 113 ] In the devolved nations such as Scotland, waste management policy is a responsibility of their own respective departments.

Zambia [ edit ] In Zambia , ASAZA is a community-based organization whose principal purpose is to complement the efforts of the Government and cooperating partners to uplift the standard of living for disadvantaged communities. The project's main objective is to minimize the problem of indiscriminate littering which leads to land degradation and pollution of the environment. ASAZA is also at the same time helping alleviate the problems of unemployment and poverty through income generation and payment of participants, women, and unskilled youths.

[ 114 ] E-waste [ edit ] A record 53.6 million metric tonnes (Mt) of electronic waste was generated worldwide in 2019, up 21 percent in just five years, according to the UN's Global E-waste Monitor 2020, released today.

[ when?

] The new report also predicts global e-waste – discarded products with a battery or plug – will reach 74 Mt by 2030, almost a doubling of e-waste in just 16 years. This makes e-waste the world's fastest-growing domestic waste stream, fueled mainly by higher consumption rates of electric and electronic equipment, short life cycles, and few options for repair. Only 17.4 percent of 2019's e-waste was collected and recycled. This means that gold, silver, copper, platinum, and other high-value, recoverable materials conservatively valued at US$57 billion – a sum greater than the gross domestic product of most countries – were mostly dumped or burned rather than being collected for treatment and reuse.

[ 115 ] E-waste is predicted to double by 2050.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] Transboundary movement of e-waste [ edit ] The Transboundary E-waste Flows Monitor quantified that 5.1 Mt (just below 10 percent of the total amount of global e-waste, 53.6 Mt) crossed country borders in 2019. To better understand the implication of transboundary movement, this study categorizes the transboundary movement of e-waste into controlled and uncontrolled movements and also considers both the receiving and sending regions.

[ 118 ] Scientific journals [ edit ] See also: Category: Waste management journals Related scientific journals in this area include: Environmental and Resource Economics Environmental Monitoring and Assessment Journal of Environmental Assessment Policy and Management Journal of Environmental Economics and Management See also [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Also known as a tip, dump, rubbish tip, rubbish dump, garbage dump, trash dump, dumpsite, or dumping ground.

References [ edit ] ^ "Environment Statistics" .

United Nations Statistics Division .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2017 . Retrieved 3 March 2017 .

^ a b Giusti, L. (1 August 2009).

"A review of waste management practices and their impact on human health" .

Waste Management .

29 (8): 2227– 2239.

Bibcode : 2009WaMan..29.2227G .

doi : 10.1016/j.wasman.2009.03.028 .

ISSN 0956-053X .

PMID 19401266 .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2018 . Retrieved 4 December 2020 .

^ "Waste" .

Environment Statistics . United Nations Statistics Division. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 3 March 2017 .

^ "Wastes" .

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency . 2 November 2017 . Retrieved 19 August 2023 .

^ Davidson, Gary (June 2011).

"Waste Management Practices: Literature Review" (PDF) . Dalhousie University – Office of Sustainability. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 February 2012 . Retrieved 3 March 2017 .

^ a b "Solid Waste Management" .

World Bank .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ "Glossary of environmental and waste management terms".

Handbook of Solid Waste Management and Waste Minimization Technologies . Butterworth-Heinemann. 2003. pp.

337– 465.

doi : 10.1016/B978-075067507-9/50010-3 .

ISBN 9780750675079 .

^ "Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change" .

www.ipcc.ch . Retrieved 5 April 2022 .

^ Gollakota, Anjani R. K.; Gautam, Sneha; Shu, Chi-Min (1 May 2020).

"Inconsistencies of e-waste management in developing nations – Facts and plausible solutions" .

Journal of Environmental Management .

261 110234.

Bibcode : 2020JEnvM.26110234G .

doi : 10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110234 .

ISSN 0301-4797 .

PMID 32148304 .

S2CID 212641354 .

Archived from the original on 20 September 2021 . Retrieved 27 February 2021 .

^ Elegba, S. B. (2006).

"Import/export control of radioactive sources in Nigeria" .

Safety and security of radioactive sources: Towards a global system for the continuous control of sources throughout their life cycle. Proceedings of an international conference . pp.

393– 402.

Archived from the original on 20 September 2021 . Retrieved 27 February 2021 .

^ "E –Waste Management through Regulations" (PDF) .

International Journal of Engineering Inventions .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 July 2021 . Retrieved 27 February 2021 .

^ "Health crisis: Up to a billion tons of waste potentially burned in the open every year" .

phys.org .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2021 . Retrieved 13 February 2021 .

^ Cook, E.; Velis, C. A. (6 January 2021).

"Global Review on Safer End of Engineered Life" .

Global Review on Safer End of Engineered Life .

Archived from the original on 22 February 2021 . Retrieved 13 February 2021 .

^ R. Dhana, Raju (2021).

"Waste Management in India – An Overview" (PDF) .

United International Journal for Research & Technology .

02 (7): 175– 196.

eISSN 2582-6832 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 21 June 2021 .

^ "Waste and waste management" . BBC . Retrieved 27 May 2025 .

^ Albert, Raleigh (4 August 2011).

"The Proper Care and Use of a Garbage Disposal" .

Disposal Mag .

Archived from the original on 13 July 2018 . Retrieved 3 March 2017 .

^ "14.6: Waste Management" .

Medicine LibreTexts . 30 August 2021 . Retrieved 19 August 2023 .

^ a b c d Guidelines for National Waste Management Strategies Moving from Challenges to Opportunities (PDF) . United Nations Environmental Programme. 2013.

ISBN 978-92-807-3333-4 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 May 2014 .

^ "14.6: Waste Management" .

Medicine LibreTexts . 30 August 2021 . Retrieved 17 June 2023 .

^ OECD. (2023). *Policies for a circular economy: The case of product design*. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Retrieved from https://www.oecd.org/environment/waste/policies-for-a-circular-economy-the-case-of-product-design.pdf ^ United States Environmental Protection Agency. (2023). *Sustainable Materials Management: Non-Hazardous Materials and Waste Management Hierarchy*. EPA.gov. Retrieved from https://www.epa.gov/smm/sustainable-materials-management-non-hazardous-materials-and-waste-management-hierarchy ^ "What is the polluter pays principle?" .

LSE . 11 May 2018.

Archived from the original on 6 February 2020 . Retrieved 7 February 2020 .

^ Barbalace, Roberta Crowell (1 August 2003).

"The History of Waste" . EnvironmentalChemistry.com . Retrieved 9 December 2013 .

^ Maier, D. (1979). "Nineteenth-Century Asante Medical Practices".

Comparative Studies in Society and History .

21 (1): 63– 81.

doi : 10.1017/S0010417500012652 .

JSTOR 178452 .

PMID 11614369 .

S2CID 19587869 .

^ Florence Nightingale, Selected Writings of Florence Nightingale Archived 1 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine , ed. Lucy Ridgely Seymer (New York: The Macmillan Co., 1954), pp. 38287 ^ a b Herbert, Lewis (2007).

"Centenary History of Waste and Waste Managers in London and South East England" .

Chartered Institution of Wastes Management .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Chadwick, Edwin (1842).

Report...from the Poor Law Commissioners on an Inquiry into the Sanitary Conditions of the Labouring Population of Great Britain . London. pp.

369– 372.

Archived from the original on 30 May 2019 . Retrieved 13 January 2015 – via The Victorian Web.

^ Hamlin, Christopher; Sheard, Sally (29 August 1998).

"Revolutions in public health: 1848, and 1998?" .

BMJ: British Medical Journal .

317 (7158): 587– 591.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.317.7158.587 .

ISSN 0959-8138 .

PMC 1113797 .

PMID 9721121 .

^ "History of Solid Waste Management" . Washington, D.C.: National Waste & Recycling Association.

Archived from the original on 24 October 2013 . Retrieved 9 December 2013 .

^ Gandy, Matthew (1994).

Recycling and the Politics of Urban Waste . Earthscan.

ISBN 9781853831683 .

^ "Covered Bodies" . Archived from the original on 6 January 2015.

^ "From Benjamin Franklin to John Fothergill, [1757–1762]" Founders Online online ^ Martin V. Melosi, The Sanitary City: Urban Infrastructure in America from Colonial Times to the Present (2nd ed. U of Pittsburgh Press, 2008) pp.4–7 online ^ See the contemporary illustrations in Enrique Alonso,  and Ana Recarte,  "Pigs in New York City; a Study on 19th Century Urban 'Sanitation' ” Case Study for the Friends of Thoreau Environmental Program (2008) online ^ Patricia Bixler Reber, "Free range pigs ... in New York City" Researching Food History (January 13, 2014) online ^ Garrick E. Louis, "A historical context of municipal solid waste management in the United States." Waste management & research 22.4 (2004): 306-322.

^ Martin V. Melosi, "Hazardous Waste and Environmental Liability: An Historical Perspective" Houston Law Review 25 (1988): 741–753 online ^ Douglas Brinkley, Silent Spring Revolution: John F. Kennedy, Rachel Carson, Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon and the Great Environmental Awakening (2022),  pp. xiii to xxx.

^ "Siemens" (PDF) .

www.siemens.com .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 January 2021 . Retrieved 24 January 2021 .

^ Kaufman, Scott M.; Krishnan, Nikhil; Themelis, Nickolas J. (1 August 2010).

"A Screening Life Cycle Metric to Benchmark the Environmental Sustainability of Waste Management Systems" .

Environmental Science & Technology .

44 (15): 5949– 5955.

Bibcode : 2010EnST...44.5949K .

doi : 10.1021/es100505u .

ISSN 0013-936X .

PMID 20666561 .

^ "Segregation of waste" .

The Nation . 2 February 2019.

Archived from the original on 25 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ "Why should I segregate my waste properly? | EMS" .

www.em-solutions.co.uk . 10 August 2016.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ Raj, K.; Prasad, K. K.; Bansal, N. K. (1 April 2006).

"Radioactive waste management practices in India" .

Nuclear Engineering and Design . India's Reactors: Past, Present, Future.

236 (7): 914– 930.

Bibcode : 2006NuEnD.236..914R .

doi : 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2005.09.036 .

ISSN 0029-5493 .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2012 . Retrieved 4 December 2020 .

^ Tomita, Andrew; Cuadros, Diego F; Burns, Jonathan K; Tanser, Frank; Slotow, Rob (16 June 2020).

"Exposure to waste sites and their impact on health: a panel and geospatial analysis of nationally representative data from South Africa, 2008–2015" .

The Lancet. Planetary Health .

4 (6): e223 – e234 .

doi : 10.1016/S2542-5196(20)30101-7 .

ISSN 2542-5196 .

PMC 7302423 .

PMID 32559439 .

^ "Why is poverty linked with exposure to toxic chemicals?" .

www.medicalnewstoday.com . 12 August 2021 . Retrieved 6 November 2023 .

^ "Regulatory and Guidance Information by Topic: Waste" .

Environmental Protection Agency . 10 November 2014.

^ "Overview of technologies for the treatment of infectious and sharp waste from health care facilities" .

www.who.int . Retrieved 7 November 2023 .

^ Velis, Costas; Conversation, The.

"Health crisis: Up to a billion tons of waste potentially burned in the open every year" .

phys.org . Retrieved 7 November 2023 .

^ "Financing of Solid Waste Management Projects | BioEnergy Consult" . 28 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 23 October 2020 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ Ergun, Merve (5 August 2022).

"The Waste Tax in Italy" .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.4182310 .

S2CID 251685226 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "01-DMG" (PDF) .

web.mit.edu .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 June 2018 . Retrieved 24 January 2021 .

^ Carroll, Gregory J.; Thurnau, Robert C.; Fournier, Donald J. (5 March 2012).

"Mercury Emissions from a Hazardous Waste Incinerator Equipped with a State-of-the-Art WetScrubber" .

Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association .

45 (9): 730– 736.

doi : 10.1080/10473289.1995.10467401 .

^ "Energies" .

www.mdpi.com .

Archived from the original on 11 October 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 .

^ "what is recycling" .

What is Recycling . 28 September 2020 – via conserve energy future.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ City of Chicago, Illinois. Department of Streets and Sanitation.

"What is Single Stream Recycling." Archived 23 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine Accessed 2013-12-09.

^ Montgomery County, Maryland. Division of Solid Waste Services.

"Curbside Collection." Archived 17 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine Accessed 2013-12-09.

^ "Types of Recycling" .

ISM Waste & Recycling .

Archived from the original on 6 February 2020 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ Walker, T. R. (2018). China's ban on imported plastic waste could be a game changer. Nature, 553(7689), 405–405.

^ "Waste Management – Biological Reprocessing" .

Waste Management . 3 July 2010.

Archived from the original on 30 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ a b "Energy Recovery from Waste" . USEPA. 2014. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014 . Retrieved 3 May 2014 .

^ "Waste Hierarchy" . New Energy Corporation. 2014.

Archived from the original on 16 May 2014 . Retrieved 3 May 2014 .

^ Czajczyńska, D.; Anguilano, L.; Ghazal, H.; Krzyżyńska, R.; Reynolds, A.J.; Spencer, N.; Jouhara, H. (September 2017).

"Potential of pyrolysis processes in the waste management sector" .

Thermal Science and Engineering Progress .

3 : 171– 197.

Bibcode : 2017TSEP....3..171C .

doi : 10.1016/j.tsep.2017.06.003 .

^ Oxford Reference – Pyrolysis ^ Encyclopedia Britannica ^ By Prabir Basu: Biomass Gasification, Pyrolysis, and Torrefaction: Practical Design and Theory ^ Chen, Dezhen; Yin, Lijie; Wang, Huan; He, Pinjing (December 2014). "Pyrolysis technologies for municipal solid waste: A review".

Waste Management .

34 (12): 2466– 2486.

Bibcode : 2014WaMan..34.2466C .

doi : 10.1016/j.wasman.2014.08.004 .

PMID 25256662 .

^ "Frequent Questions" . USEPA. 2012. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014 . Retrieved 3 May 2014 .

^ a b "Resource Recovery" . Government of Montana. 2012. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014 . Retrieved 3 April 2014 .

^ a b "What is Resource Recovery?" . Grand Traverse County. 2006. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014 . Retrieved 3 April 2014 .

^ a b c d Kabongo, Jean D. (2013). "Waste Valorization".

Encyclopedia of Corporate Social Responsibility . pp.

2701– 2706.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-28036-8_680 .

ISBN 978-3-642-28035-1 .

^ "Waste Valorization" .

www.aiche.org . Retrieved 17 June 2021 .

^ a b "When a waste becomes a resource for energy and new materials" .

www.biogreen-energy.com . 28 December 2017. Archived from the original on 4 February 2020 . Retrieved 17 June 2021 .

^ Nzihou, Ange; Lifset, Reid (2010). "Waste Valorization, Loop-Closing, and Industrial Ecology".

Journal of Industrial Ecology .

14 (2): 196– 199.

Bibcode : 2010JInEc..14..196N .

doi : 10.1111/j.1530-9290.2010.00242.x .

^ Arancon, Rick Arneil D.; Lin, Carol Sze Ki; Chan, King Ming; Kwan, Tsz Him; Luque, Rafael (2013). "Advances on waste valorization: New horizons for a more sustainable society".

Energy Science & Engineering .

1 (2): 53– 71.

Bibcode : 2013EneSE...1...53A .

doi : 10.1002/ese3.9 .

^ "Liquid Waste | Waste Management" .

u.osu.edu . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ Tchobanoglous G, Burton FL, Stensel HD (2003).

Metcalf & Eddy Wastewater Engineering: treatment and reuse (4th ed.). McGraw-Hill Book Company.

ISBN 0-07-041878-0 .

^ George Tchobanoglous; Franklin L. Burton; H. David Stensel (2003). "Chapter 3: Analysis and Selection of Wastewater Flowrates and Constituent Loadings".

Metcalf & Eddy Wastewater engineering: treatment and reuse (4th ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 0-07-041878-0 .

OCLC 48053912 .

^ Von Sperling, M. (2007).

"Wastewater Characteristics, Treatment and Disposal" .

Water Intelligence Online .

6 .

doi : 10.2166/9781780402086 .

ISSN 1476-1777 .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ^ "Pollution Prevention Case Studies" . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 11 August 2021.

^ Henze, M.; van Loosdrecht, M.C.M.; Ekama, G.A.; Brdjanovic, D. (2008).

Biological Wastewater Treatment: Principles, Modelling and Design . IWA Publishing.

doi : 10.2166/9781780401867 .

ISBN 978-1-78040-186-7 .

S2CID 108595515 .

(Spanish and Arabic versions are available online for free) ^ Von Sperling, M. (2015).

"Wastewater Characteristics, Treatment and Disposal" .

Water Intelligence Online .

6 : 9781780402086.

doi : 10.2166/9781780402086 .

ISSN 1476-1777 .

^ "Centrifuge Thickening and Dewatering. Fact sheet" . EPA. September 2000. EPA 832-F-00-053.

^ "Belt Filter Press. Fact sheet" .

Biosolids . EPA. September 2000. EPA 832-F-00-057.

^ Panagos, Panos; Ballabio, Cristiano; Lugato, Emanuele; Jones, Arwyn; Borrelli, Pasquale; Scarpa, Simone; Orgiazzi, Albert o; Montanarella, Luca (9 July 2018).

"Potential Sources of Anthropogenic Copper Inputs to European Agricultural Soils" .

Sustainability .

10 (7): 2380.

Bibcode : 2018Sust...10.2380P .

doi : 10.3390/su10072380 .

ISSN 2071-1050 .

^ C., Reed, Sherwood (1988).

Natural systems for waste management and treatment . Middlebrooks, E. Joe., Crites, Ronald W. New York: McGraw-Hill. pp.

268–290 .

ISBN 0070515212 .

OCLC 16087827 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Waste Minimization" .

ehs.ucsc.edu .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ "Removing food remains to reduce waste" . Recycling Guide. 14 February 2008.

Archived from the original on 28 April 2010 . Retrieved 25 September 2012 .

^ Schneider, Michael; Johnson, Liz.

"Lightweighting" . Projects in Scientific Computing. Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center, Carnegie Mellon University, University of Pittsburgh. Archived from the original on 25 February 2009 . Retrieved 25 September 2012 .

^ a b c "3: Waste Generation" (PDF) . What a Waste: A Global Review of Solid Waste Management (Report). Urban Development. World Bank. pp.

8– 13.

^ Nixon, Rob (2011).

Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

^ Grossman, Gene M.; Krueger, Alan B. (1994).

"Environmental Impacts of a North American Free Trade Agreement" . In Garber, Peter (ed.).

The U.S. Mexico Free Trade Agreement . MIT Press. pp.

13–56 .

doi : 10.3386/w3914 .

ISBN 0-262-07152-5 .

^ Smith, Jackie (March 2001).

"Globalizing Resistance: The Battle of Seattle and the Future of Social Movements" (PDF) .

Mobilization: An International Quarterly .

6 (1): 1– 19.

doi : 10.17813/maiq.6.1.y63133434t8vq608 .

^ 15 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 373 (1992)Fallacies of Free Market Environmentalism, The ; Blumm, Michael C.

^ Polychroniou, CJ. "Neoliberalism and the Politics of Higher Education: An Interview With Henry A. Giroux." Truthout. N.p., 26 Mar. 2013. Web. 13 Apr. 2014. < http://truth-out.org/news/item/15237-predatory-capitalism-and-the-attack-on-higher-education-an-interview-with-henry-a-giroux >.

^ Gérard Duménil; Dominique Lévy (23 September 2005).

"Neoliberalism – Neoimperialism" (PDF) .

EconomiX-CNRS and PSE-CNRS : 1– 12. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 July 2014.

^ "Global Trade Liberalization and the Developing Countries" .

An IMF Issues Brief . International Monetary Fund. November 2001 . Retrieved 11 April 2014 .

^ a b c Jay Johnson; Gary Pecquet; Leon Taylor (Fall 2007).

"Potential Gains from Trade in Dirty Industries: Revisiting Lawrence Summers' Memo" (PDF) .

Cato Journal .

27 (3). Cato Institute: 398– 402.

^ Dao-Tuan, Anh; Nguyen-Thi-Ngoc, Anh; Nguyen-Trong, Khanh; Bui-Tuan, Anh; Dinh-Thi-Hai, Van (2018), Chen, Yuanfang; Duong, Trung Q. (eds.), "Optimizing Vehicle Routing with Path and Carbon Dioxide Emission for Municipal Solid Waste Collection in Ha Giang, Vietnam", Industrial Networks and Intelligent Systems , Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering, vol. 221, Springer International Publishing, pp.

212– 227, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-74176-5_19 , ISBN 9783319741758 ^ Abarca Guerrero, Lilliana; Maas, Ger; Hogland, William (2013).

"Solid waste management challenges for cities in developing countries" (PDF) .

Waste Management .

33 (1): 220– 232.

Bibcode : 2013WaMan..33..220G .

doi : 10.1016/j.wasman.2012.09.008 .

PMID 23098815 .

S2CID 205673283 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 June 2024 – via Academia Ucentral.

^ Zafar, Salman (29 January 2020).

"Waste Management Challenges in Developing Nations" .

BioEnergy Consult .

Archived from the original on 27 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ Claire Swedberg (4 February 2014).

"Air-Trak Brings Visibility to Waste Management" . RFID Journal. Archived from the original on 2 October 2015 . Retrieved 1 October 2015 .

^ Abdoli, S (28 September 2020).

"RFID Application in Municipal Solid Waste Management system" .

International Journal of Environmental Research – via ResearchGate.

^ "Sensors Used in Waste Management" .

NORD SENSE . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ "Madrid: Eliminating Overflowing Waste with Reliable and High-Quality Data" .

NORD SENSE . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ United Nations Environment Programme, UN.

"Global Waste Management Outlook 2024" (PDF) .

www.unep.org . Retrieved 4 April 2024 .

^ "No time to waste: A sustainability challenge for cities" .

Atlas of Sustainable Development Goals 2023 . Retrieved 20 May 2024 .

^ Ding, Yin (2021). "A review of China's municipal solid waste (MSW) and comparison with international regions: Management and technologies in treatment and resource utilization".

Journal of Cleaner Production .

293 126144.

Bibcode : 2021JCPro.29326144D .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126144 .

S2CID 233579268 .

^ "Hungary Waste Prevention Country Profile 2021" .

Europa . 2021 . Retrieved 26 February 2025 .

^ "How the world should cope with its growing piles of rubbish" .

The Economist .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2018 . Retrieved 3 October 2018 .

^ a b c d "Zero Waste Case Study: San Francisco" .

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency . 1 March 2013 . Retrieved 3 August 2023 .

^ Brigham, Katie (14 July 2018).

"How San Francisco sends less trash to the landfill than any other major U.S. city" .

CNBC . Retrieved 3 August 2023 .

^ a b "Turkey" .

Waste Atlas . University of Leed and ISWA . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ DEFRA, Waste management plan for England Archived 25 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine , accessed 22 December 2020 ^ "Project Detail" .

sgp.undp.org . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ "The Global E-waste Monitor 2020 – Quantities, flows, and the circular economy potential" .

UNITA . 30 October 2021.

^ "Map" .

unitar .

^ Parajuly K, Kuehr R, Awasthi AK, Fitzpatrick C, Lepawsky J, Smith E, Widmer R, Zeng X (2019).

Future E-waste Scenarios (PDF) .

unitar (Report). StEP (Bonn), UNU ViE-SCYCLE (Bonn) & UNEP IETC (Osaka).

^ "The Global Transboundary E-waste Flows Monitor 2022" .

Unitar . United Nation Institute for Training and Research. 7 June 2022.

Bibliography [ edit ] Agunwamba, J. C. "Analysis of scavengers’ activities and recycling in some cities of Nigeria." Environmental management 32 (2003): 116-127.

online Anand, Subhash.

Solid waste management (Mittal Publications, 2010) online .

Downs, Mary, and Martin Medina. "A short history of scavenging." Comparative Civilizations Review 42.42 (2000): 4+ online .

Guerrero, Lilliana Abarca, Ger Maas, and William Hogland. "Solid waste management challenges for cities in developing countries." Waste management 33.1 (2013): 220-232.

Guo, Wei, et al. "Solid waste management in China: Policy and driving factors in 2004–2019." Resources, Conservation and Recycling 173 (2021): 105727.

Hoornweg, Daniel, and Perinaz Bhada-Tata. "What a waste: a global review of solid waste management." (2012).

online Letcher, Trevor M.; Vallero, Daniel A., eds. (2011).

Waste: A Handbook for Management . Burlington: Academic Press .

ISBN 978-0-12-381475-3 .

Ludwig, Christian, Stefanie Hellweg, and Samuel Stucki, eds.

Municipal solid waste management: strategies and technologies for sustainable solutions (Springer Science & Business Media, 2012) online .

Melosi, Martin V.

The Sanitary City: Urban Infrastructure in America from Colonial Times to the Present (2nd ed. U of Pittsburgh Press, 2008) online Nanda, Sonil, and Franco Berruti. "Municipal solid waste management and landfilling technologies: a review." Environmental Chemistry Letters 19.2 (2021): 1433-1456.

Reber, Patricia Bixler. "Free range pigs . . . in New York City" Researching Food History (January 13, 2014) online Reno, Joshua. "Waste and waste management." Annual Review of Anthropology 44.1 (2015): 557-572.

online Reno, Joshua. "Motivated Markets: Instruments and Ideologies of Clean Energy in the United Kingdom," Cultural Anthropology 2011  26(3): 391-415 Shove E.

Comfort, Cleanliness and Convenience: the Social Organisation of Normality (Bloomsbury, 2004).

Strasser, Susan.

Waste and want: A social history of trash (Macmillan, 2000).

Watson, Robert P., and Noah Zerbe. "Scavengers, Recyclers, and Solutions for Solid Waste Management in Indonesia." (1996): 268-271.

JSTOR 45197669 Weghmann, Vera. "Waste management in Europe." (2023).

online Wilson, David C., et al. "Comparative analysis of solid waste management in 20 cities." Waste management & research 30.3 (2012): 237-254.

online Zimring C.

Cash for Your Trash: Scrap Recycling in America.

(Rutgers University Press, 2005).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Waste management .

v t e Biosolids , waste , and waste management Major types Agricultural wastewater Biodegradable waste Biomedical waste Brown waste Chemical waste Construction waste Demolition waste Electronic waste by country Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Heat waste Industrial waste Industrial wastewater Litter Marine debris Mining waste Municipal solid waste Open defecation Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Radioactive waste Scrap metal Sewage Sharps waste Surface runoff Toxic waste Processes Anaerobic digestion Balefill Biodegradation Composting Durable good Ecological design Garden waste dumping Illegal dumping Incineration Landfill Landfill mining Mechanical biological treatment Mechanical sorting Photodegradation Reclaimed lumber Recycling appliance recycling battery recycling bottle recycling fluorescent lamp recycling land recycling plastic recycling textile recycling timber recycling tire recycling water heat recycling water recycling shower Repurposing Resource recovery Reusable packaging Right to repair Sewage treatment Urban mining Waste collection Waste sorting Waste trade Waste treatment Waste-to-energy Countries Afghanistan Albania Armenia Australia Belgium Bangladesh Brazil Bosnia and Herzegovina Egypt Georgia Hong Kong India Israel Japan Kazakhstan New Zealand Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Switzerland Syria Tanzania Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States Agreements Bamako Convention Basel Convention EU directives batteries Recycling framework incineration landfills RoHS vehicles waste water WEEE London Convention Oslo Convention OSPAR Convention Occupations Sanitation worker Street sweeper Waste collector Waste picker Other topics Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future China's waste import ban Cleaner production Downcycling Eco-industrial park Extended producer responsibility High-level radioactive waste management History of waste management Landfill fire Sewage regulation and administration Supervised injection site Toxic colonialism Upcycling Waste hierarchy Waste legislation Waste minimisation Zero waste Environment portal Category: Waste Index Journals Lists Organizations v t e Recycling Materials Aluminium Asphalt Concrete Copper Cotton Energy Glass Gypsum Paper Plastic Refrigerant Scrap Timber Cooking oil Water Products Appliances Automotive oil Batteries Bottles PET bottles Computers Drugs Fluorescent lamps Lumber Mobile phones Paint Ships Textiles Tires Vehicles Apparatus Bins Blue bags Blue boxes Codes Collection Materials recovery facility Waste sorting Countries Rate by country Australia Brazil Canada Ireland Israel Japan Malaysia Mongolia The Netherlands Switzerland Taiwan United Kingdom Northern Ireland United States Concepts Circular economy Dematerialization Downcycling Durable good Eco-industrial park Ecological design Extended producer responsibility Green economy Industrial ecology Industrial metabolism Interchangeable parts Land recycling Material flow analysis Precycling Product stewardship Recycling (ecological) Refill (campaign) Repairability Resource recovery Reusable packaging Reuse of bottles Reuse of human excreta Repurposing Reuse Right to repair Symbol ( Green Dot ) Upcycling Urban lumberjacking Waste hierarchy Waste minimisation Waste picking Wishcycling Zero waste See also Bottle cutting Cogeneration Composting Container-deposit legislation Dumpster diving Ethical consumerism Freeganism Pallet crafts Reverse vending machine Simple living Waste Waste-to-energy Waste collection Waste management law Waste management Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Environment portal Category by country by material by product organizations Index Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐4ttql
Cached time: 20250818101612
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.490 seconds
Real time usage: 2.974 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 26820/1000000
Revision size: 100886/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 456176/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 37676/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 52/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 440568/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.302/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9300041/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2278.176      1 -total
 33.80%  770.136      2 Template:Reflist
 18.37%  418.400    211 Template:Flag
 17.66%  402.375      6 Template:Excerpt
 16.43%  374.409     57 Template:Cite_web
  8.13%  185.198     26 Template:Cite_journal
  4.95%  112.721     12 Template:Fix
  4.30%   97.942      1 Template:Pollution_sidebar
  4.21%   95.922      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  3.84%   87.484    211 Template:Flag/core Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:210555:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818101612 and revision id 1306547822. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Waste_management&oldid=1306547822 " Categories : Waste management Management by type Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2021 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with dead external links from May 2023 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2016 Articles needing additional references from May 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles containing suspected AI-generated texts from August 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from June 2024 Articles with excerpts All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from November 2016 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from July 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 10:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Waste management 63 languages Add topic

