Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 References Toggle the table of contents List of fictional Cambridge colleges Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article does not cite any sources containing significant coverage .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to sources containing significant coverage . Articles without significant coverage do not demonstrate notability and may be deleted .

Find sources: "List of fictional Cambridge colleges" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fictional colleges are perennially popular in modern novels, allowing the author much greater licence when describing the more intimate activities of a Cambridge college and a way of placing events that might not be permitted by actual Cambridge geography.

Below is a list of some of the fictional colleges of the University of Cambridge .

All Saints College , The Man in Room 17 , The Green Man by Kingsley Amis , mentioned briefly in Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency by Douglas Adams and in Dreaming of the Bones by Deborah Crombie .

Boniface College, Cambridge , Pendennis by William Thackeray , inspired by his time at Cambridge and home to the poet Sprott.

[ 1 ] Brakespeare College , Manalive by G. K. Chesterton Canterbury College , The Mezzotint by M. R. James Fawkes College , in the novels of Mary Selby/Joanna Bell. The College features her book Gargoyles and Port , in which it is rival to the neighbouring St Alupent's College Fisher College , The Cambridge Murders by Dilwyn Rees , situated between real-life St John's College and Trinity College Flopsy College , In the episode Return of the Mummy of children's spy series M.I. High Haworth College , Dr Rose Fenemore in Stormy Petrel by Mary Stewart is described as the College's English tutor, though most of the novel is set on the Isle of Mull Hawkins College , The longstanding rivals of Old College in the series of PorterGirl books and blog of the same name written by Lucy Brazier Humber College , Hugo Lamb, narrator of the second chapter in David Mitchell's novel The Bone Clocks , is an undergraduate at Humber, a medieval college in the city centre Lancaster College , various books by Simon Raven .  Bears more than a passing resemblance to King's College , founded by Henry VI of the House of Lancaster Lauds College , various books by Susan Howatch .  Fictionally contains Cambridge Cathedral, so is similar to Christ Church, Oxford . Charles Ashworth was a fellow of the College and many other characters studied there. Named after William Laud , controversial 17th century Archbishop of Canterbury Marcian College , Raisley Conyngham's old college in In the Image of God by Simon Raven . Located between the Round Church and Portugal Place, i.e. between St John's and Jesus. Described by its head porter as "the least distinguished college in the kingdom, with the possible exception of Hertford College, Oxford " Old College , fictional college from the PorterGirl books and blog, written by Lucy Brazier Pelby College , spoof college that Cambridge students use as an "unmistakable landmark" when giving directions to tourists. By convention it is located somewhere between Magdalene and St John's.

[ 2 ] Porterhouse College , Porterhouse Blue and Grantchester Grind by Tom Sharpe .  The name suggests Peterhouse , though it is also a pun on college porters and porterhouse steaks. It is also reputedly based loosely on Pembroke , Sharpe's alma mater or Corpus Christi which is next door and its location is somewhere near Peterhouse and Pembroke. Despite this, however, filming for the television series took place at Sidney Sussex College . A Porterhouse College in the (fictional) University of Carrbridge , Inverness-shire has been used in University of Cambridge mathematics exam questions.

[ 3 ] Rachel Ambrose College, Christminster , Culture Shock ( Duckworth 1988)  by Valerie Grosvenor Myer , a graduate of Newnham , and sometime Associate of Lucy Cavendish , which, as a college for mature women students, it most resembles St Agatha's College , The Wyndham Case (1993), A Piece of Justice (1995), Debts of Dishonour (2006) and The Bad Quarto (2007)  by Jill Paton Walsh , located between Castle Mound and Chesterton Lane St Alupent's College , in the novels of Mary Selby/Joanna Bell. The College is the setting of her book Gargoyles and Port .

[ 4 ] The author studied at Gonville and Caius College . She named St Alupent's after a branded asthma syrup available on the NHS at the time St Angelicus College , The Gate of Angels (1990) by Penelope Fitzgerald . Situated not far from Christ's Pieces .

St Barnabas' College , Tomorrow's Ghost (1979) by Anthony Price St Bartholemew's College , Nights in White Satin (1999) by Michelle Spring . Located near the police station and New Square, with murders investigated by Laura Principal of Newnham College St Bernard's College , Darkness at Pemberley by T. H. White .  Loosely disguised version of Queens' College [ 5 ] St Botolph's College , example college in Cambridge University Computing Service documentation.

St Bride's College , the setting for much of Charlie Cochrane 's Cambridge Fellows Mysteries St Cedd's College , various works by Douglas Adams .  Based on St. John's College , the alma mater of Douglas Adams St Dunstan's College, Cambridge , College of Professor Austin Herring, who appears in Chris Addison 's The Ape That Got Lucky and Civilisation St Ignatius' College , alma mater of Albert Campion in the novels of Margery Allingham ; see his minibiography in Sweet Danger .

St Margaret's College , The Cambridge Theorem by Tony Cape St Mark's College , Tom Browning's Schooldays by Joel Vincent [ 6 ] St Martha's College , Matricide at St. Martha's by Ruth Dudley Edwards St Martin's College , War Game by Anthony Price St Mary's College , The Hills of Varna by Geoffrey Trease St Matthew's College , The Green Man by Kingsley Amis , next door to St Catharine's College . Also in various works by Stephen Fry - in which it is a loosely disguised version of Queens' College , revealed by names of bridges and courts St Maud's College , in the short-lived BBC sitcom Honey for Tea . Exterior shots are of Clare College St Paul's College , located on St Andrew's Street, between Christ's and Emmanuel, in The Pink and the Grey by Anthony Camber St Radegund's College , an all-female college in Hearts and Mind by Rosy Thornton St Stephen's College , For the Sake of Elena by Elizabeth George , located between Trinity College and Trinity Hall , modelled on the latter. In the BBC adaptation of the Inspector Lynley Mysteries, St John's College was used as the setting. Also referenced in The Proof of my Innocence by Jonathan Coe .

St Swithin's College , In James Hilton's Random Harvest , the college attended by Charles Ranier, the main character, and a decade later by Harrison, the narrator. Founded in the latter 16th century Saviours’ College , In Sophie Hannah 's The Monogram Murders , the college attended by Patrick Ive Tudor College , the home of the main characters in The Night Climbers by Ivo Stourton Weirdsister College , Magical college, setting of a sequel to The Worst Witch Wetmarsh College , subject of an operetta by Mark Wainwright and Roland Anderson entitled Wetmarsh College, or, Dr Middlebottom , first staged at the ADC Theatre , Cambridge, in 2005 (Wetmarsh is never explicitly said to be in Cambridge, but Wainwright's libretto [albeit including a little Oxford terminology] and the place of its composition and first performance make it fairly clear) An unnamed college in C. P. Snow 's Strangers and Brothers series, including The Masters , in which he states that he "never liked geographical inventions such as Christminster", [ 7 ] referring to the Oxford surrogate in Thomas Hardy's Wessex .

[ 8 ] An unnamed college in the BBC Radio 4 comedy series High Table, Lower Orders See also [ edit ] Colleges of the University of Cambridge List of fictional Oxford colleges List of fictional Oxbridge colleges References [ edit ] ^ Thackeray, William Makepeace.

"II. A Pedigree and other Family Matters" .

THE HISTORY OF PENDENNIS .

Pendennis, by this time, had his handsomely framed and glazed, and hanging up in his drawing-room between the pictures of Codlingbury House in Somersetshire, and St. Boniface's College, Cambridge, where he had passed the brief and happy days of his early manhood.

^ Varsity, October 2002 ^ "IA NST Maths, 2008 Paper 2, Question 11X" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2015.

"IA NST Maths, 2009 Paper 1, Question 12X" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2015.

"IA NST Maths, 2010 Paper 1, Question 12X" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2015.

"IA NST Maths, 2011 Paper 1, Question 12X" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2015.

^ Selby, Mary. (1998).

Gargoyles and port . London: Black Swan.

ISBN 0-552-99763-3 .

OCLC 38886188 .

^ Darkness at Pemberley at England Have My Bones ^ "Tom Browning's Schooldays by Joel" .

^ "Note".

The Masters . New York: Macmillan. 1951. p. vii.

^ Room, Adrian (1 June 1989).

"The Case For Casterbridge: Thomas Hardy As PlacenaDle Creator" .

Names .

37 (1): 5 Table 1.

doi : 10.1179/nam.1989.37.1.1 . Retrieved 28 July 2024 .

v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category v t e Fictional education Schools Fictional universities Fictional Oxford colleges Fictional Cambridge colleges Fictional Oxbridge colleges Fictional schools Fictional magic schools Campus novel Varsity novel School television series People Fictional professors Fictional librarians representation in popular culture Fictional Oxford people NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐mt7lw
Cached time: 20250812031738
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.335 seconds
Real time usage: 0.431 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1100/1000000
Revision size: 12280/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 91614/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 890/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51078/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.194/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6208670/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  334.507      1 -total
 28.92%   96.724      3 Template:Navbox
 27.91%   93.373      1 Template:University_of_Cambridge
 21.12%   70.660      3 Template:Cite_book
 18.58%   62.155      1 Template:Short_description
 15.43%   51.620      1 Template:No_significant_coverage
 14.77%   49.390      1 Template:Ambox
  9.41%   31.486      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.40%   21.408      5 Template:Cite_web
  6.11%   20.450      3 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:529967:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812031738 and revision id 1287414326. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_fictional_Cambridge_colleges&oldid=1287414326 " Categories : Fictional colleges of the University of Cambridge Lists of fictional locations University of Cambridge-related lists Fictional universities and colleges Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 Articles lacking sources containing significant coverage from August 2024 All articles lacking sources containing significant coverage This page was last edited on 26 April 2025, at 02:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of fictional Cambridge colleges Add languages Add topic

