Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Conceptions Toggle Conceptions subsection 1.1 Representationalism 1.2 Functionalism 1.3 Interpretationism 1.4 Origins 1.5 Historical 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Occurrent and dispositional 2.2 Full and partial 2.3 Belief-in and belief-that 2.4 De dicto and de re 2.5 Collective belief 3 Contents Toggle Contents subsection 3.1 Atomism, molecularism and holism 3.2 Internalism and externalism 4 Epistemology Toggle Epistemology subsection 4.1 Justified true belief 4.2 Belief systems 4.2.1 Glover's view 5 Religion Toggle Religion subsection 5.1 Forms 5.1.1 Fundamentalism 5.1.2 Orthodoxy 5.1.3 Modernism/reform 5.2 Attitudes to other religions 5.2.1 Exclusivism 5.2.2 Inclusivism 5.3 Adherence 5.4 Apostasy 6 Psychology Toggle Psychology subsection 6.1 Belief formation and revision 6.1.1 Models of belief formation 6.2 Prediction 6.3 Delusion 6.4 Belief studies 6.5 Emotion and beliefs 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Belief 78 languages العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Boarisch Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Latviešu Magyar Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Patois Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Scots Shqip Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Kadazandusun Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Religious belief ) Subjective attitude that something is true This article is about the general concept. For other uses, see Belief (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Epistemology Outline Category Schools Coherentism Contextualism Dogmatism Empiricism Fallibilism Fideism Foundationalism Infallibilism Infinitism Naturalism Perspectivism Pragmatism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Solipsism Structuralism Concepts Action Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Belief Credence Certainty Data Experience Information Justification Induction Knowledge Meaning Rationality Reason Truth Wisdom Domains Applied epistemology Evolutionary epistemology Formal epistemology Historical epistemology Metaepistemology Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Epistemologists Aristotle Sextus Empiricus Edmund Gettier Wang Yangming René Descartes David Hume Immanuel Kant W. V. O. Quine more...

Related fields Epistemic cognition Epistemic logic Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science v t e A belief is a subjective attitude that something is true or a state of affairs is the case. A subjective attitude is a mental state of having some stance , take, or opinion about something.

[ 1 ] In epistemology , philosophers use the term belief to refer to attitudes about the world which can be either true or false .

[ 2 ] To believe something is to take it to be true; for instance, to believe that snow is white is comparable to accepting the truth of the proposition "snow is white". However, holding a belief does not require active introspection . For example, few individuals carefully consider whether or not the sun will rise tomorrow, simply assuming that it will. Moreover, beliefs need not be occurrent (e.g., a person actively thinking "snow is white"), but can instead be dispositional (e.g., a person who if asked about the color of snow would assert "snow is white").

[ 2 ] There are various ways that contemporary philosophers have tried to describe beliefs, including as representations of ways that the world could be ( Jerry Fodor ), as dispositions to act as if certain things are true ( Roderick Chisholm ), as interpretive schemes for making sense of someone's actions ( Daniel Dennett and Donald Davidson ), or as mental states that fill a particular function ( Hilary Putnam ).

[ 2 ] Some have also attempted to offer significant revisions to our notion of belief, including eliminativists about belief who argue that there is no phenomenon in the natural world which corresponds to our folk psychological concept of belief ( Paul Churchland ) and formal epistemologists who aim to replace our bivalent notion of belief ("either we have a belief or we don't have a belief") with the more permissive, probabilistic notion of credence ("there is an entire spectrum of degrees of belief, not a simple dichotomy between belief and non-belief").

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Beliefs are the subject of various important philosophical debates. Notable examples include: "What is the rational way to revise one's beliefs when presented with various sorts of evidence?", "Is the content of our beliefs entirely determined by our mental states, or do the relevant facts have any bearing on our beliefs (e.g. if I believe that I'm holding a glass of water, is the non-mental fact that water is H 2 O part of the content of that belief)?", "How fine-grained or coarse-grained are our beliefs?", and "Must it be possible for a belief to be expressible in language, or are there non-linguistic beliefs?" [ 2 ] Conceptions [ edit ] Various conceptions of the essential features of beliefs have been proposed, but there is no consensus as to which is the right one.

Representationalism is the traditionally dominant position. Its most popular version maintains that attitudes toward representations, which are typically associated with propositions, are mental attitudes that constitute beliefs. These attitudes are part of the internal constitution of the mind holding the attitude. This view contrasts with functionalism , which defines beliefs not in terms of the internal constitution of the mind but in terms of the function or the causal role played by beliefs. According to dispositionalism , beliefs are identified with dispositions to behave in certain ways. This view can be seen as a form of functionalism, defining beliefs in terms of the behavior they tend to cause.

Interpretationism constitutes another conception, which has gained popularity in contemporary philosophy. It holds that the beliefs of an entity are in some sense dependent on or relative to someone's interpretation of this entity.

Representationalism tends to be associated with mind-body-dualism.

Naturalist considerations against this dualism are among the motivations for choosing one of the alternative conceptions.

[ 4 ] Representationalism [ edit ] Representationalism characterizes beliefs in terms of mental representations . Representations are usually defined as objects with semantic properties —like having content, referring to something, or being true or false.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Beliefs form a special class of mental representations since they do not involve sensory qualities in order to represent something, unlike perceptions or episodic memories.

[ 6 ] Because of this, it seems natural to construe beliefs as attitudes towards propositions, which also constitute non-sensory representations, i.e. as propositional attitudes . As mental attitudes , beliefs are characterized by both their content and their mode.

[ 6 ] The content of an attitude is what this attitude is directed at: its object. Propositional attitudes are directed at propositions.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 5 ] Beliefs are usually distinguished from other propositional attitudes, like desires, by their mode or the way in which they are directed at propositions. The mode of beliefs has a mind-to-world direction of fit : beliefs try to represent the world as it is; they do not, unlike desires, involve an intention to change it.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] For example, if Rahul believes that it will be sunny today, then he has a mental attitude towards the proposition "It will be sunny today" which affirms that this proposition is true. This is different from Sofía's desire that it will be sunny today, despite the fact that both Rahul and Sofía have attitudes toward the same proposition. The mind-to-world direction of fit of beliefs is sometimes expressed by saying that beliefs aim at truth.

[ 9 ] This aim is also reflected in the tendency to revise one's belief upon receiving new evidence that an existing belief is false.

[ 4 ] Upon hearing a forecast of bad weather, Rahul is likely to change his mental attitude but Sofía is not.

There are different ways of conceiving how mental representations are realized in the mind. One form of this is the language of thought hypothesis , which claims that mental representations have a language-like structure, sometimes referred to as "mentalese".

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Just like regular language, this involves simple elements that are combined in various ways according to syntactic rules to form more complex elements that act as bearers of meaning.

[ 4 ] [ 11 ] On this conception, holding a belief would involve storing such a complex element in one's mind. Different beliefs are separated from each other in that they correspond to different elements stored in the mind. A more holistic alternative to the "language of thought hypothesis" is the map-conception , which uses an analogy of maps to elucidate the nature of beliefs.

[ 4 ] [ 11 ] According to this view, the belief system of a mind should be conceived of not as a set of many individual sentences but as a map encoding the information contained in these sentences.

[ 4 ] [ 11 ] For example, the fact that Brussels is halfway between Paris and Amsterdam can be expressed both linguistically as a sentence and in a map through its internal geometrical relations.

Functionalism [ edit ] Functionalism contrasts with representationalism in that it defines beliefs not in terms of the internal constitution of the mind but in terms of the function or the causal role played by them.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] This view is often combined with the idea that the same belief can be realized in various ways and that it does not matter how it is realized as long as it plays the causal role characteristic to it.

[ 4 ] [ 14 ] As an analogy, a hard drive is defined in a functionalist manner: it performs the function of storing and retrieving digital data. This function can be realized in many different ways: being made of plastic or steel, or using magnetism or laser.

[ 4 ] Functionalists hold that something similar is true for beliefs (or mental states in general).

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Among the roles relevant to beliefs is their relation to perceptions and to actions: perceptions usually cause beliefs and beliefs cause actions.

[ 4 ] For example, seeing that a traffic light has switched to red is usually associated with a belief that the light is red, which in turn causes the driver to bring the car to a halt. Functionalists use such characteristics to define beliefs: whatever is caused by perceptions in a certain way and also causes behavior in a certain way is called a belief. This is not just true for humans but may include animals, hypothetical aliens or even computers.

[ 4 ] [ 12 ] From this perspective, it would make sense to ascribe the belief that a traffic light is red to a self-driving car behaving just like a human driver.

Dispositionalism is sometimes seen as a specific form of functionalism.

[ 4 ] It defines beliefs only concerning their role as causes of behavior or as dispositions to behave in a certain way.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] For example, a belief that there is a pie in the pantry is associated with the disposition to affirm this when asked and to go to the pantry when hungry.

[ 6 ] While it is uncontroversial that beliefs shape our behavior, the thesis that beliefs can be defined exclusively through their role in producing behavior has been contested.

[ 4 ] [ 15 ] The problem arises because the mechanisms shaping our behavior seem to be too complex to single out the general contribution of one particular belief for any possible situation.

[ 6 ] For example, one may decide not to affirm that there is a pie in the pantry when asked because one wants to keep it secret. Or one might not eat the pie despite being hungry, because one also believes that it is poisoned.

[ 6 ] Due to this complexity, we are unable to define even a belief as simple as this one in terms of the behavioral dispositions for which it could be responsible.

[ 4 ] Interpretationism [ edit ] According to interpretationism, the beliefs of an entity are in some sense dependent on, or relative to, someone's interpretation of this entity.

[ 4 ] [ 17 ] Daniel Dennett is an important defender of such a position. He holds that we ascribe beliefs to entities in order to predict how they will behave. Entities with simple behavioral patterns can be described using physical laws or in terms of their function. Dennett refers to these forms of explanation as the "physical stance" and the "design stance". These stances are contrasted with the intentional stance , which is applied to entities with a more complex behavior by ascribing beliefs and desires to these entities.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] For example, we can predict that a chess player will move her queen to f7 if we ascribe to her the desire to win the game and the belief that this move will achieve that. The same procedure can also be applied to predicting how a chess computer will behave. The entity has the belief in question if this belief can be used to predict its behavior.

[ 4 ] Having a belief is relative to an interpretation since there may be different equally good ways of ascribing beliefs to predict behavior.

[ 4 ] So there may be another interpretation that predicts the move of the queen to f7 that does not involve the belief that this move will win the game. Another version of interpretationism is due to Donald Davidson , [ 17 ] who uses the thought experiment of radical interpretation , in which the goal is to make sense of the behavior and language of another person from scratch without any knowledge of this person's language.

[ 4 ] This process involves ascribing beliefs and desires to the speaker. The speaker really has these beliefs if this project can be successful in principle.

[ 4 ] Interpretationism can be combined with eliminativism and instrumentalism about beliefs. Eliminativists hold that, strictly speaking, there are no beliefs. Instrumentalists agree with eliminativists but add that belief-ascriptions are useful nonetheless.

[ 4 ] This usefulness can be explained in terms of interpretationism: belief-ascriptions help us in predicting how entities will behave. It has been argued that interpretationism can also be understood in a more realistic sense: that entities really have the beliefs ascribed to them and that these beliefs participate in the causal network.

[ 20 ] But, for this to be possible, it may be necessary to define interpretationism as a methodology and not as an ontological outlook on beliefs.

[ 17 ] Origins [ edit ] Biologist Lewis Wolpert discusses the importance of causal beliefs and associates the making and use of tools with the origin of human beliefs.

[ 21 ] Historical [ edit ] In the context of Ancient Greek thought , three related concepts were identified regarding the concept of belief: pistis [ broken anchor ] , doxa , and dogma .

Simplified, Pistis refers to " trust " and "confidence," doxa refers to " opinion " and "acceptance," and dogma refers to the positions of a philosopher or of a philosophical school such as Stoicism .

Types [ edit ] Beliefs can be categorized into various types depending on their ontological status, their degree, their object or their semantic properties.

Occurrent and dispositional [ edit ] Having an occurrent belief that the Grand Canyon is in Arizona involves entertaining the representation associated with this belief—for example, by actively thinking about it. But the great majority of our beliefs are not active most of the time: they are merely dispositional.

[ 4 ] They usually become activated or occurrent when needed or relevant in some way and then fall back into their dispositional state afterwards.

[ 4 ] For example, the belief that 57 is greater than 14 was probably dispositional to the reader before reading this sentence, has become occurrent while reading it and may soon become dispositional again as the mind focuses elsewhere. The distinction between occurrent and dispositional beliefs is sometimes identified with the distinction between conscious and unconscious beliefs.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] But it has been argued that, despite overlapping, the two distinctions do not match. The reason for this is that beliefs can shape one's behaviour and be involved in one's reasoning even if the subject is not conscious of them. Such beliefs are cases of unconscious occurrent mental states.

[ 22 ] On this view, being occurrent corresponds to being active, either consciously or unconsciously.

[ 23 ] A dispositional belief is not the same as a disposition to believe.

[ 16 ] We have various dispositions to believe given the right perceptions; for example, to believe that it is raining given a perception of rain. Without this perception, there is still a disposition to believe but no actual dispositional belief.

[ 16 ] On a dispositionalist conception of belief, there are no occurrent beliefs, since all beliefs are defined in terms of dispositions.

[ 4 ] Full and partial [ edit ] An important dispute in formal epistemology concerns the question of whether beliefs should be conceptualized as full beliefs or as partial beliefs.

[ 24 ] Full beliefs are all-or-nothing attitudes: either one has a belief in a proposition or one does not. This conception is sufficient to understand many belief ascriptions found in everyday language: for example, Pedro's belief that the Earth is bigger than the Moon. But some cases involving comparisons between beliefs are not easily captured through full beliefs alone: for example, that Pedro's belief that the Earth is bigger than the Moon is more certain than his belief that the Earth is bigger than Venus. Such cases are most naturally analyzed in terms of partial beliefs involving degrees of belief, so-called credences .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] The higher the degree of a belief, the more certain the believer is that the believed proposition is true.

[ 26 ] This is usually formalized by numbers between 0 and 1: a degree of 1 represents an absolutely certain belief, a belief of 0 corresponds to an absolutely certain disbelief and all the numbers in between correspond to intermediate degrees of certainty. In the Bayesian approach , these degrees are interpreted as subjective probabilities : [ 27 ] [ 28 ] e.g. a belief of degree 0.9 that it will rain tomorrow means that the agent thinks that the probability of rain tomorrow is 90%. Bayesianism uses this relation between beliefs and probability to define the norms of rationality in terms of the laws of probability.

[ 26 ] This includes both synchronic laws about what one should believe at any moment and diachronic laws about how one should revise one's beliefs upon receiving new evidence.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] The central question in the dispute between full and partial beliefs is whether these two types are really distinct types or whether one type can be explained in terms of the other.

[ 24 ] One answer to this question is called the Lockean thesis . It states that partial beliefs are basic and that full beliefs are to be conceived as partial beliefs above a certain threshold: for example, every belief above 0.9 is a full belief.

[ 24 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Defenders of a primitive notion of full belief, on the other hand, have tried to explain partial beliefs as full beliefs about probabilities.

[ 24 ] On this view, having a partial belief of degree 0.9 that it will rain tomorrow is the same as having a full belief that the probability of rain tomorrow is 90%. Another approach circumvents the notion of probability altogether and replaces degrees of belief with degrees of disposition to revise one's full belief.

[ 24 ] From this perspective, both a belief of degree 0.6 and a belief of degree 0.9 may be seen as full beliefs. The difference between them is that the former belief can readily be changed upon receiving new evidence while the latter is more stable.

[ 24 ] Belief-in and belief-that [ edit ] Traditionally, philosophers have mainly focused in their inquiries concerning belief on the notion of belief-that .

[ 31 ] Belief-that can be characterized as a propositional attitude to a claim which is either true or false.

Belief-in , on the other hand, is more closely related to notions like trust or faith in that it refers usually to an attitude to persons.

[ 31 ] Belief-in plays a central role in many religious traditions in which belief in God is one of the central virtues of their followers.

[ 32 ] The difference between belief-in and belief-that is sometimes blurry since various expressions using the term "belief in" seem to be translatable into corresponding expressions using the term "belief that" instead.

[ 33 ] For example, a belief in fairies may be said to be a belief that fairies exist.

[ 32 ] In this sense, belief-in is often used when the entity is not real, or its existence is in doubt. Typical examples would include: "he believes in witches and ghosts" or "many children believe in Santa Claus " or "I believe in a deity".

[ 34 ] Not all usages of belief-in concern the existence of something: some are commendatory in that they express a positive attitude towards their object.

[ 34 ] [ 31 ] It has been suggested that these cases can also be accounted for in terms of belief-that. For example, a belief in marriage could be translated as a belief that marriage is good.

[ 32 ] Belief-in is used in a similar sense when expressing self-confidence or faith in one's self or one's abilities.

Defenders of a reductive account of belief-in have used this line of thought to argue that belief in God can be analyzed in a similar way: e.g. that it amounts to a belief that God exists with his characteristic attributes, like omniscience and omnipotence .

[ 32 ] Opponents of this account often concede that belief-in may entail various forms of belief-that, but that there are additional aspects to belief-in that are not reducible to belief-that.

[ 33 ] For example, a belief in an ideal may involve the belief that this ideal is something good, but it additionally involves a positive evaluative attitude toward this ideal that goes beyond a mere propositional attitude.

[ 32 ] Applied to the belief in God, opponents of the reductive approach may hold that a belief that God exists may be a necessary pre-condition for belief in God, but that it is not sufficient.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] De dicto and de re [ edit ] See also: De dicto and de re The difference between de dicto and de re beliefs or the corresponding ascriptions concerns the contributions singular terms like names and other referential devices make to the semantic properties of the belief or its ascription.

[ 4 ] [ 35 ] In regular contexts, the truth-value of a sentence does not change upon substitution of co-referring terms.

[ 36 ] For example, since the names "Superman" and "Clark Kent" refer to the same person, we can replace one with the other in the sentence "Superman is strong" without changing its truth-value; this issue is more complicated in case of belief ascriptions.

[ 36 ] For example, Lois Lane believes that Superman is strong but she does not believe that Clark Kent is strong.

[ 4 ] This difficulty arises due to the fact that she does not know that the two names refer to the same entity. Beliefs or belief ascriptions for which this substitution does not generally work are de dicto , otherwise, they are de re .

[ 4 ] [ 36 ] [ 35 ] In a de re sense, Lois does believe that Clark Kent is strong, while in a de dicto sense she does not. The contexts corresponding to de dicto ascriptions are known as referentially opaque contexts while de re ascriptions are referentially transparent.

[ 4 ] [ 36 ] Collective belief [ edit ] A collective belief is referred to when people speak of what "we" believe when this is not simply elliptical for what "we all" believe.

[ 37 ] Sociologist Émile Durkheim wrote of collective beliefs and proposed that they, like all " social facts ", "inhered in" social groups as opposed to individual persons.

Jonathan Dancy states that "Durkheim's discussion of collective belief, though suggestive, is relatively obscure".

[ 38 ] Margaret Gilbert has offered a related account in terms of the joint commitment of a number of persons as a body to accept a certain belief. According to this account, individuals who together collectively believe something need not personally believe it individually. Gilbert's work on the topic has stimulated a developing literature among philosophers.

[ 39 ] One question that has arisen is whether and how philosophical accounts of belief in general need to be sensitive to the possibility of collective belief.

Collective belief can play a role in social control [ 40 ] and serve as a touchstone for identifying and purging heresies , [ 41 ] deviancy [ 42 ] or political deviationism .

Contents [ edit ] As mental representations , beliefs have contents, which is what the belief is about or what it represents. Within philosophy, there are various disputes about how the contents of beliefs are to be understood. Holists and molecularists hold that the content of one particular belief depends on or is determined by other beliefs belonging to the same subject, which is denied by atomists. The question of dependence or determination also plays a central role in the internalism-externalism debate. Internalism states that the contents of someone's beliefs depend only on what is internal to that person and are determined entirely by things going on inside this person's head. Externalism, on the other hand, holds that the relations to one's environment also have a role to play in this.

Atomism, molecularism and holism [ edit ] The disagreement between atomism, molecularism and holism concerns the question of how the content of one belief depends on the contents of other beliefs held by the same subject.

[ 43 ] Atomists deny such dependence relations, molecularists restrict them to only a few closely related beliefs while holists hold that they may obtain between any two beliefs, however unrelated they seem.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 43 ] For example, assume that Mei and Benjamin both affirm that Jupiter is a planet. The most straightforward explanation, given by the atomists, would be that they have the same belief, i.e. that they hold the same content to be true. But now assume that Mei also believes that Pluto is a planet, which is denied by Benjamin. This indicates that they have different concepts of planet , which would mean that they were affirming different contents when they both agreed that Jupiter is a planet. This reasoning leads to molecularism or holism because the content of the Jupiter-belief depends on the Pluto-belief in this example.

[ 4 ] [ 43 ] An important motivation for this position comes from W. V. Quine 's confirmational holism , which holds that, because of this interconnectedness, we cannot confirm or disconfirm individual hypotheses, that confirmation happens on the level of the theory as a whole.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Another motivation is due to considerations of the nature of learning: it is often not possible to understand one concept, like force in Newtonian physics , without understanding other concepts, like mass or kinetic energy .

[ 43 ] One problem for holism is that genuine disagreements seem to be impossible or very rare: disputants would usually talk past each other since they never share exactly the same web of beliefs needed to determine the content of the source of the disagreement.

[ 4 ] [ 43 ] Internalism and externalism [ edit ] Internalism and externalism disagree about whether the contents of our beliefs are determined only by what's happening in our head or also by other factors.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Internalists deny such a dependence on external factors. They hold that a person and a molecule-by-molecule copy would have exactly the same beliefs.

Hilary Putnam objects to this position by way of his twin Earth thought experiment . He imagines a twin Earth in another part of the universe that is exactly like ours, except that their water has a different chemical composition despite behaving just like ours.

[ 4 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] According to Putnam, the reader's thought that water is wet is about our water while the reader's twin's thought on twin Earth that water is wet is about their water . This is the case despite the fact that the two readers have the same molecular composition. So it seems necessary to include external factors in order to explain the difference. One problem with this position is that this difference in content does not bring any causal difference with it: the two readers act in exactly the same way. This casts doubt on the thesis that there is any genuine difference in need of explanation between the contents of the two beliefs.

[ 4 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Epistemology [ edit ] Main article: Epistemology A Venn diagram illustrating the traditional definition of knowledge as justified true belief (represented by the yellow circle). The Gettier problem gives us reason to think that not all justified true beliefs constitute knowledge.

Epistemology is concerned with delineating the boundary between justified belief and opinion , [ 47 ] and involved generally with a theoretical philosophical study of knowledge . The primary problem in epistemology is to understand what is needed to have knowledge. In a notion derived from Plato 's dialogue Theaetetus , where the epistemology of Socrates most clearly departs from that of the sophists , who appear to have defined knowledge as " justified true belief ". The tendency to base knowledge ( episteme ) on common opinion ( doxa ) Socrates dismisses, results from failing to distinguish a dispositive belief ( doxa ) from knowledge ( episteme ) when the opinion is regarded correct (n.b., orthé not alethia ), in terms of right, and juristically so (according to the premises of the dialogue), which was the task of the rhetors to prove. Plato dismisses this possibility of an affirmative relation between opinion and knowledge even when the one who opines grounds his belief on the rule and is able to add justification ( logos : reasonable and necessarily plausible assertions/evidence/guidance) to it.

[ citation needed ] A belief can be based fully or partially on intuition .

[ 48 ] Plato has been credited for the justified true belief theory of knowledge, even though Plato in the Theaetetus elegantly dismisses it, and even posits this argument of Socrates as a cause for his death penalty. The epistemologists, Gettier [ 49 ] and Goldman , [ 50 ] have questioned the "justified true belief" definition.

Justified true belief [ edit ] See also: Definitions of knowledge § Justified true belief Justified true belief is a definition of knowledge that gained approval during the Enlightenment , "justified" standing in contrast to "revealed". There have been attempts to trace it back to Plato and his dialogues, more specifically in the Theaetetus , [ 51 ] and the Meno . The concept of justified true belief states that in order to know that a given proposition is true, one must not only believe the relevant true proposition but also have justification for doing so. In more formal terms, an agent S {\displaystyle S} knows that a proposition P {\displaystyle P} is true if and only if : P {\displaystyle P} is true S {\displaystyle S} believes that P {\displaystyle P} is true, and S {\displaystyle S} is justified in believing that P {\displaystyle P} is true That theory of knowledge suffered a significant setback with the discovery of Gettier problems , situations in which the above conditions were seemingly met but where many philosophers deny that anything is known.

[ 52 ] Robert Nozick suggested a clarification of "justification" which he believed eliminates the problem: the justification has to be such that were the justification false, the knowledge would be false.

[ 53 ] Bernecker and Dretske (2000) argue that "no epistemologist since Gettier has seriously and successfully defended the traditional view." [ 54 ] : 3 On the other hand, Paul Boghossian argues that the justified true belief account is the "standard, widely accepted" definition of knowledge.

[ 55 ] Belief systems [ edit ] A belief system comprises a set of mutually supportive beliefs. The beliefs of any such system can be religious , philosophical , political , ideological , or a combination of these.

[ 56 ] Glover's view [ edit ] The British philosopher Jonathan Glover , following Meadows (2008), says that beliefs are always part of a belief system, and that tenanted belief systems are difficult for the tenants to completely revise or reject.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] He suggests that beliefs have to be considered holistically , and that no belief exists in isolation in the mind of the believer. Each belief always implicates and relates to other beliefs.

[ 57 ] Glover provides the example of a patient with an illness who returns to a doctor, but the doctor says that the prescribed medicine is not working. At that point, the patient has a great deal of flexibility in choosing what beliefs to keep or reject: the patient could believe that the doctor is incompetent, that the doctor's assistants made a mistake, that the patient's own body is unique in some unexpected way, that Western medicine is ineffective, or even that Western science is entirely unable to discover truths about ailments.

[ 57 ] This insight has relevance for inquisitors , missionaries , agitprop groups and thought-police . The British philosopher Stephen Law has described some belief systems (including belief in homeopathy , psychic powers , and alien abduction ) as "claptrap" and says that such belief-systems can "draw people in and hold them captive so they become willing slaves of claptrap ... if you get sucked in, it can be extremely difficult to think your way clear again".

[ 59 ] Religion [ edit ] This section uses texts from within a religion or faith system without referring to secondary sources that critically analyse them.

Please help improve this article .

( August 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Belief" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main article: Faith Religion is a personal set or institutionalized system of religious attitudes, beliefs, and practices; the service or worship of God or the supernatural.

[ 60 ] Religious belief is distinct from religious practice and from religious behaviours —with some believers not practicing religion and some practitioners not believing religion.

Belief is no less of a theoretical term than is religion .

[ 61 ] Religious beliefs often relate to the existence, characteristics and worship of a deity or deities, to the idea of divine intervention in the universe and in human life , or to the deontological explanations for the values and practices centered on the teachings of a spiritual leader or community .

[ 62 ] In contrast to other belief systems , religious beliefs are usually codified .

[ 63 ] Forms [ edit ] A popular view holds that different religions each have identifiable and exclusive sets of beliefs or creeds , but surveys of religious belief have often found that the official doctrine and descriptions of the beliefs offered by religious authorities do not always agree with the privately held beliefs of those who identify as members of a particular religion.

[ 64 ] For a broad classification of the kinds of religious belief, see below.

Fundamentalism [ edit ] Main article: Religious fundamentalism First self-applied as a term to the conservative doctrine outlined by anti-modernist Protestants in the United States, [ 65 ] "fundamentalism" in religious terms denotes strict adherence to an interpretation of scriptures that are generally associated with theologically conservative positions or traditional understandings of the text and are distrustful of innovative readings, new revelation, or alternative interpretations.

[ 66 ] Religious fundamentalism has been identified [ by whom?

] in the media as being associated with fanatical or zealous political movements around the world that have used a strict adherence to a particular religious doctrine as a means to establish political identity and to enforce societal norms.

[ 67 ] Orthodoxy [ edit ] Main article: Orthodoxy First used in the context of Early Christianity , the term "orthodoxy" relates to religious belief that closely follows the edicts, apologies , and hermeneutics of a prevailing religious authority. In the case of Early Christianity, this authority was the communion of bishops, and is often referred to by the term " Magisterium ". The term orthodox was applied [ when?

] almost as an epithet to a group of Jewish believers who held to pre-Enlightenment understanding of Judaism—now known as Orthodox Judaism . The Eastern Orthodox Church of Christianity and the Catholic Church each consider themselves to be the true heir to Early Christian belief and practice. The antonym of "orthodox" is " heterodox ", and those adhering to orthodoxy often accuse the heterodox of apostasy , schism , or heresy .

Modernism/reform [ edit ] The Renaissance and later the Enlightenment in Europe exhibited varying degrees of religious tolerance and intolerance towards new and old religious ideas. The philosophes took particular exception to many of the more fantastical claims of religions and directly challenged religious authority and the prevailing beliefs associated with the established churches. In response to the liberalizing political and social movements, some religious groups attempted to integrate Enlightenment ideals of rationality, equality, and individual liberty into their belief systems, especially in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.

Reform Judaism [ 68 ] [ 69 ] and Liberal Christianity offer two examples of such religious associations.

Attitudes to other religions [ edit ] Adherents of particular religions deal with the differing doctrines and practices espoused by other religions or by other religious denominations in a variety of ways.

Exclusivism [ edit ] See also: Religious exclusivism People with exclusivist beliefs typically explain other beliefs either as in error, or as corruptions or counterfeits of the true faith . This approach is a fairly consistent feature among smaller new religious movements that often rely on doctrine that claims a unique revelation by the founders or leaders , and considers it a matter of faith that the "correct" religion has a monopoly on truth. All three major Abrahamic monotheistic religions have passages in their holy scriptures that attest to the primacy of the scriptural testimony, and indeed monotheism itself is often [ quantify ] vouched [ by whom?

] as an innovation characterized specifically by its explicit rejection of earlier polytheistic faiths.

Some exclusivist faiths incorporate a specific element of proselytization . This is a strongly held belief in the Christian tradition which follows the doctrine of the Great Commission , and is less emphasized by the Islamic faith where the Quranic edict "There shall be no compulsion in religion" (2:256) is often quoted as a justification for toleration of alternative beliefs. The Jewish tradition does not actively seek out converts.

Exclusivism correlates with conservative, fundamentalist, and orthodox approaches of many religions, while pluralistic and syncretist approaches either explicitly downplay or reject the exclusivist tendencies within a religion.

[ citation needed ] [ 70 ] Inclusivism [ edit ] People with inclusivist beliefs recognize some truth in all faith systems , highlighting agreements and minimizing differences. This attitude is sometimes associated [ by whom?

] with Interfaith dialogue or with the Christian Ecumenical movement, though in principle such attempts at pluralism are not necessarily inclusivist and many actors in such interactions (for example, the Roman Catholic Church ) still hold to exclusivist dogma while participating in inter-religious organizations. Explicitly inclusivist religions include many that are associated with the New Age movement, as well as modern reinterpretations of Hinduism and Buddhism . The Baháʼí Faith considers it doctrine that there is truth in all faith systems.

Pluralism and syncretism are two closely related concepts. People with pluralist beliefs make no distinction between faith systems, viewing each one as valid within a particular culture. People with syncretic views blend the views of a variety of different religions or traditional beliefs into a unique fusion which suits their particular experiences and contexts ( eclecticism ).

Unitarian Universalism exemplifies a syncretic faith.

Adherence [ edit ] See also: Existence of God Typical reasons for adherence to religion include the following: Some see belief in a deity as necessary for moral behavior .

[ 71 ] Some regard religious practices as serene, beautiful, and conducive to religious experiences, which in turn support religious beliefs.

[ 72 ] Organized religions promote a sense of community among their followers, and the moral and cultural common ground of these communities makes them attractive to people with similar values .

[ 73 ] Indeed, while religious beliefs and practices are usually connected, some individuals with substantially secular beliefs still participate in religious practices for cultural reasons.

[ 74 ] Each religion asserts that it is a means by which its adherents may come into closer contact with the Divine, with Truth, and with spiritual power . They all promise to free adherents from spiritual bondage, and to bring them into spiritual freedom. It naturally follows that a religion which can free its adherents from deception, sin, and spiritual death will have significant mental-health benefits.

Abraham Maslow 's research after World War II showed that Holocaust survivors tended to be those who held strong religious beliefs (not necessarily temple attendance, etc.), suggesting that belief helped people cope in extreme circumstances.

Humanistic psychology went on to investigate how religious or spiritual identity may have correlations with longer lifespan and better health. The study found that humans may particularly need religious ideas to serve various emotional needs such as the need to feel loved, the need to belong to homogeneous groups, the need for understandable explanations and the need for a guarantee of ultimate justice. Other factors may involve sense of purpose , sense of identity , or a sense of contact with the divine. See also Man's Search for Meaning , by Viktor Frankl , detailing his experience with the importance of religion in surviving the Holocaust. Critics assert that the very fact that religion was the primary selector for research subjects may have introduced a bias, and that the fact that all subjects were Holocaust survivors may also have had an effect. According to Larson et al. (2000), "[m]ore longitudinal research with better multidimensional measures will help further clarify the roles of these [religious] factors and whether they are beneficial or harmful." [ 75 ] Psychologist James Alcock also summarizes a number of apparent benefits which reinforce religious belief. These include prayer appearing to account for successful resolution of problems, "a bulwark against existential anxiety and fear of annihilation," an increased sense of control, companionship with one's deity, a source of self-significance, and group identity.

[ 76 ] Apostasy [ edit ] Main article: Apostasy See also: Existence of God § Arguments against the existence of God or gods Typical reasons for rejection of religion include: Some people regard certain fundamental doctrines of some religions as illogical, contrary to experience, or unsupported by sufficient evidence ; such people may reject one or more religions for those reasons.

[ 77 ] Even some believers may have difficulty accepting particular religious assertions or doctrines. Some people believe the body of evidence available to humans to be insufficient to justify certain religious beliefs. They may thus disagree with religious interpretations of ethics and human purpose, or with various creation myths . This reason has perhaps [ original research?

] been aggravated by the protestations and emphases of some fundamentalist Christians .

Some religions include beliefs that certain groups of people are inferior or sinful and deserve contempt, persecution, or even death, and that non-believers will be punished for their unbelief in an after-life .

[ 78 ] Adherents to a religion may feel antipathy to unbelievers. Numerous examples exist of people of one religion or sect using religion as an excuse to murder people with different religious beliefs. To mention just a few examples: the slaughter of the Huguenots by French Catholics in the sixteenth century Hindus and Muslims killing each other when Pakistan separated from India in 1947 the persecution and killing of Shiite Muslims by Sunni Muslims in Iraq the murder of Protestants by Catholics and vice versa in Ireland (both of these examples in the late twentieth century) the Israeli–Palestinian conflict that continues as of 2018 [update] – According to some critics of religion, such beliefs can encourage completely unnecessary conflicts and in some cases even wars. Many atheists believe that, because of this, religion is incompatible with world peace, freedom, civil rights, equality, and good government. On the other hand, most religions perceive atheism as a threat and will vigorously and even violently [ 79 ] defend themselves against religious sterilization, making the attempt to remove public religious practices a source of strife.

[ 79 ] Some people may be unable to accept the values that a specific religion promotes and will therefore not join that religion. They may also be unable to accept the proposition that those who do not believe will go to hell or be damned, especially if said nonbelievers are close to the person.

Psychology [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Belief" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mainstream psychology and related disciplines have traditionally treated belief as if it were the simplest form of mental representation and therefore one of the building blocks of conscious thought.

[ 80 ] Philosophers have tended to be more abstract in their analysis, and much of the work examining the viability of the belief concept stems from philosophical analysis.

[ 81 ] The concept of belief presumes a subject (the believer) and an object of belief (the proposition). Like other propositional attitudes , belief implies the existence of mental states and intentionality , both of which are hotly debated topics in the philosophy of mind , whose foundations and relation to brain states are still controversial.

Beliefs are sometimes divided into core beliefs (that are actively thought about) and dispositional beliefs (that may be ascribed to someone who has not thought about the issue). For example, if asked "do you believe tigers wear pink pajamas?" a person might answer that they do not, despite the fact they may never have thought about this situation before.

[ 82 ] Philosopher Lynne Rudder Baker has outlined four main contemporary approaches to belief in her book Saving Belief : [ 83 ] Our common-sense understanding of belief is correct – Sometimes called the "mental sentence theory," in this conception, beliefs exist as coherent entities, and the way we talk about them in everyday life is a valid basis for scientific endeavor.

Jerry Fodor was one of the principal defenders of this point of view.

Our common-sense understanding of belief may not be entirely correct, but it is close enough to make some useful predictions – This view argues that we will eventually reject the idea of belief as we know it now, but that there may be a correlation between what we take to be a belief when someone says "I believe that snow is white" and how a future theory of psychology will explain this behavior. Philosopher Stephen Stich has argued for this particular understanding of belief.

Our common-sense understanding of belief is entirely wrong and will be completely superseded by a radically different theory that will have no use for the concept of belief as we know it – Known as eliminativism , this view (most notably proposed by Paul and Patricia Churchland ) argues that the concept of belief is like obsolete theories of times past such as the four humours theory of medicine, or the phlogiston theory of combustion. In these cases science has not provided us with a more detailed account of these theories, but completely rejected them as valid scientific concepts to be replaced by entirely different accounts. The Churchlands argue that our common-sense concept of belief is similar in that as we discover more about neuroscience and the brain, the inevitable conclusion will be to reject the belief hypothesis in its entirety.

Our common-sense understanding of belief is entirely wrong; however, treating people, animals, and even computers as if they had beliefs is often a successful strategy – The major proponents of this view, Daniel Dennett and Lynne Rudder Baker , are both eliminativists in that they hold that beliefs are not a scientifically valid concept, but they do not go as far as rejecting the concept of belief as a predictive device. Dennett gives the example of playing a computer at chess. While few people would agree that the computer held beliefs, treating the computer as if it did (e.g. that the computer believes that taking the opposition's queen will give it a considerable advantage) is likely to be a successful and predictive strategy. In this understanding of belief, named by Dennett the intentional stance , belief-based explanations of mind and behaviour are at a different level of explanation and are not reducible to those based on fundamental neuroscience, although both may be explanatory at their own level.

Strategic approaches make a distinction between rules, norms and beliefs as follows: Rules. Explicit regulative processes such as policies, laws, inspection routines, or incentives. Rules function as a coercive regulator of behavior and are dependent upon the imposing entity's ability to enforce them.

Norms. Regulative mechanisms accepted by the social collective. Norms are enforced by normative mechanisms within the organization and are not strictly dependent upon law or regulation.

Beliefs. The collective perception of fundamental truths governing behavior. The adherence to accepted and shared beliefs by members of a social system will likely persist and be difficult to change over time. Strong beliefs about determinant factors (i.e., security, survival, or honor) are likely to cause a social entity or group to accept rules and norms.

[ 84 ] Belief formation and revision [ edit ] See also: Belief revision Belief revision is a term commonly used to refer to the modification of beliefs. An extensive amount of scientific research and philosophical discussion exists around belief revision. Generally speaking, the process of belief revision entails the believer weighing the set of truths and/or evidence, and the dominance of a set of truths or evidence on an alternative to a held belief can lead to revision. One process of belief revision is Bayesian updating (or Bayesian inference ) and is often referenced for its mathematical basis and conceptual simplicity.

[ 85 ] However, such a process may not be representative for individuals whose beliefs are not easily characterized as probabilistic.

There are several techniques for individuals or groups to change the beliefs of others; these methods generally fall under the umbrella of persuasion . Persuasion can take on more specific forms such as consciousness raising when considered in an activist or political context. Belief modification may also occur as a result of the experience of outcomes. Because goals are based, in part on beliefs, the success or failure at a particular goal may contribute to modification of beliefs that supported the original goal.

Whether or not belief modification actually occurs is dependent not only on the extent of truths or evidence for the alternative belief, but also characteristics outside the specific truths or evidence. This includes, but is not limited to: the source characteristics of the message, such as credibility ; social pressures ; the anticipated consequences of a modification; or the ability of the individual or group to act on the modification. Therefore, individuals seeking to achieve belief modification in themselves or others need to consider all possible forms of resistance to belief revision.

Glover maintains that any person can continue to hold any belief if they would really like to [ 57 ] (for example, with help from ad hoc hypotheses ). One belief can be held fixed, and other beliefs will be altered around it. Glover warns that some beliefs may not be entirely explicitly believed (for example, some people may not realize they have racist belief-systems adopted from their environment as a child). Glover believes that people tend to first realize that beliefs can change, and may be contingent on their upbringing, around age 12 or 15.

[ 57 ] Philosopher Jonathan Glover warns that belief systems are like whole boats in the water; it is extremely difficult to alter them all at once (for example, it may be too stressful, or people may maintain their biases without realizing it).

[ 57 ] Glover emphasizes that beliefs are difficult to change. He says that one may try to rebuild one's beliefs on more secure foundations ( axioms ), like building a new house, but warns that this may not be possible. Glover offers the example of René Descartes , saying: "[Descartes] starts off with the characteristic beliefs of a 17th-century Frenchman; he then junks the lot, he rebuilds the system, and somehow it looks a lot like the beliefs of a 17th-century Frenchman." To Glover, belief systems are not like houses but are instead like boats. As Glover puts it: "Maybe the whole thing needs rebuilding, but inevitably at any point you have to keep enough of it intact to keep floating." [ 57 ] Models of belief formation [ edit ] We are influenced by many factors that ripple through our minds as our beliefs form, evolve, and may eventually change.

Psychologists study belief formation and the relationship between beliefs and actions. Three types of models of belief formation and change have been proposed: conditional inference process models, linear models and information processing models.

Conditional inference process models emphasize the role of inference for belief formation. When asked to estimate the likelihood that a statement is true, people allegedly search their memory for information that has implications for the validity of this statement. Once this information has been identified, they estimate the likelihood that the statement would be true if the information were true, and the likelihood that the statement would be true if the information were false. If their estimates for these two probabilities differ, people average them, weighting each by the likelihood that the information is true and false. Thus, information bears directly on beliefs of another, related statement.

[ 86 ] Unlike the previous model, linear models take into consideration the possibility of multiple factors influencing belief formation. Using regression procedures, these models predict belief formation on the basis of several different pieces of information, with weights assigned to each piece on the basis of their relative importance.

[ 86 ] Information processing models address the fact that the responses people have to belief-relevant information is unlikely to be predicted from the objective basis of the information that they can recall at the time their beliefs are reported. Instead, these responses reflect the number and meaning of the thoughts that people have about the message at the time that they encounter it.

[ 86 ] Some influences on people's belief formation include: Internalization of beliefs during childhood, which can form and shape humans' beliefs in different domains.

Albert Einstein is often quoted as having said that "Common sense is the collection of prejudices acquired by age eighteen." Political beliefs depend most strongly on the political beliefs most common in the community where one lives.

[ 87 ] Most individuals believe the religion they were taught in childhood.

[ 88 ] Charismatic leaders can form or modify beliefs (even if those beliefs fly in the face of all previous beliefs).

[ 89 ] Rational individuals need to reconcile their direct reality with any said belief; therefore, if belief is not present or possible, it reflects the fact that contradictions were necessarily overcome using cognitive dissonance .

Advertising can form or change beliefs through repetition, shock, or association with images of sex, love, beauty, and other strong positive emotions.

[ 90 ] Contrary to intuition , a delay, known as the sleeper effect , instead of immediate succession may increase an advertisement's ability to persuade viewer's beliefs if a discounting cue is present.

[ 91 ] Physical trauma, especially to the head, can radically alter a person's beliefs.

[ 92 ] However, even educated people, well aware of the process by which beliefs form, still strongly cling to their beliefs, and act on those beliefs even against their own self-interest. In her book Leadership Therapy , Anna Rowley states: "You want your beliefs to change. It's proof that you are keeping your eyes open, living fully, and welcoming everything that the world and people around you can teach you." This view implies that peoples' beliefs may evolve as they gain new experiences.

[ 93 ] Prediction [ edit ] Different psychological models have tried to predict people's beliefs and some of them try to estimate the exact probabilities of beliefs. For example, Robert Wyer developed a model of subjective probabilities.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] When people rate the likelihood of a certain statement (e.g., "It will rain tomorrow"), this rating can be seen as a subjective probability value. The subjective probability model posits that these subjective probabilities follow the same rules as objective probabilities. For example, the law of total probability might be applied to predict a subjective probability value. Wyer found that this model produces relatively accurate predictions for probabilities of single events and for changes in these probabilities, but that the probabilities of several beliefs linked by "and" or "or" do not follow the model as well.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] Delusion [ edit ] In the DSM-5 , delusions are defined as fixed false beliefs that are not changed even when confronted with conflicting evidence.

Belief studies [ edit ] Socio-demographic correlates of witchcraft beliefs [ 96 ] There is research investigating specific beliefs, types of beliefs and patterns of beliefs. For example, a study estimated contemporary prevalence and associations with belief in witchcraft around the world, which (in its data) varied between 9% and 90% among nations and is still a widespread element in worldviews globally. It also shows associations such as with lower "innovative activity", higher levels of anxiety, lower life expectancy , and higher religiosity .

[ 97 ] [ 96 ] Other research is investigating beliefs in misinformation and their resistance to correction, including with respect to misinformation countermeasures . It describes cognitive, social and affective processes that leave people vulnerable to the formation of false beliefs.

[ 98 ] A study introduced the concept of false social reality which refers to widespread perceptions of public opinion that are shown to be false, such as underestimated general public support in the U.S. for climate change mitigation policies .

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] Studies also suggested some uses of psychedelics can shift beliefs in some humans in certain ways, such as increasing attribution of consciousness to various entities (including plants and inanimate objects) and towards panpsychism and fatalism .

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] Emotion and beliefs [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2020 ) Research has indicated that emotion and cognition act in conjunction to produce beliefs, and more specifically emotion plays a vital role in the formation and maintenance of beliefs.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Psychology portal Society portal Alief Bayesian epistemology Culture-specific syndrome Doxastic attitudes Doxastic logic Doxastic voluntarism Expectation (epistemic) Idea Magical thinking Moore's paradox Observer-expectancy effect Opinion Propositional knowledge Self-deception Subject-expectancy effect Subjective validation Suggestibility Suggestion Theory of justification Thomas theorem Tinkerbell effect Trust Unintended consequence Validity Value (personal and cultural) World view References [ edit ] ^ Primmer, Justin (2018), "Belief", in Primmer, Justin (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Stanford, CA: The Metaphysics Research Lab, archived from the original on 15 November 2019 , retrieved 19 September 2008 ^ a b c d e "Belief" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 15 November 2019 . Retrieved 22 June 2020 .

^ "Formal Representations of Belief" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2020 . Retrieved 22 June 2020 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag Schwitzgebel, Eric (2019).

"Belief" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 15 November 2019 . Retrieved 22 June 2020 .

^ a b c d Pitt, David (2020).

"Mental Representation" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 6 August 2019 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ a b c d e f Borchert, Donald (2006). "Belief".

Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2nd Edition . Macmillan.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ "Philosophy of mind – Propositional attitudes" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 19 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ Oppy, Graham.

"Propositional attitudes" .

www.rep.routledge.com .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ Fassio, Davide.

"Aim of Belief" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ Katz, Matthew.

"Language of Thought Hypothesis" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 28 February 2021 . Retrieved 31 March 2021 .

^ a b c d Craig, Edward (1996).

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

Archived from the original on 16 January 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ a b c Levin, Janet (2018).

"Functionalism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ a b Polger, Thomas W.

"Functionalism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 19 May 2019 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ Bickle, John (2020).

"Multiple Realizability" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 16 March 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ a b Quilty-Dunn, Jake; Mandelbaum, Eric (1 September 2018).

"Against dispositionalism: belief in cognitive science" .

Philosophical Studies .

175 (9): 2353– 2372.

doi : 10.1007/s11098-017-0962-x .

ISSN 1573-0883 .

^ a b c Audi, Robert (1999). "Belief".

The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy . Cambridge University Press.

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ a b c Child, William (1994). "1. Interpretationism".

Causality, Interpretation, and the Mind . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Archived from the original on 5 May 2016 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ Dennett, Daniel (1989).

The Intentional Stance . The MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0262040938 .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ Dennett, Daniel C. (1988). "Précis of The Intentional Stance ".

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

11 (3): 495– 505.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.1026.2283 .

doi : 10.1017/S0140525X00058611 .

S2CID 145750868 .

^ Child, William (1994). "4. Causalism and Interpretationism: The Problem of Compatibility".

Causality, Interpretation, and the Mind . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Archived from the original on 5 May 2016 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ Wolpert, Lewis (3 February 2011) [2006]. "Belief".

Six Impossible Things Before Breakfast: The Evolutionary Origins of Belief (reprint ed.). London: Faber & Faber.

ISBN 9780571266722 . Retrieved 22 December 2023 .

Causal beliefs are a fundamental characteristic of humans; animals, by contrast, [...] have very few causal beliefs. Beliefs come from a wide variety of sources that include the individual's experiences, the influence of authority, and the interpretation of events. At their core, beliefs establish a cause-and-effect relationship between events [...] From an evolutionary point of view, beliefs should help the individual survive, and I will argue that they had their origin in tool making and use.

^ a b Bartlett, Gary (2018).

"Occurrent States" .

Canadian Journal of Philosophy .

48 (1): 1– 17.

doi : 10.1080/00455091.2017.1323531 .

S2CID 220316213 .

Archived from the original on 4 May 2021 . Retrieved 3 April 2021 .

^ a b Frise, Matthew (2018).

"Eliminating the Problem of Stored Beliefs" .

American Philosophical Quarterly .

55 (1): 63– 79.

doi : 10.2307/45128599 .

JSTOR 45128599 .

S2CID 149057271 .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 3 April 2021 .

^ a b c d e f g Genin, Konstantin; Huber, Franz (2021).

"Formal Representations of Belief" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 1 April 2021 .

^ a b Olsson, Erik J. (2018). "Bayesian Epistemology".

Introduction to Formal Philosophy . Springer. pp.

431– 442.

Archived from the original on 16 May 2021 . Retrieved 3 April 2021 .

^ a b c Hartmann, Stephan; Sprenger, Jan (2010). "Bayesian Epistemology".

The Routledge Companion to Epistemology . London: Routledge. pp.

609– 620.

Archived from the original on 16 May 2021 . Retrieved 3 April 2021 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Hájek, Alan (2019).

"Interpretations of Probability: 3.3 The Subjective Interpretation" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 17 February 2021 . Retrieved 6 March 2021 .

^ Pettigrew, Richard (2018).

"Précis of Accuracy and the Laws of Credence" .

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research .

96 (3): 749– 754.

doi : 10.1111/phpr.12501 .

hdl : 1983/d9f3e1c4-1bc9-4e04-b74c-dba4eb795393 .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 3 April 2021 .

^ Dorst, Kevin (2019).

"Lockeans Maximize Expected Accuracy" .

Mind .

128 (509): 175– 211.

doi : 10.1093/mind/fzx028 .

Archived from the original on 20 October 2020 . Retrieved 3 April 2021 .

^ Locke, Dustin Troy (2014).

"The Decision-Theoretic Lockean Thesis" .

Inquiry: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy .

57 (1): 28– 54.

doi : 10.1080/0020174x.2013.858421 .

S2CID 85521556 .

Archived from the original on 5 July 2016 . Retrieved 3 April 2021 .

^ a b c Price, H. H. (1965).

"Belief 'In' and Belief 'That' " .

Religious Studies .

1 (1): 5– 27.

doi : 10.1017/S0034412500002304 .

S2CID 170731716 .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 2 March 2021 .

^ a b c d e f Williams, John N. (1992).

"Belief-in and Belief in God" .

Religious Studies .

28 (3): 401– 406.

doi : 10.1017/s0034412500021740 .

S2CID 170864816 .

Archived from the original on 19 May 2021 . Retrieved 2 March 2021 .

^ a b c Macintosh, J. J. (1994).

"Belief-in Revisited: A Reply to Williams" .

Religious Studies .

30 (4): 487– 503.

doi : 10.1017/S0034412500023131 .

S2CID 170786861 .

Archived from the original on 29 September 2020 . Retrieved 2 March 2021 .

^ a b Macintosh, Jack (2005). "Belief-in".

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford University Press.

Archived from the original on 29 January 2021 . Retrieved 2 March 2021 .

^ a b Broackes, Justin (1986).

"Belief de Re and de Dicto" .

Philosophical Quarterly .

36 (144): 374– 383.

doi : 10.2307/2220191 .

JSTOR 2220191 .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2016 . Retrieved 3 April 2021 .

^ a b c d Nelson, Michael.

"Propositional Attitude Reports: The De Re/De Dicto Distinction" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2021 .

^ Dancy, Jonathan (2014).

A Companion to Epistemology . Just the Facts101 (2 ed.). Content Technologies Inc.

ISBN 978-1478400028 . Retrieved 30 April 2019 .

A collective belief is referred to when people speak of what 'we' believe when this is not simply elliptical for what 'we all' believe.

^ Dancy, Jonathan (2014).

A Companion to Epistemology . Just the Facts101 (2 ed.). Content Technologies Inc. (published 2016).

ISBN 978-1478400028 . Retrieved 30 April 2019 .

Sociologist Émile Durkheim wrote of collective beliefs and proposed that they, like all 'social facts', 'inhered in' social groups as opposed to individual persons. Durkheim's discussion of collective belief, though suggestive, is relatively obscure.

^ Gilbert, Margaret (1987).

"Modelling collective belief" .

Synthese .

73 (1): 185– 204.

doi : 10.1007/bf00485446 .

ISSN 0039-7857 .

S2CID 46976878 .

^ Innes, Martin (16 December 2003). "A history of the idea of social control".

Understanding Social Control: Deviance, crime and social order . UK Higher Education OUP Humanities & Social Sciences Criminology. Maidenhead, Berkshire: McGraw-Hill Education (UK). p. 22.

ISBN 9780335225880 . Retrieved 30 October 2023 .

[...] all states and all collectives draw upon shared remembrances of the past to establish or preserve a sense of shared identity and a collective belief system. A coherent approach to understanding the functions of social control for collective life is to be found in Erikson's (1966) discussion of the social control of witchcraft in seventeenth-century New England.

^ Sandkühler, Hans Jörg (23 December 2011). "Critique of Representation: Cultures of Knowledge - Humanly Speaking". In Abel, Günter ; Conant, James (eds.).

Rethinking Epistemology . Berlin Studies in Knowledge Research, volume 1. Vol. 1. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. p. 185.

ISBN 9783110253573 . Retrieved 30 October 2023 .

Collective belief systems are characterized by the belief of knowing what counts as proper beliefs; divergence is condemned as heresy, betrayal, apostasy, etc.

^ Visano, L. A. (1998).

Crime and Culture: Refining the Traditions . Toronto: Canadian Scholars Press. p. 51.

ISBN 9781551301273 . Retrieved 30 October 2023 .

[...] deviance cannot be studied in isolation nor understood apart from [...] overwhelmingly binding collective belief systems.

^ a b c d e f Block, Ned (1996). "Holism, Mental and Semantic".

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2016 . Retrieved 5 April 2021 .

^ Wagner, Steven J. (1986).

"Quine's Holism" .

Analysis .

46 (1): 1– 6.

doi : 10.2307/3328733 .

ISSN 0003-2638 .

JSTOR 3328733 .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 5 April 2021 .

^ a b c Rowlands, Mark; Lau, Joe; Deutsch, Max (2020).

"Externalism About the Mind" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 4 April 2021 .

^ a b c Smith, Basil.

"Internalism and Externalism in the Philosophy of Mind and Language" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 6 May 2021 . Retrieved 4 April 2021 .

^ Oxford Dictionaries – definition Archived 6 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine published by OUP [Retrieved 2015-08-09] ^ Pust, Joel (2019), "Intuition" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 27 September 2022 ^ Gettier, E.L. (1963).

"Is justified true belief knowledge?" (PDF) .

Analysis .

23 (6): 121– 123.

doi : 10.1093/analys/23.6.121 .

JSTOR 3326922 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 September 2019 . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

^ Goldman, A.I. (1967). "A causal theory of knowing".

The Journal of Philosophy .

64 (12): 357– 372.

doi : 10.2307/2024268 .

JSTOR 2024268 .

S2CID 53049561 .

^ The received view holds it that Plato's theory presents knowledge as remembering eternal truths and justification reawakens memory, see Fine, G. (2003). "Introduction".

Plato on Knowledge and Forms: Selected Essays . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

5– 7.

ISBN 978-0199245581 .

^ Chisholm, Roderick (1982). "Knowledge as Justified True Belief".

The Foundations of Knowing . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 978-0816611034 .

^ Nozick, Robert. (1981).

Philosophical explanations . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0674664485 .

OCLC 7283862 .

^ Bernecker, Sven; Dretske, Fred (2000).

Knowledge. Readings in contemporary epistemology . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0198752615 .

^ Paul Boghossian (2007), Fear of Knowledge: Against relativism and constructivism , Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, ISBN 978-0199230419 , archived from the original on 7 October 2017 , retrieved 20 April 2017 , Chapter 2, p. 15.

^ "A system is an interconnected set of elements that is coherently organized in a way that achieves something." — Donella Meadows (2008) Thinking in Systems: A Primer Archived 2 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine p.11, as quoted by Tim Rettig (2017) Belief Systems: what they are and how they affect you Archived 16 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d e f g " "Jonathan Glover on systems of belief", Philosophy Bites Podcast, Oct 9 2011" .

Archived from the original on 14 October 2011 . Retrieved 5 July 2014 .

^ Elizabeth A. Minton, Lynn R. Khale (2014).

Belief Systems, Religion, and Behavioral Economics . New York: Business Expert Press LLC.

ISBN 978-1606497043 .

Archived from the original on 22 December 2019 . Retrieved 30 April 2019 .

^ New Scientist (magazine), 11 June 2011 A field guide to bullshit | New Scientist Archived 16 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine - "Intellectual black holes are belief systems that draw people in and hold them captive so they become willing slaves of claptrap. Belief in homeopathy, psychic powers, alien abductions—these are examples of intellectual black holes. As you approach them, you need to be on your guard because if you get sucked in, it can be extremely difficult to think your way clear again." ^ "Definition of RELIGION" .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 5 May 2023 .

^ Iii, Thomas J. Coleman; Jong, Jonathan; Mulukom, Valerie van (31 August 2018).

"Introduction to the Special Issue: What are Religious Beliefs?" .

Contemporary Pragmatism .

15 (3): 279– 283.

doi : 10.1163/18758185-01503001 .

ISSN 1572-3429 .

S2CID 171838557 .

^ Nye, Malory (2008).

Religion: The Basics . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1134059478 .

^ Wittgenstein, Ludwig (2007).

Lectures and Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology and Religious Belief . University of California Press. p. 53.

ISBN 978-0520251816 .

^ Braithwaite, R.B. (1975).

An empiricist's view of the nature of religious belief . Norwood Editions (Norwood, Pa.).

ISBN 978-0883059555 .

^ "The Fundamentals: A Testimony to the Truth" . 27 November 2012. Archived from the original on 3 December 2012 . Retrieved 28 November 2012 .

^ Bruce, Steve (2008).

Fundamentalism . Polity.

ISBN 978-0745640754 .

OCLC 1001942770 .

^ Fox, Jonathan (13 February 2018).

An Introduction to Religion and Politics .

doi : 10.4324/9781315183787 .

ISBN 978-1315183787 .

^ "What is Reform Judaism?" .

Reform Judaism . Retrieved 27 March 2022 .

^ "Reform Judaism | Britannica" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 27 March 2022 .

^ Meister, Chad (2011).

The Oxford Handbook of Religious Diversity . OUP US.

ISBN 978-0195340136 .

^ Compare: "Roy Moore: 'We Have No Morality Without an Acknowledgment of God' " .

Christianity Today . 7 March 2005.

Archived from the original on 8 January 2009 . Retrieved 19 May 2006 .

^ Miller, David Ian (15 February 2005).

"Finding My Religion: Steve Georgiou on his faith and mentor, minimalist poet Robert Lax" . SFGate.

Archived from the original on 16 May 2012 . Retrieved 19 May 2006 .

^ Repa, J. Theodore (18 October 1998).

"Building Community: The Marriage of Religion and Education" . Archived from the original on 7 September 2006 . Retrieved 19 May 2006 .

^ Note for example the concept of a cultural Christian .

^ Larson, David B.; Susan S. Larson; Harold G. Koenig (October 2000).

"Research Findings on Religious Commitment and Mental Health" .

Psychiatric Times .

17 (10).

Archived from the original on 8 January 2009 . Retrieved 19 May 2006 .

^ Alcock, James (2018). "The God Engine".

Skeptical Inquirer .

42 (5): 32– 38.

^ For example: Russell, Bertrand (1927).

"Why I am Not a Christian" . Archived from the original on 19 November 2006 . Retrieved 19 May 2006 .

^ For example, some Muslims believe that women are inferior to men. Some Christians share this belief. At the time of the American Civil War of 1861–1865, many Southerners used passages from the Bible to justify race-based slavery . Certain campaigners have used the Christian religion as a reason to persecute and to deny the rights of homosexuals, on the basis that the Christian biblical God disapproves of homosexuality, and by implication of homosexuals. Compare http://www.godhatesfags.com Archived 7 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Beauchamp, Philip (pseudonym of Jeremy Bentham) Analysis of the Influence of Natural Religion on the Temporal Happiness of Mankind Archived 4 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine , 1822, R. Carlile, London, at page 76: "Of all human antipathies, that which the believer in a God bears to the unbeliever is the fullest, the most unqualified, and the most universal" ^ Bering, Jesse (2006).

"The Cognitive Psychology of Belief in the Supernatural" .

American Scientist .

94 (2): 142.

doi : 10.1511/2006.58.142 .

ISSN 0003-0996 .

^ Barnett, Zach (1 January 2019).

"Philosophy Without Belief" .

Mind .

128 (509): 109– 138.

doi : 10.1093/mind/fzw076 .

ISSN 0026-4423 .

^ Bell, V.; Halligan, P.W.; Ellis, H.D. (2006). "A Cognitive Neuroscience of Belief". In Halligan, Peter W.; Aylward, Mansel (eds.).

The Power of Belief: Psychological Influence on Illness, Disability, and Medicine . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0198530107 .

^ Baker, Lynne Rudder (1989).

Saving Belief: A Critique of Physicalism . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691073200 .

^ Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, U.S. Army (2012). Information Operations. Joint Publication 3–13. Joint Doctrine Support Division, Suffolk, VA. p. 22.

^ Parr, Thomas; Rees, Geraint; Friston, Karl J. (2018).

"Computational Neuropsychology and Bayesian Inference" .

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience .

12 : 61.

doi : 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00061 .

ISSN 1662-5161 .

PMC 5829460 .

PMID 29527157 .

^ a b c Wyer, R.S., & Albarracin, D. (2005). "Belief formation, organization, and change: Cognitive and motivational influences". In D. Albarracin, B.T. Johnson, & M.P. Zanna, The Handbook of Attitudes (273–322). New York: Psychology Press.

^ Gelman, Andrew ; Park, David; Shor, Boris; Bafumi, Joseph; Cortina, Jeronimo (2008).

Red State, Blue State, Rich State, Poor State: Why Americans Vote the Way They Do . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691139272 .

^ Argyle, Michael (1997).

The Psychology of Religious Behaviour, Belief and Experience . London: Routledge. p. 25.

ISBN 978-0415123303 .

Religion, in most cultures, is ascribed, not chosen.

^ Hoffer, Eric (2002).

The True Believer . New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics.

ISBN 978-0060505912 .

^ Kilbourne, Jane; Pipher, Mary (2000).

Can't Buy My Love: How Advertising Changes the Way We Think and Feel . Free Press.

ISBN 978-0684866000 .

^ See Kumkale & Albarracin, 2004.

^ Rothschild, Babette (2000).

The Body Remembers: The Psychophysiology of Trauma and Trauma Treatment . New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393703276 .

^ Rowley, Anna (2007).

Leadership Therapy: Inside the Mind of Microsoft . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. p.

69 .

ISBN 978-1403984036 .

^ a b Wyer, R.S. (1970). "Quantitative prediction of belief and opinion change: A further test of a subjective probability model".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

16 (4): 559– 570.

doi : 10.1037/h0030064 .

^ a b Wyer, R.S.; Goldberg, L. (1970). "A probabilistic analysis of the relationships among beliefs and attitudes".

Psychological Review .

77 (2): 100– 120.

doi : 10.1037/h0028769 .

^ a b Gershman, Boris (23 November 2022).

"Witchcraft beliefs around the world: An exploratory analysis" .

PLOS ONE .

17 (11): e0276872.

Bibcode : 2022PLoSO..1776872G .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0276872 .

PMC 9683553 .

PMID 36417350 .

^ "Witchcraft beliefs are widespread, highly variable around the world" .

Public Library of Science via phys.org . Retrieved 17 December 2022 .

^ Ecker, Ullrich K. H.; Lewandowsky, Stephan; Cook, John; Schmid, Philipp; Fazio, Lisa K.; Brashier, Nadia; Kendeou, Panayiota; Vraga, Emily K.; Amazeen, Michelle A. (January 2022).

"The psychological drivers of misinformation belief and its resistance to correction" .

Nature Reviews Psychology .

1 (1): 13– 29.

doi : 10.1038/s44159-021-00006-y .

hdl : 1983/889ddb0f-0d44-44f4-a54f-57c260ae4917 .

ISSN 2731-0574 .

S2CID 245916820 .

^ Clifford, Catherine.

"Americans don't think other Americans care about climate change as much as they do" .

CNBC . Retrieved 15 September 2022 .

^ Sparkman, Gregg; Geiger, Nathan; Weber, Elke U. (23 August 2022).

"Americans experience a false social reality by underestimating popular climate policy support by nearly half" .

Nature Communications .

13 (1): 4779.

Bibcode : 2022NatCo..13.4779S .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-022-32412-y .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 9399177 .

PMID 35999211 .

^ Nayak, Sandeep M.; Griffiths, Roland R. (28 March 2022).

"A Single Belief-Changing Psychedelic Experience Is Associated With Increased Attribution of Consciousness to Living and Non-living Entities" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

13 : 852248.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.852248 .

ISSN 1664-1078 .

PMC 8995647 .

PMID 35418909 .

^ Timmermann, Christopher; Kettner, Hannes; Letheby, Chris; Roseman, Leor; Rosas, Fernando E.; Carhart-Harris, Robin L.

(23 November 2021).

"Psychedelics alter metaphysical beliefs" .

Scientific Reports .

11 (1): 22166.

Bibcode : 2021NatSR..1122166T .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-021-01209-2 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 8611059 .

PMID 34815421 .

^ Frijda, Nico H (2010).

Emotions and Beliefs . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0511659904 .

^ Mercer, Jonathan (January 2010). "Emotional Beliefs".

International Organization .

65 : 1– 31.

doi : 10.1017/S0020818309990221 .

S2CID 232251086 .

^ Harlé, Katia M.; Shenoy, Pradeep; Paulus, Martin P. (19 September 2013).

"The influence of emotions on cognitive control: feelings and beliefs—where do they meet?" .

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience .

7 : 508.

doi : 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00508 .

ISSN 1662-5161 .

PMC 3776943 .

PMID 24065901 .

Further reading [ edit ] Robert Audi (Dec. 1994).

"Dispositional Beliefs and Dispositions to Believe" , Noûs , Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 419–434.

OCLC 481484099 .

Coleman, T. III, Jong, J., & van Mulukom, V. (2018).

Introduction to the Special Issue: What are Religious Beliefs?

. Contemporary Pragmatism, 15(3), 279–283.

doi : 10.1163/18758185-01503001 Järnefelt, Elisa, Created by Some Being: Theoretical and Empirical Exploration of Adults' Automatic and Reflective Beliefs about the Origin of Natural Phenomena.

Diss. University of Helsinki, 2013.

ISBN 978-9521094163 .

Leicester, J. "What beliefs are made from". Sharjah, UAE: Bentham Science Publishers, 2016.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Belief .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Belief .

Wikiversity has learning resources about Knowing How You Know Wikiversity has learning resources about Seeking True Beliefs Look up belief in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Look up belief system in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Schwitzgebel, Eric.

"Belief" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"The Aim of Belief" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

John Russell (1877), An analysis of religious belief .

Links to related articles v t e Belief systems Abrahamism Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Deism Dharmism Dualism Esotericism Feminist theology Gnosticism Henotheism Immanence Monism Monolatry Monotheism Mysticism Neoplatonism New Age New Thought Nondualism Pandeism Pantheism Panentheism Polytheism Process theology Religious naturalism Shamanism Shramanism Taoic Theism Transcendence v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophical logic Critical thinking and informal logic Analysis Ambiguity Argument Belief Bias Credibility Dialectic Antithesis , Socratic method , Unity of opposites Evidence Explanation Explanatory power Fact Fallacy List of fallacies Hypothesis Inquiry Opinion Parsimony (Occam's razor) Premise Propaganda Prudence Razor Reasoning Relevance Rhetoric Rigor Theory Vagueness Theories of deduction Constructivism Dialetheism Fictionalism Finitism Formalism Intuitionism Logical atomism Logicism Nominalism Platonic realism Pragmatism Realism Category v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism Authority control databases National United States Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐fb57p
Cached time: 20250817222804
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.683 seconds
Real time usage: 1.928 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11565/1000000
Revision size: 105392/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 806495/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 173250/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 487269/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.915/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10622887/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1388.756      1 -total
 49.66%  689.587      1 Template:Reflist
 14.02%  194.703     36 Template:Cite_book
 13.48%  187.170     30 Template:Cite_journal
  8.40%  116.619     23 Template:Cite_web
  8.17%  113.475      1 Template:Navboxes
  7.36%  102.164      4 Template:Ambox
  5.99%   83.224      3 Template:Citation
  5.78%   80.256      1 Template:Religious_text_primary
  5.13%   71.190      1 Template:Epistemology_sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:102883:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222804 and revision id 1304973504. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Belief&oldid=1304973504#Religion " Categories : Belief Religious belief and doctrine Concepts in epistemology Propositional attitudes Psychological attitude Psychological concepts Truth Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2017 Pages with broken anchors All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles needing additional references from August 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles needing more viewpoints from August 2020 Articles needing additional references from May 2021 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2017 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from November 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from November 2017 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2018 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles to be expanded from January 2020 All articles to be expanded Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 08:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Belief 78 languages Add topic

