Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Physics 2 Modelling Toggle Modelling subsection 2.1 Classification of fluids 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Fluid 76 languages Afrikaans अंगिका العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Substance which continuously deforms under an applied shear stress, including liquids and gases This article is about the concept in physics . For other uses, see Fluid (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with liquid .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Fluid" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Continuum mechanics J = − − D d φ φ d x {\displaystyle J=-D{\frac {d\varphi }{dx}}} Fick's laws of diffusion Laws Conservations Mass Momentum Energy Inequalities Clausius–Duhem (entropy) Solid mechanics Deformation Elasticity linear Plasticity Hooke's law Stress Strain Finite strain Infinitesimal strain Compatibility Bending Contact mechanics frictional Material failure theory Fracture mechanics Fluid mechanics Fluids Statics · Dynamics Archimedes' principle · Bernoulli's principle Navier–Stokes equations Poiseuille equation · Pascal's law Viscosity ( Newtonian · non-Newtonian ) Buoyancy · Mixing · Pressure Liquids Adhesion Capillary action Chromatography Cohesion (chemistry) Surface tension Gases Atmosphere Boyle's law Charles's law Combined gas law Fick's law Gay-Lussac's law Graham's law Plasma Rheology Viscoelasticity Rheometry Rheometer Smart fluids Electrorheological Magnetorheological Ferrofluids Scientists Bernoulli Boyle Cauchy Charles Euler Fick Gay-Lussac Graham Hooke Newton Navier Noll Pascal Stokes Truesdell v t e In physics , a fluid is a liquid , gas , or other material that may continuously move and deform ( flow ) under an applied shear stress , or external force.

[ 1 ] They have zero shear modulus , or, in simpler terms, are substances which cannot resist any shear force applied to them.

[ citation needed ] Although the term fluid generally includes both the liquid and gas phases, its definition varies among branches of science . Definitions of solid vary as well, and depending on field, some substances can have both fluid and solid properties.

[ 2 ] Non-Newtonian fluids like Silly Putty appear to behave similar to a solid when a sudden force is applied.

[ 3 ] Substances with a very high viscosity such as pitch appear to behave like a solid (see pitch drop experiment ) as well. In particle physics , the concept is extended to include fluidic matters other than liquids or gases.

[ 4 ] A fluid in medicine or biology refers to any liquid constituent of the body ( body fluid ), [ 5 ] [ 6 ] whereas "liquid" is not used in this sense. Sometimes liquids given for fluid replacement , either by drinking or by injection, are also called fluids [ 7 ] (e.g. "drink plenty of fluids"). In hydraulics , fluid is a term which refers to liquids with certain properties, and is broader than (hydraulic) oils.

[ 8 ] Physics [ edit ] Fluids display properties such as: lack of resistance to permanent deformation, resisting only relative rates of deformation in a dissipative, frictional manner, and the ability to flow (also described as the ability to take on the shape of the container).

These properties are typically a function of their inability to support a shear stress in static equilibrium . By contrast, solids respond to shear either with a spring-like restoring force —meaning that deformations are reversible—or they require a certain initial stress before they deform (see plasticity ).

Solids respond with restoring forces to both shear stresses and to normal stresses , both compressive and tensile .  By contrast, ideal fluids only respond with restoring forces to normal stresses, called pressure : fluids can be subjected both to compressive stress—corresponding to positive pressure—and to tensile stress, corresponding to negative pressure . Solids and liquids both have tensile strengths, which when exceeded in solids creates irreversible deformation and fracture, and in liquids cause the onset of cavitation .

Both solids and liquids have free surfaces, which cost some amount of free energy to form. In the case of solids, the amount of free energy to form a given unit of surface area is called surface energy , whereas for liquids the same quantity is called surface tension . In response to surface tension, the ability of liquids to flow results in behaviour differing from that of solids, though at equilibrium both tend to minimise their surface energy : liquids tend to form rounded droplets , whereas pure solids tend to form crystals .

Gases , lacking free surfaces, freely diffuse .

Modelling [ edit ] Main article: Fluid mechanics In a solid, shear stress is a function of strain , but in a fluid, shear stress is a function of strain rate . A consequence of this behavior is Pascal's law which describes the role of pressure in characterizing a fluid's state.

The behavior of fluids can be described by the Navier–Stokes equations —a set of partial differential equations which are based on: continuity ( conservation of mass ), conservation of linear momentum , conservation of angular momentum , conservation of energy .

The study of fluids is fluid mechanics , which is subdivided into fluid dynamics and fluid statics depending on whether the fluid is in motion.

Classification of fluids [ edit ] Depending on the relationship between shear stress and the rate of strain and its derivatives , fluids can be characterized as one of the following: Newtonian fluids : where stress is directly proportional to rate of strain Non-Newtonian fluids : where stress is not proportional to rate of strain, its higher powers and derivatives.

Newtonian fluids follow Newton's law of viscosity and may be called viscous fluids .

Fluids may be classified by their compressibility: Compressible fluid: A fluid that causes volume reduction or density change when pressure is applied to the fluid or when the fluid becomes supersonic.

Incompressible fluid: A fluid that does not vary in volume with changes in pressure or flow velocity (i.e., ρ=constant) such as water or oil.

Newtonian and incompressible fluids do not actually exist, but are assumed to be for theoretical settlement. Virtual fluids that completely ignore the effects of viscosity and compressibility are called perfect fluids .

See also [ edit ] Matter Liquid Gas Supercritical fluid References [ edit ] ^ "Fluid | Definition, Models, Newtonian Fluids, Non-Newtonian Fluids, & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2 June 2021 .

^ Thayer, Ann (2000).

"What's That Stuff? Silly Putty" .

Chemical & Engineering News .

78 (48). American Chemical Society (published 2000-11-27): 27.

doi : 10.1021/cen-v078n048.p027 .

Archived from the original on 2021-05-07.

^ Kroen, Gretchen Cuda (2012-04-11).

"Silly Putty for Potholes" .

Science . Retrieved 2021-06-23 .

^ Example (in the title): Berdyugin, A. I.; Xu, S. G. (2019-04-12).

"Measuring Hall viscosity of graphene's electron fluid" .

Science .

364 (6436). F. M. D. Pellegrino, R. Krishna Kumar, A. Principi, I. Torre, M. Ben Shalom, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, I. V. Grigorieva, M. Polini, A. K. Geim, D. A. Bandurin: 162– 165.

arXiv : 1806.01606 .

Bibcode : 2019Sci...364..162B .

doi : 10.1126/science.aau0685 .

PMID 30819929 .

S2CID 73477792 .

^ "Fluid (B.1.b.)" .

Oxford English Dictionary . Vol. IV F–G (1978 reprint ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1933 [1901]. p. 358 . Retrieved 2021-06-22 .

^ "body fluid" .

Taber's online – Taber's medical dictionary .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-21 . Retrieved 2021-06-22 .

^ Usage example: Guppy, Michelle P B; Mickan, Sharon M; Del Mar, Chris B (2004-02-28).

" "Drink plenty of fluids": a systematic review of evidence for this recommendation in acute respiratory infections" .

BMJ .

328 (7438): 499– 500.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.38028.627593.BE .

PMC 351843 .

PMID 14988184 .

^ "What is Fluid Power?" .

National Fluid Power Association .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-23 . Retrieved 2021-06-23 .

With hydraulics, the fluid is a liquid (usually oil) Bird, Robert Byron; Stewart, Warren E.; Lightfoot, Edward N. (2007).

Transport Phenomena . New York: Wiley, Revised Second Edition. p. 912.

ISBN 978-0-471-41077-5 .

Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fluid&oldid=1301514393 " Category : Fluid dynamics Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2022 All articles needing additional references Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 07:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fluid 76 languages Add topic

