Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Collections Toggle Collections subsection 2.1 Literature 2.2 Theatre and performing arts 2.3 Film and television 2.4 Art 2.5 History 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Harry Ransom Center 2 languages العربية Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 30°17′04″N 97°44′28″W ﻿ / ﻿ 30.28444°N 97.74111°W ﻿ / 30.28444; -97.74111 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Archive at the University of Texas at Austin Harry Ransom Center The Harry Ransom Center in June 2012 30°17′04″N 97°44′28″W ﻿ / ﻿ 30.28444°N 97.74111°W ﻿ / 30.28444; -97.74111 Location Austin , Texas, U.S., US Type Academic library Established 1957 Other information Affiliation University of Texas at Austin Website www .hrc .utexas .edu The Harry Ransom Center , known as the Humanities Research Center until 1983, is an archive , library , and museum at the University of Texas at Austin , specializing in the collection of literary and cultural artifacts from the Americas and Europe for the purpose of advancing the study of the arts and humanities . The Ransom Center houses 36 million literary manuscripts , one million rare books , five million photographs , and more than 100,000 works of art .

[ 1 ] The center has a reading room for scholars and galleries which display rotating exhibitions of works and objects from the collections. In the 2015–16 academic year, the center hosted nearly 6,000 research visits, resulting in the publication of over 145 books.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Ian McEwan , whose archives are housed at the Harry Ransom Center Harry Ransom founded the Humanities Research Center in 1957 with the ambition of expanding the rare books and manuscript holdings of the University of Texas. He acquired the Edward Alexander Parsons Collection, [ 3 ] the T. Edward Hanley Collection, [ 4 ] and the Norman Bel Geddes Collection.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Ransom was only the official director of the center from 1958 to 1961, but he directed and presided over a period of great expansion in the collections until his resignation in 1971 as chancellor of the University of Texas System . The center moved into its current building in 1972.

F. Warren Roberts was the official director from 1961 to 1976. He acquired the Helmut Gernsheim collection of photographs and the archives of authors D. H. Lawrence , John Steinbeck , and Evelyn Waugh , and in 1968 the Carlton Lake Collection.

[ 7 ] After Roberts's tenure, John Payne and then Carlton Lake served as interim directors from 1976 to 1980. In 1978, the center acquired its complete copy of the Gutenberg Bible .

In 1980, the center hired Decherd Turner as director. Turner acquired the Giorgio Uzielli Collection of Aldine editions , [ 8 ] the Anne Sexton archive, the Robert Lee Wolff Collection of 19th-century fiction, the Pforzheimer Collection , [ 9 ] the David O. Selznick archive, the Gloria Swanson archive, and the Ernest Lehman Collection.

[ 10 ] Upon Decherd Turner's retirement in 1988, Thomas F. Staley became director of the center.

[ 11 ] Staley acquired the Woodward and Bernstein Watergate Papers, [ 12 ] a copy of the Plantin Polyglot Bible , and more than 100 literary archives.

In September 2013, Stephen Enniss, former head librarian of the Folger Shakespeare Library , was appointed director of the Ransom Center.

[ 13 ] Under Enniss, the Ransom Center continued to collect archives, including those of Kazuo Ishiguro , [ 14 ] Arthur Miller , [ 15 ] and Ian McEwan .

[ 16 ] In 1983, the institution's name was changed from the Humanities Research Center to the Harry Ransom Center.

[ 17 ] Collections [ edit ] Nicéphore Niépce 's View from the Window at Le Gras , c.

1826 , on permanent display in Harry Ransom Center's main lobby Two prominent items in the Ransom Center's collections are a Gutenberg Bible , [ 18 ] [ 19 ] one of 21 complete copies known to exist, and Nicéphore Niépce 's c.

1826 View from the Window at Le Gras , the first successful permanent photograph from nature. Both of these objects are on permanent display in the main lobby.

The center also houses many culturally important documents and artifacts. Particular strengths include modern literature, performing arts, [ 20 ] and photography.

[ 21 ] Besides the Gutenberg Bible and the photograph, notable holdings include: Literature [ edit ] George L. Aiken 's original manuscript for his stage adaptation of Uncle Tom's Cabin , published in 1852 from the George C. Howard and Family Collection at the Harry Ransom Center [ 22 ] Three copies of the 1623 First Folio of William Shakespeare 's plays A suppressed 1865 first edition of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland , one of only 23 copies known to exist The first edition of the 1572 Portuguese book Os Lusíadas , by Luis de Camões The personal libraries of writers such as Gabriel García Márquez , Alice Corbin Henderson , Ezra Pound , Evelyn Waugh , David Foster Wallace , and the Coleridge family Extensive manuscript collections of George Atherton Aitken , Julia Alvarez , Julian Barnes , Marthe Bibesco , Elizabeth Bowen , T. C. Boyle , Lewis Carroll , J. M. Coetzee , Billy Collins , Aleister Crowley , Don DeLillo , Gabriel García Márquez , Erle Stanley Gardner , Graham Greene , Kazuo Ishiguro , James Joyce , Pamela Hansford Johnson , D. H. Lawrence , T. E. Lawrence , Doris Lessing , Norman Mailer , Carson McCullers , Ian McEwan , McSweeney's , Brian Moore , Anne Sexton , David Foster Wallace , and T.H. White Edgar Allan Poe 's writing desk A large collection of rare and valuable comic books A writing journal kept by Jack Kerouac in preparation for writing On the Road (1957) The Cardigan manuscript of Chaucer 's Canterbury Tales A rare 1904 first edition of The Book of the Law ( Liber AL ) by Aleister Crowley (among other original Crowley first editions), also known as the Vellum books but more popularly known as the Holy Book of Thelema Tarot cards hand-colored by Aleister Crowley The Thomas James Wise collection of bibliographies and catalogs created by Wise and miscellaneous manuscripts and correspondence relating to Wise's forgeries and life.

The records of the Alfred A. Knopf , a publishing company Theatre and performing arts [ edit ] The papers of Stella Adler , Frith Banbury , Sebastian Barry , Samuel Beckett , Paul Bowles , Richard Buckle , Edward Gordon Craig , T. S. Eliot , Harry Frazee , Spalding Gray , David Hare , Lillian Hellman , Harry Houdini , Anne Jackson , Adrienne Kennedy , David Mamet , Terrence McNally , Arthur Miller , John Osborne , Peter O'Toole , J. B. Priestley , James Purdy , James Roose-Evans , George Bernard Shaw , Sam Shepard , Tom Stoppard , Jule Styne , Laurette Taylor , Eli Wallach , Jerome Weidman , Arnold Wesker , Tennessee Williams , Sandy Wilson , Audrey Wood , and many others.

The organizational archives of B. J. Simmons & Company , Theatre Guild , and the College of Fellows of the American Theatre .

An extensive library of early modern plays and theatrical books including three Shakespeare First Folios and one of only three known copies of the 1594 quarto of the True Tragedie of Richard the Third published by an anonymous writer.

A historic collection of 19th- and 20th-century portrait photography of actors and dancers, and production photography holdings including Joseph Abeles and Leo Friedman, Fred Fehl , and Bob Golby.

Design archives of Norman Bel Geddes , Gordon Conway, Eldon Elder, and Boris Aronson .

David Garrick 's diary from his 1751 trip to Paris, which formerly belonged to Harry Houdini .

John Wilkes Booth 's personal production promptbook for Richard III .

Original costumes from the Ballets Russes including pieces from Narcisse and The Rite of Spring . Design holdings include two of Pablo Picasso 's costume designs and a set design from The Three-Cornered Hat .

The original manuscripts for George Aiken 's 1852 stage adaptation of Uncle Tom's Cabin and the archive of its producing company, George C. Howard .

A 1730 manuscript of George Frideric Handel 's Coronation Anthems made by his principal copyist.

Film and television [ edit ] The papers of Jay Presson Allen , Lewis Allen , Robert De Niro , [ 23 ] Edward Carrick , Nicholas Ray , Alfred Junge , Ernest Lehman , Lorne Michaels , [ 24 ] Nicholas Ray , David O. Selznick , Gloria Swanson , and King Vidor Selected costumes, script drafts, storyboards , and audition media from Gone with the Wind . These are part of the David O. Selznick Collection Unused props designed by Salvador Dalí to have been used in the dream sequence in the 1945 film Spellbound The sunglasses worn by Gloria Swanson in the 1950 film Sunset Boulevard Scripts, drafts, notes, props, costumes, digital video and research material from the American television series Mad Men [ 25 ] Art [ edit ] Two paintings by Frida Kahlo : Self-Portrait with Thorn Necklace and Hummingbird (1940) and Still Life (with Parrot and Fruit) A complete set of Pablo Picasso's 1930–1937 Vollard Suite A she-wolf statue carved in stone and coated with gold leaf (now worn off) by Eric Gill , creator of Gill Sans typeface Busts of various writers (on display in the lobby and reading room) Large holdings in art by writers and portraits of literary figures Facsimile of the 1908 piano suite Gaspard de la nuit composed by Maurice Ravel History [ edit ] A 16th-century globe designed by Gerardus Mercator Kraus Map Collection, a 16th- and 17th-century cartographic collection An official declaration by Napoleon Bonaparte The love letters of the Mexican Emperor Maximilian I and his wife Carlota Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein 's notes, interviews, manuscripts, and other documents relating to the Watergate scandal References [ edit ] ^ "About: Harry Ransom Center" .

University of Texas at Austin . Retrieved May 3, 2020 .

^ "Annual Report 2015-2016" (PDF) .

Harry Ransom Center . 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 28, 2017 . Retrieved April 27, 2017 .

^ "Edward Alexander Parsons Collection" . Archived from the original on October 14, 2018 . Retrieved January 27, 2013 .

^ "T. Edward Hanley Library" . Archived from the original on November 27, 2018 . Retrieved January 27, 2013 .

^ Normal Bel Geddes Theater and Industrial Design Papers ^ Lewis, Anne S. (September 10, 2012).

"Normal Bel Geddes, Harry Ransom Center, Future Perfect exhibition" .

Wall Street Journal .

^ Carlton Lake brief bio from "New Directions" Carlton Lake (1915–2006) was the Paris art critic for the Christian Science Monitor .

^ Aldine Press Archived 2013-02-27 at the Wayback Machine Giorgio Uzielli was a New York stockbroker and book collector, born in Florence, Italy.

After a 1982 visit to the Harry Ransom Center, Giorgio Uzielli, a New York City stockbroker and book collector born in Florence , Italy, wrote into his will a bequest to the center of 287 books published by Aldine Press in Venice in the 15th and 16th centuries, valued at about $2 million.

^ "Carl H. Pforzheimer Library" . Archived from the original on November 10, 2018 . Retrieved January 27, 2013 .

^ "Ernest Lehman Collection" . Archived from the original on March 18, 2005 . Retrieved January 27, 2013 .

^ "Director Thomas F. Staley: Major Acquisitions and Achievements" . Archived from the original on March 14, 2017 . Retrieved January 27, 2013 .

^ Bernstein, Carl; Woodward, Bob Woodward (2003).

"Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein: An Inventory of Their Watergate Papers at the Harry Ransom Center" .

Harry Ransom Center . Retrieved October 12, 2022 .

^ "Stephen Enniss appointed new director of Ransom Center" Archived 2014-01-04 at the Wayback Machine , Harry Ransom Center.

^ Faires, Robert (August 25, 2015).

"The Remains of the Papers" .

Austin Chronicle .

Archived from the original on August 30, 2015 . Retrieved October 12, 2022 .

^ Gans, Andrew (January 10, 2018).

"Harry Ransom Center Acquires Arthur Miller Archive" .

Playbill .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2018.

^ "Ian McEwan's literary archive bought by Harry Ransom Center" ^ "About: Harry Ransom Center" .

University of Texas at Austin . Retrieved May 3, 2020 .

^ "Gutenberg Bible, permanent exhibit at HRC" . Archived from the original on January 27, 2013 . Retrieved January 27, 2013 .

^ Luxist.com: The World of Rare Books: The Gutenberg Bible, First and Most Valuable Archived 2013-04-10 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Performing Arts - Harry Ransom Center" . Archived from the original on April 1, 2019 . Retrieved January 27, 2013 .

^ Photography - Harry Ransom Center ^ "George C. (George Cunnibell) Howard and Family: An Inventory of Their Collection at the Harry Ransom Center" .

norman.hrc.utexas.edu . Retrieved March 15, 2017 .

^ "Robert De Niro Donates collection of Film Materials to Harry Ransom Center" .

Harry Ransom Center . June 7, 2006 . Retrieved June 29, 2022 .

^ "Lorne Michaels Entrusts Harry Ransom Center With Historic SNL Collection" .

Harry Ransom Center . January 15, 2025 . Retrieved January 21, 2025 .

^ Vertuno, Jim.

"Don Draper and 'Mad Men' archive land at University of Texas" .

Statesman . Austin, Texas. Archived from the original on January 13, 2017 . Retrieved January 12, 2017 .

Sources [ edit ] Max, D. T. (June 11, 2007).

"Letter from Austin: Final Destination" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved June 20, 2007 .

Pearson, Rachel (March 7, 2006).

"Center offers literary sort of Ransom" .

The Daily Texan . Retrieved March 17, 2006 .

[ permanent dead link ] Pearson, Rachel (March 8, 2006).

"Ransom Center criticized abroad" .

The Daily Texan . Retrieved March 17, 2006 .

[ permanent dead link ] Page, Caroline (October 30, 2007).

"HRC holds cultural gems" .

The Daily Texan . Retrieved October 30, 2007 .

[ permanent dead link ] Page, Caroline (November 15, 2007).

"Ransom Center leads in conservation" .

The Daily Texan . Retrieved November 19, 2007 .

[ permanent dead link ] Page, Caroline (December 4, 2007).

"Literary treasure hunt" .

The Daily Texan . Retrieved December 4, 2007 .

[ permanent dead link ] "Harry Ransom Center Acquires Rare Plantin Polyglot Bible" . April 29, 2008. Archived from the original on May 1, 2008 . Retrieved May 1, 2008 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Harry Ransom Center .

Official website Why do the archives of so many great writers end up in Texas?

, The New Yorker , June 11, 2007 v t e City of Austin Slogan: Live Music Capital of the World Attractions Austin Zoo Circuit of the Americas Darrell K Royal–Texas Memorial Stadium Dell Diamond Driskill Hotel Frank Erwin Center NLand State Capitol Texas Governor's Mansion Treaty Oak UFCU Disch-Falk Field University of Texas Tower Zach Theatre History 1839 city plan 1928 city plan Austin Dam failure Capitol View Corridors COVID-19 pandemic French Legation Greater Austin Oakwood Cemetery Stephen F. Austin Texas Archive War Timeline Treaty Oak Waterloo, Texas Education Tertiary Austin Community College Concordia University Texas Huston–Tillotson University St. Edward's University The University of Texas School districts Austin ISD template Del Valle ISD Eanes ISD Hays CISD Leander ISD Lake Travis ISD Manor ISD Pflugerville ISD State schools Texas School for the Blind and Visually Impaired Texas School for the Deaf Closed Texas Blind, Deaf, and Orphan School Libraries Austin Public Library Lorenzo de Zavala State Archives and Library Building Government City Hall Camp Mabry City Council ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 ) Mayor Fire Health Police Industry General Amy's Ice Creams Golfsmith Keller Williams Realty Schlotzsky's Torchy's Tacos Whole Foods Market Creative arts Alamo Drafthouse Cinema / Drafthouse Films Austin Film Society Collings Guitars Devolver Digital Gunfire Games Inner Sanctum Records Powerhouse Animation Studios Retro Studios Rooster Teeth Troublemaker Studios Waterloo Records Western Vinyl Technology Advanced Technology Development Facility (ATDF) Cirrus Logic Dell Freescale Semiconductor Luminex Corporation MCC National Instruments Silicon Labs Valence Technology Museums Austin History Center Austin Museum of Digital Art Austin Museum of Popular Culture Blanton Museum of Art Bullock Texas State History Museum The Contemporary Austin Jones Center on Congress Avenue Laguna Gloria Dolph Briscoe Center for American History Elisabet Ney Museum French Legation Museum George Washington Carver Museum and Cultural Center Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center Jacob Fontaine Religious Museum Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum Mexic-Arte Museum Neill-Cochran House Museum O. Henry Museum Texas Military Forces Museum Texas Science and Natural History Museum Texas State Capitol Visitors Center Umlauf Sculpture Garden and Museum Women and Their Work Music Antone's Armadillo World Headquarters Austin City Limits Austin Opera Austin Symphony Orchestra Cinematic Symphony Emo's Germania Insurance Amphitheater South by Southwest Neighborhoods Allandale Anderson Mill Barton Hills Blackland Bouldin Creek Bremond Block Historic District Brentwood Bryker Woods Canyon Creek Chinatown Circle C Ranch Clarksville Congress Avenue Copperfield Crestview Dawson Dove Springs Downtown Austin The Drag East Cesar Chavez East Riverside-Oltorf Easton Park French Place Galindo Granada Hills Hancock Hyde Park Historic District Jollyville Montopolis Moore's Crossing Historic District Mueller Community North Burnet–Gateway North Shoal Creek Northwest Hills Oak Hill Old West Austin Onion Creek Pemberton Heights Rainey Street Rosedale Saint John Scenic Brook Shadow Lawn Historic District Sixth Street South Congress South Lamar South River City Spyglass-Barton's Bluff Swedish Hill Tarrytown Travis Heights Waters Park West Campus Westgate West Line Willow-Spence Streets Windsor Hills Windsor Park Wooten Zilker Parks and recreation Auditorium Shores Barton Creek Barton Springs Big Walnut Creek Brush Square Park Bull Creek Colorado River Deep Eddy Pool Emma Long Hippie Hollow Lady Bird Lake Lake Austin Lake Travis Lake Walter E. Long McKinney Falls Mount Bonnell Pease Park Republic Square Rosewood Park Walnut Creek Park Wooldridge Park Wild Basin Zilker Park Transportation Public Austin–Bergstrom International Airport CapMetro CapMetro Bus CapMetro Rail CapMetro Rapid Capital Area Rural Transportation System Freeways MoPac Expressway Interstate 35 Pickle Parkway SH 71 US 290 US 183 Streets Congress Avenue Guadalupe Street Sixth Street Bridges Ann W. Richards Congress Avenue Bridge Lamar Boulevard Bridge Larry Monroe Forever Bridge Montopolis Bridge Pennybacker Bridge Pfluger Pedestrian Bridge West Fifth Street Bridge West Sixth Street Bridge Culture Austin Bat Cave Chili's at 45th and Lamar Keep Austin Weird Leslie Cochran Occupy Austin Spamarama Weird City Sports Austin Aztex FC Austin Bold FC Austin FC Austin FC II Austin Gilgronis Austin Huns Austin Lightning Austin Lady Lone Stars Austin Lone Stars Austin Outlaws Austin Rise FC Austin Spurs Austin Thunder Austin United FC FC Austin Elite LOVB Austin Round Rock Express Texas Stars v t e The University of Texas at Austin Located in : Austin, Texas Schools Architecture Business Communication Radio, Television, Film Computational Education Engineering Fine Arts Music Geosciences Graduate School Information Law Liberal Arts Medicine Natural Sciences Public Affairs Social Work Centers Cultural Latin American Community College Student Engagament Complex Quantum Systems National Security American History Humanities Research Philanthropy International Security Advanced Computing Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Cross Country ( Men's , Women's ) Football Golf ( Men's , Women's ) Women's Rowing Women's Soccer Softball Swimming & Diving Tennis ( Men's , Women's ) Track & Field ( Men's , Women's ) Volleyball Clubs Rugby Sailing Venues Darrell K Royal–Texas Memorial Stadium Denton A. Cooley Pavilion Erwin Special Events Center Gregory Gymnasium Jamail Texas Swimming Center McCombs Field Moody Center Myers Stadium UFCU Disch–Falk Field Rivalries Texas A&M Campus Buildings Cactus Academic Center Little Campus Dobie Pickle Patterson Labs Geological Sciences Jester Littlefield Wildflower Landmarks Los Angeles Center Main Building Pedestrian Bridge Physics, Math, and Astronomy Social Work Building Statue of Barbara Jordan Union Building University Teaching Center Halls Battle Batts Burdine Calhoun Music Garrison Goldsmith Painter Sutton Waggener Webb Welch Facilities Blanton Museum of Art Austin Johnson Library and Museum Observatory Performing Arts Center Perry–Castañeda Library Texas Memorial Museum History History of the University Stephen F. Austin Constitution of 1876 Fisher v. University of Texas (2013) Fisher v. University of Texas (2016) Hopwood v. Texas Sweatt v. Painter Tower shooting Admissions controversy pro-Palestinian campus protests People Alumni Faculty Presidents Texas Exes Friar Society Tejas Club Traditions Bevo The Eyes of Texas Texas Fight Hex Rally Hook 'em Horns Hook 'Em (mascot) The Showband of the Southwest Texas Cowboys ( Smokey the Cannon ) Texas Silver Spurs World's Largest Texas Flag Students The Drag Fraternities and sororities Solar Vehicles Team Media KUT KUTX Longhorn IMG Sports Network Longhorn Network StarDate Texas Student Media ( The Daily Texan , KVRX-FM , Texas Student Television , Texas Travesty ) Category Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF National United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Norway Vatican Israel Artists ULAN People ISIL : OCLC-HRH Other SNAC ELMCIP Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harry_Ransom_Center&oldid=1303578749 " Categories : Art museums and galleries in Texas Libraries in Austin, Texas Literary archives in the United States Museums in Austin, Texas University and college academic libraries in the United States University museums in Texas University of Texas at Austin University of Texas at Austin campus Special collections libraries in the United States Authors' libraries in the United States 1957 establishments in Texas Archives in Texas Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 20:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harry Ransom Center 2 languages Add topic

