Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aristotle's view 2 Types 3 Self-sufficiency 4 Altruism and egoism 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Philia 25 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Кыргызча Latina მარგალური Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Português Русский Tagalog Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Affection; one of the ancient Greek forms of love For other uses, see Philia (disambiguation) .

This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( May 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Detail from Phidias Showing the Frieze of the Parthenon to His Friends by Lawrence Alma-Tadema (1868) Part of a series on Love Red-outline heart icon Types of love Affection Bonding Broken heart Compassionate love Conjugal love Courtly love courtship troubadours Falling in love Friendship cross-sex romantic zone Infatuation Interpersonal relationship Intimacy Limerence Love addiction Love at first sight Love triangle Lovesickness Lovestruck Obsessive love Parental love Passion Passionate and companionate love Platonic love Puppy love Queerplatonic relationship Romance Self-love Amour de soi Unconditional love Unrequited love Social views Anarchist Free love Patriotism Chinese Ren Yuanfen French Amour-propre Greek words for love Agape Eros Ludus Mania Philautia Philia Pistis Pragma Storgḗ Xenia Indian Kama Bhakti Maitrī Islamic Ishq Jewish Chesed Latin Amor Caritas Portuguese Saudade Yaghan Mamihlapinatapai Concepts Color wheel theory of love Bhakti yoga Biology of romantic love Interpersonal attraction Love letter Love of Christ Love of God in Christianity Love magic Valentine's Day Philosophy Religious views love deities Sacred Heart Similarity Physical attractiveness Triangular theory of love v t e Philia ( / ˈ f ɪ l i ə / ; from Ancient Greek φιλία (philía) ) is one of the four ancient Greek words for love , alongside storge , agape and eros . In Aristotle 's Nicomachean Ethics , philia is usually translated as " friendship " or affection .

[ 1 ] The complete opposite is called a phobia .

Aristotle's view [ edit ] As Gerard Hughes points out, in Books VIII and IX of his Nicomachean Ethics Aristotle gives examples of philia including: young lovers (1156b2), lifelong friends (1156b12), cities with one another (1157a26), political or business contacts (1158a28), parents and children (1158b20), fellow-voyagers and fellow-soldiers (1159b28), members of the same religious society (1160a19), or of the same tribe (1161b14), a cobbler and the person who buys from him. (1163b35) [ 2 ] All of these different relationships involve getting on well with someone, though Aristotle at times implies that something more like actual liking is required. When he is talking about the character or disposition that falls between obsequiousness or flattery on the one hand and surliness or quarrelsomeness on the other, he says that this state: has no name, but it would seem to be most like [philia]; for the character of the person in the intermediate state is just what we mean in speaking of a decent friend, except that the friend is also fond of us. (1126b21) This passage indicates also that, though broad, the notion of philia must be mutual, and thus excludes relationships with inanimate objects, though philia with animals, such as pets, is allowed for (see 1155b27–31) though it considers its existence in the way of inanimate objects could also "inanimately love".

In his Rhetoric , Aristotle defines the activity involved in philia (τὸ φιλεῖν) as: wanting for someone what one thinks good, for his sake and not for one's own, and being inclined, so far as one can, to do such things for him. (1380b36–1381a2) John M. Cooper argues that this indicates: that the central idea of φιλíα is that of doing well by someone for his own sake, out of concern for him (and not, or not merely, out of concern for oneself). [... Thus] the different forms of φιλíα [as listed above] could be viewed just as different contexts and circumstances in which this kind of mutual well-doing can arise.

[ 3 ] Aristotle takes philia to be both necessary as a means to happiness ("no one would choose to live without friends even if he had all the other goods" [1155a5–6]) and noble or fine (καλόν) in itself.

Types [ edit ] Aristotle divides friendships into three types, based on the motive for forming them: friendships of utility, friendships of pleasure and friendships of the good.

Friendships of utility are relationships formed without regard to the other person at all. Buying merchandise, for example, may require meeting another person but usually needs only a very shallow relationship between the buyer and seller. In modern English, people in such a relationship would not even be called friends, but acquaintances (if they even remembered each other afterwards). The only reason these people are communicating is in order to buy or sell things, which is not a bad thing, but as soon as that motivation is gone, so goes the relationship between the two people unless another motivation is found. Complaints and quarrels generally only arise in this type of friendship.

At the next level, friendships of pleasure are based on pure delight in the company of other people. People who drink together or share a hobby may have such friendships. However, these friends may also part—in this case if they no longer enjoy the shared activity, or can no longer participate in it together.

Friendships of the good are ones where both friends enjoy each other's characters. As long as both friends keep similar characters, the relationship will endure since the motive behind it is care for the friend. This is the highest level of philia, and in modern English might be called true friendship.

Now it is possible for bad people as well [as good] to be friends to each other for pleasure or utility, for decent people to be friends to base people, and for someone with neither character to be a friend to someone with any character.  Clearly, however, only good people can be friends to each other because of the other person himself; for bad people find no enjoyment in one another if they get no benefit. (1157a18–21) Not all bonds of philia involves reciprocity Aristotle notes. Some examples of these might include love of father to son, elder to younger or ruler to subject. Generally though, the bonds of philia are reciprocal and even symmetrical.

[ 4 ] Self-sufficiency [ edit ] See also: Eudaimonia Aristotle recognizes that there is an apparent conflict between what he says about philia and what he says elsewhere (and what is widely held at the time) about the self-sufficient nature of the fulfilled life: it is said that the blessedly happy and self-sufficient people have no need of friends.  For they already have [all] the goods, and hence, being self-sufficient, need nothing added. (1169b4–6) He offers various answers.  The first is based on the inherent goodness of acting for and being concerned for others ("the excellent person labours for his friends and for his native country, and will die for them if he must" [1169a19–20]); thus, being a wholly virtuous and fulfilled person necessarily involves having others for whom one is concerned—without them, one's life is incomplete: the solitary person's life is hard, since it is not easy for him to be continuously active all by himself; but in relation to others and in their company it is easier. (1170a6–8) Aristotle's second answer is: "good people's life together allows the cultivation of virtue" (1170a12).  Finally, he argues that one's friend is "another oneself", and so the pleasure that the virtuous person gets from his own life is also found in the life of another virtuous person.  "Anyone who is to be happy, then, must have excellent friends" (1170b19).

Altruism and egoism [ edit ] For Aristotle, in order to feel the highest form of philia for another, one must feel it for oneself; the object of philia is, after all, "another oneself".  This alone does not commit Aristotle to egoism, of course.  Not only is self-love not incompatible with love of others, but Aristotle is careful to distinguish the sort of self-love that is condemned (ascribed to "those who award the biggest share in money, honours, and bodily pleasures to themselves.  For these are the goods desired and eagerly pursued by the many on the assumption that they are best" [1168b17–19]) from that which should be admired (ascribed to one who "is always eager above all to perform just or temperate actions or any other actions in accord with the virtues, and in general always gains for himself what is fine [noble, good]" [1168b25–27]).  In fact: The good person must be a self-lover, since he will both help himself and benefit others by performing fine actions.  But the vicious person must not love himself, since he will harm both himself and his neighbours by following his base feelings. (1169a12–15) Aristotle also holds, though, that, as Hughes puts it: "[t]he only ultimately justifiable reason for doing anything is that acting in that way will contribute to a fulfilled life." [ 5 ] Thus acts of philia might seem to be essentially egoistic, performed apparently to help others, but in fact intended to increase the agent's happiness.  This, however, confuses the nature of the action with its motivation; the good person doesn't perform an action to help a friend because it will give her fulfillment; she performs it in order to help the friend, and in performing it makes both her friend and herself happy.  The action is thus good both in itself and for the effect it has on the agent's happiness.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Blood brother Love Selfless service -phil- Philotes References [ edit ] ^ Liddell and Scott : φιλία ^ Hughes (2001) , p. 168.

^ Cooper (1980) , p. 302.

^ Tabensky (2003) , p. 205.

^ Hughes (2001) , pp. 173–174.

^ See Hughes (2001) , pp. 175–176 For an alternative view, see Kraut (1989) , ch. 2.

Works cited [ edit ] Aristotle (1934).

Nicomachean Ethics . Translated by H. Rackham. Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-674-99081-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Aristotle (1999).

Nicomachean Ethics . Translated by Terence Irwin (2nd ed.). Hackett.

ISBN 0-87220-464-2 .

Cooper, John M.

(1980). "Aristotle on Friendship". In Rorty, Amélie Oksenberg (ed.).

Essays on Aristotle's Ethics . University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-04041-4 .

Hughes, Gerard J. (2001).

Aristotle on Ethics . Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-22187-0 .

Kraut, Richard (1989).

Aristotle on the Human Good . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-02071-X .

Tabensky, Pedro Alexis (2003).

Happiness: Personhood, Community, Purpose .

Ashgate Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-7546-0734-2 .

Further reading [ edit ] Cooper, John M.

(1976–1977). "Aristotle on the Forms of Friendship".

The Review of Metaphysics .

30 : 619– 648.

Cooper, John M. (1977). "Friendship and the Good".

The Philosophical Review .

86 : 290– 315.

Oord, Thomas Jay (2010).

Defining Love: A Philosophical, Scientific, and Theological Engagement . Brazos Press.

ISBN 1-58743-257-9 .

Oord, Thomas Jay (2010).

The Nature of Love: A Theology . Chalice Press.

ISBN 978-0-8272-0828-5 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of philia at Wiktionary v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Family History Rights Household Nuclear family Extended family Conjugal family Immediate family Matrifocal family First-degree relatives Parent mother father Child son daughter Sibling brother sister Second-degree relatives Grandparent Grandchild Uncle / Aunt Niece and nephew Third-degree relatives Great-grandparent Great-grandchild Great-uncle / Great-aunt Cousin Family-in-law Spouse wife husband Parent-in-law Sibling-in-law Child-in-law daughter-in-law son-in-law Stepfamily Stepparent stepfather stepmother Stepchild Stepsibling Kinship terminology Kinship Australian Aboriginal kinship Adoption Affinity Consanguinity Disownment Divorce Estrangement Family of choice Fictive kinship Marriage Nurture kinship Chinese kinship Hawaiian kinship Sudanese kinship Eskimo kinship Iroquois kinship Crow kinship Omaha kinship Genealogy and lineage Bilateral descent Cadet branch Common ancestor Family name Heirloom Heredity Inheritance Lineal descendant collateral descent Matrilineality Patrilineality Progenitor Clan Royal descent Family trees Pedigree chart Genogram Ahnentafel Genealogical numbering systems Seize quartiers Quarters of nobility Relationships Agape (parental love) Eros (marital love) Philia (brotherly love) Storge (familial love) Filial piety Polyfidelity Holidays Mother's Day U.S.

Father's Day Father–Daughter Day Siblings Day National Grandparents Day Parents' Day Children's Day Japan Family Day Canada American Family Day International Day of Families National Family Week UK National Adoption Day Related Breadwinner model Single parent Wedding anniversary Godparent Birth order Only child Middle child syndrome Sociology of the family Museum of Motherhood Astronaut family Dysfunctional family Domestic violence Incest Sibling abuse Sibling estrangement Sibling rivalry NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xzpcs
Cached time: 20250816101219
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.615 seconds
Real time usage: 0.832 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2650/1000000
Revision size: 11261/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 190327/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3705/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 59248/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.406/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15465887/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  676.864      1 -total
 31.34%  212.147      1 Template:Love_sidebar
 31.03%  210.060      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 19.71%  133.425     21 Template:Lang
 14.39%   97.433      8 Template:Cite_book
 11.47%   77.603      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
 11.08%   75.011      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.72%   59.045      1 Template:Short_description
  6.77%   45.820      7 Template:Quote
  5.84%   39.542      4 Template:Sfnp Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:432691:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816101219 and revision id 1285457455. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philia&oldid=1285457455 " Categories : Love Ancient Greek philosophical concepts Greek words and phrases Philosophy of Aristotle Words and phrases with no direct English translation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from May 2018 All articles with style issues Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 13 April 2025, at 20:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philia 25 languages Add topic

