Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mythology Toggle Mythology subsection 1.1 Family 1.2 Blasphemous boast 2 Within Greek culture 3 In literature and fine arts Toggle In literature and fine arts subsection 3.1 Literature 3.2 Arts 3.3 Examples in painting and sculpture 4 Related terms 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Modern scholarship 7.2 Classical authors 7.3 General reading 8 References Toggle the table of contents Niobe 44 languages العربية Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek mythological daughter of Tantalus This article is about the daughter of Tantalus. For other uses, see Niobe (disambiguation) .

A 1772 painting by Jacques-Louis David depicting Niobe attempting to shield her children from Artemis and Apollo Niobe ( / ˈ n aɪ .

ə .

b iː / ; Ancient Greek : Νιόβη [ni.óbɛː] : Nióbē) was in Greek mythology a daughter of Tantalus and of either Dione or of Eurythemista or Euryanassa . She was the wife of Amphion and the sister of Pelops and Broteas .

Niobe is mentioned by Achilles in Homer 's Iliad , which relates her hubris , for which she was punished by Leto , who sent Apollo and Artemis to slay all of her children, after which her children lay unburied for nine days while she abstained from food.

[ 1 ] Once the gods had interred the slain, Niobe retreated to her native Sipylus , "where Nymphs dance around the River Acheloos, [ 2 ] and though turned to stone, she broods over the sorrows sent by the Gods".

[ 3 ] Later writers [ 4 ] asserted that Niobe was wedded to Amphion , one of the twin founders of Thebes , where there was a single sanctuary where the twin founders were venerated, but no shrine to Niobe.

Mythology [ edit ] Woodcut illustration of Niobe, Amphion and their dead sons, ca. 1474 – Penn Provenance Project Family [ edit ] Her father was the ruler of a city located near Manisa in today's Aegean Turkey that was called "Tantalis" [ 5 ] or "the city of Tantalus ", or "Sipylus". The city was located at the foot of Mount Sipylus and its ruins were reported to be still visible at the beginning of the 1st century AD, [ 6 ] although few traces remain today.

[ 7 ] Pliny reports that Tantalis was destroyed by an earthquake and the city of Sipylus ( Magnesia ad Sipylum ) was built in its place.

[ 8 ] Niobe's father is referred to as " Phrygian " and sometimes even as "King of Phrygia ", [ 9 ] although his city was located in the western extremity of Anatolia where Lydia was to emerge as a state before the beginning of the first millennium BC, and not in the traditional heartland of Phrygia, situated more inland.

In the Fabulae Dione, identified in the text as a daughter of Atlas, becomes the wife of Tantalus and mother of Pelops , though Niobe herself is not mentioned.

[ 10 ] In Ovid 's account of the story, Niobe names her father as Tantalus and her mother as a sister of the Pleiades and a daughter of Atlas .

[ 11 ] Although she gives no name it is assumed to be Dione.

[ 12 ] The Hyades are traditionally the sisters of the Pleiades and daughters of Atlas, [ 13 ] and in the account of Pherecydes , Dione numbers among them.

[ 14 ] According to a scholia on Euripides 's Orestes , her mother is either Eurythemista [ 15 ] or Euryanassa, [ 16 ] with the latter being a genealogy also given by Tzetzes .

[ 17 ] Niobe's husband was Amphion , a son of Zeus and Antiope . Amphion's twin brother, Zethus , was a ruler of Thebes. Amphion became a great singer and musician after his lover Hermes taught him to play music and gave him a golden lyre. Zethus's wife and Niobe's sister-in-law was Aëdon , who had a single child, Itylus . Aëdon was jealous of the vast progeny Niobe had produced, so she conceived a plan to kill Niobe's firstborn, a boy named Amaleus . Aëdon instructed her son to sleep in the back of the room, or in the innermost position of the bed that night, but Itylus forgot about his mother's words. So when Aëdon entered the children's chamber, she unknowingly killed her own child instead of Niobe's. Her pain was so great the gods transformed her into a nightingale.

[ 18 ] Blasphemous boast [ edit ] Jacques-Louis David , Niobe and Her Daughter, 1775–80, black ink with gray wash over graphite on laid paper, overall: 15.2 × 14 cm (6 × 5 1/2 in.), NGA 107057 The Weeping Rock in Mount Sipylus , Manisa , Turkey , has been associated with Niobe's legend since Antiquity.

[ 19 ] Niobe boasted of her fourteen children, seven male and seven female (the Niobids ), to Leto who only had two children, the twins Apollo and Artemis. The number varies in different sources.

[ 20 ] Using arrows, Artemis killed Niobe's daughters and Apollo killed Niobe's sons. According to some versions, at least two of Niobe's children (usually Meliboea , along with her brother Amyclas in other renderings) was spared. In these versions, Meliboea stayed greenish pale from horror for the rest of her life, and for that reason she was called Chloris (the pale one).

[ 21 ] In most versions, Amphion commits suicide out of grief; according to Telesilla , Artemis and Apollo murder him along with his children.

Hyginus , however, writes that in his madness he tried to attack the temple of Apollo, and was killed by the god's arrows. Devastated, Niobe fled back to Mount Sipylus [ 22 ] and was turned into stone, and, as she wept unceasingly, waters started to pour from her petrified complexion. Mount Sipylus indeed has a natural rock formation which resembles a female face, and it has been associated with Niobe since ancient times and described by Pausanias . The rock formation is also known as the "Weeping Rock" ( Turkish : Ağlayan Kaya ), since rainwater seeps through its porous limestone .

Within Greek culture [ edit ] In his archaic role as bringer of diseases and death, Apollo with his poison arrows killed Niobe's sons and Artemis with her poison arrows killed Niobe's daughters.

[ 23 ] This is related to the myth of the seven youths and seven maidens who were sent every year to the king Minos of Crete as an offering sacrifice to the Minotaur . Niobe was transformed into a stone on Mount Sipylus in her homeland of Phrygia , where she brooded over the sorrows sent by the gods.

[ 24 ] In Sophocles' Antigone , the heroine believes that she will have a similar death.

[ 25 ] The iconic number "seven" often appears in Greek legends, and represents an ancient tradition because it appears as a lyre with seven strings in the Hagia Triada sarcophagus in Crete during the Mycenean age .

[ 26 ] Apollo's lyre had also seven strings.

In literature and fine arts [ edit ] Daughter of Niobe bent by terror , Niobe room in Uffizi gallery Literature [ edit ] Lineage of Tantalus The story of Niobe, and especially her sorrows, is an ancient one. The context in which she is mentioned by Achilles to Priam in Homer 's Iliad is as a stock type for mourning. Priam is not unlike Niobe in the sense that he was also grieving for his son Hector , who was killed and not buried for several days.

Niobe is also mentioned in Sophocles 's Antigone where, as Antigone is marched toward her death, she compares her own loneliness to that of Niobe.

[ 27 ] Sophocles is said to have also contributed a play titled Niobe that is lost.

The Niobe of Aeschylus , set in Thebes, survives in fragmentary quotes that were supplemented by a papyrus sheet containing twenty-one lines of text.

[ 28 ] From the fragments it appears that for the first part of the tragedy the grieving Niobe sits veiled and silent.

Furthermore, the conflict between Niobe and Leto is mentioned in one of Sappho 's poetic fragments ("Before they were mothers, Leto and Niobe had been the most devoted of friends.").

[ 29 ] In Latin language sources, Niobe's account is first told by Hyginus in his collection of stories in brief and plain Fabulae .

Parthenius of Nicaea records a rare version of the story of Niobe, in which her father is called Assaon and her husband Philottus. The circumstances in which Niobe loses her children are also different, see Niobids § Parthenius variant .

Niobe's iconic tears were also mentioned in Hamlet 's soliloquy (Act 1, Scene 2), in which he contrasts his mother's grief over the dead King, Hamlet's father – "like Niobe, all tears" – to her unseemly hasty marriage to Claudius.

[ 30 ] The quotation from Hamlet is also used in Dorothy L. Sayers ' novel Murder Must Advertise , in which an advertising agency's client turns down an advertisement using the quotation as a caption.

[ 31 ] In William Faulkner 's novel Absalom, Absalom!

Faulkner compares Ellen, the wife of Sutpen and father of Henry and Judith, to Niobe, "this Niobe without tears, who had conceived to the demon [Sutpen] in a kind of nightmare" (Chapter 1).

Among works of modern literature which have Niobe as a central theme, Kate Daniels' Niobe Poems can be cited.

[ 32 ] Arts [ edit ] Apollo and Artemis shoot the sons of Niobe, who flee (partly on horseback) in an idyllic landscape, fresco in Pompeii , 1st c. BC – 1st c. AD.

'Niobe' gavotte named after the 1904 farce by Harry Paulton concerning a figure of Greek mythology The subject of Niobe and the destruction of the Niobids was part of the repertory of Attic vase-painters and inspired sculpture groups and wall frescoes as well as relief carvings on Roman sarcophagi .

The subject of the Attic calyx-krater from Orvieto conserved in the Musée du Louvre has provided the name for the Niobid Painter .

[ 33 ] A lifesize group of marble Niobids, including one of Niobe sheltering one of her daughters, found in Rome in 1583 at the same time as the Wrestlers , were taken in 1775 to the Uffizi in Florence where, in a gallery devoted to them, they remain some of the most prominent surviving sculptures of Classical antiquity ( see below ). New instances come to light from time to time, like one headless statue found in early 2005 among the ruins of a villa in the Villa dei Quintili just outside Rome .

[ 34 ] In painting, Niobe was painted by post-Renaissance artists from varied traditions ( see below ). An early appearance, The Death of Niobe's Children by Abraham Bloemaert , was painted in 1591 towards the start of the Dutch Golden Age . The English artist Richard Wilson gained great acclaim for his The Destruction of the Children of Niobe , painted in 1760. Three notable works, all dating from the 1770s, Apollo and Diana Attacking Niobe and her Children by Anicet-Charles-Gabriel Lemonnier , The Children of Niobe Killed by Apollo and Diana by Pierre-Charles Jombert and Diana and Apollo Piercing Niobe’s Children with their Arrows by Jacques-Louis David belong to the tradition of French Baroque and Classicism .

Niobe is an abstract painting by Károly Patkó .

[ 35 ] In classical music, Italian composer Agostino Steffani (1654–1728) dedicated his opera " Niobe, Queen of Saba " to her myth, and Giovanni Pacini too wrote an opera on this myth.

Benjamin Britten based one of his Six Metamorphoses after Ovid on Niobe.

In modern music, Caribou called the last track on his 2007 album Andorra "Niobe".

In modern dance, José Limón named a section of his dance theatre work Dances for Isadora as "Niobe". The section is a solo for a woman mourning the loss of her children.

A marble statue of Niobe is a female lead character in a long-running 1892 farce Niobe (play) by Harry Paulton . In the play she is bought to life by a quaint electrical storm and brings the Edwardian values and relationships in the household to disarray. The season at the London Royal Strand Theatre enjoyed more than five hundred performances. The play is the subject of a musical dedication by Australian composer Thomas Henry Massey. The play was filmed in 1915.

[ 36 ] Examples in painting and sculpture [ edit ] Picture of the Uffizi sculpture representing Niobe photographed by Giorgio Sommer 1591 painting by Abraham Bloemaert 1610 tapestry by François Spierincx 1760 painting by Richard Wilson 1770 painting by Anicet Charles Gabriel Lemonnier 1772 painting by Pierre-Charles Jombert Statue of Niobe in Květné Gardens, Kroměříž , Czech Republic Niobe statue at Harry Houdini 's Grave in New York City Roman sarcophagus showing the massacre of Niobeʼs children. Ca 160 AD.

Glyptothek , Munich.

Related terms [ edit ] The choice of "Niobe" simply as a name in works of art and literature is not uncommon either. Two minor characters of Greek mythology have the same name ( see Niobe (disambiguation) ) and the name occurs in several works of the 19th century. More recently, one of the characters in The Matrix film series is also named Niobe. A character named Niobe also appeared in the Rome TV series.

The element niobium was so named as an extension of the inspiration which had led earlier to the naming of the element tantalum by Anders Gustaf Ekeberg . On the basis of his argument according to which there were two different elements in the tantalite sample, Heinrich Rose named them after children of Tantalus —niobium and pelopium —although the argument was later contested as far as pelopium was concerned.

A mountain in British Columbia , Canada is named Mount Niobe.

Four successive ships of the British Royal Navy were called HMS Niobe .

See also [ edit ] Ancient Greece portal Ancient Rome portal Mythology portal Cassiopeia (disambiguation) Lycian peasants Smyrna Notes [ edit ] ^ Iliad 24.603–610 : "[...] the fair-haired Niobe bethought her of meat, albeit twelve children perished in her halls, six daughters and six lusty sons. The sons Apollo slew with shafts from his silver bow, being wroth against Niobe, and the daughters the archer Artemis, for that Niobe had matched her with fair-cheeked Leto, saying that the goddess had borne but twain, while herself was mother to many; wherefore they, for all they were but twain, destroyed them all. For nine days' space they lay in their blood, nor was there any to bury them, for the son of Cronos turned the folk to stones; howbeit on the tenth day the gods of heaven buried them; and Niobe bethought her of meat, for she was wearied with the shedding of tears." ^ The river Acheloos in Niobe's story should not confused with its much larger namesake, the Acheloos River in mainland Greece . The Acheloos mentioned by Homer could correspond to the modern-day Çaybaşı Stream which flows around the slopes of the Mount Sipylus in immediate proximity of the Weeping Rock associated with her. The plain between the coast and the ancient city of Adramyttium was also called "Thebe" (the present-day Edremit Plain).

^ Iliad 24.602 ff.

^ Apollodorus , 3.5.6 ^ George Perrot (1892).

History of Art in Phrygia, Lydia, Caria and Lycia . Chapman and Hall. p. 62.

ISBN 978-1-4067-0883-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Frazer, James George (1900).

Pausanias, and other Greek sketches, later retitled Pausanias's Description of Greece .

Kessinger Publishing Company . p. 11.

ISBN 1-4286-4922-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ There is a "Throne" conjecturally associated with Pelops in the Yarıkkaya locality in Mount Sipylus. There are two tombs called "Tomb of Tantalus" near the summits of the neighboring mountains of Yamanlar and Mount Sipylus in western Turkey, sources by respective scholars differing on the associations that may be based on the one or the other.

^ Pliny the Elder (1938).

Natural History . Vol. 2. Translated by H. Rackham. p. 337.

^ Thomas Bulfinch (2010).

Bulfinch's Mythology . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.

ISBN 978-1440426308 .

^ Hyginus, Fabulae 82–83 .

^ Ovid, Metamorphoses , 6.174 .

^ Gianpiero Rosati (2024). "Commentary on Book 6". In Barchiesi, Alessandro (ed.).

A Commentary on Ovid's Metamorphoses . Cambridge University Press. p. 634.

ISBN 9781139047272 .

^ Gantz, Timothy (1993).

Early Greek myth: a guide to literary and artistic sources . Johns Hopkins University press. p. 218.

ISBN 0-8018-4410-X .

^ Pherecydes in R. Fowler, Early Greek Mythography Fr.90a (=A, 18.486c D Scholia to the Iliad 18.486c); Fr.90d (=Hyginus, De Astronomia 2.21.1 ) ^ Scholia ad Euripides, Orestes 11 English translation .

^ Scholia ad Euripides, Orestes 4 and 11 English translation .

^ Tzetzes ad Lycophron , 52 .

^ Hansen, William F. (2002).

Ariadne's Thread: A Guide to International Tales Found in Classical Literature . UK, USA: Cornell University Press . p.

303 .

ISBN 0-8014-3670-2 .

^ E.g. by Quintus Smyrnaeus , i.390ff Theoi.com on-line quotation ^ According to Iliad XXIV, there were twelve, six male, six female.

Aelian ( Varia Historia xii. 36): "But Hesiod says they were nine boys and ten girls—unless after all the verses are not Hesiod but are falsely ascribed to him as are many others." Nine would make a triple triplet , triplicity being character of numerous sisterhoods ( J.E. Harrison , A Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion (1903), "The Maiden-Trinities" pp 286ff); ten would equate to a full two hands of male dactyls , while twelve would resonate with the number of Olympian gods .

^ Pausanias .

Description of Greece 2.21.9 ^ The return of Niobe from Thebes to her Lydian homeland is recorded in pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheke 3.46.

^ Compare the "Elphenshots" in northern-European folklore. Martin Nilsson (1967).

Die Geschichte der Griechische Religion.

Vol I, p.443 ^ Homer , Iliad xxiv,602 ^ Antigone , lines 823-838. ANTIGONE: I’ve heard about a guest of ours, daughter of Tantalus, from Phrygia – she went to an excruciating death in Sipylus, right on the mountain peak. The stone there, just like clinging ivy, wore her down, and now, so people say, the snow and rain never leave her there, as she laments. Below her weeping eyes her neck is wet with tears. God brings me to a final rest which most resembles hers. CHORUS: But Niobe was a goddess, born divine – and we are human beings, a race which dies. But still, it’s a fine thing for a woman, once she’s dead, to have it said she shared, in life and death, the fate of demi-gods.

^ F. Schachermeyer (1964).

Die Minoische Kultur des alten Kreta . Stuttgart: W. Kohlhammer . p. 124.

^ Antigone , around line 940. ANTIGONE: I’ve heard about a guest of ours, daughter of Tantalus, from Phrygia – she went to an excruciating death in Sipylus, right on the mountain peak. The stone there, just like clinging ivy, wore her down, and now, so people say, the snow and rain never leave her there, [830] as she laments. Below her weeping eyes her neck is wet with tears. God brings me to a final rest which most resembles hers. [940] CHORUS: But Niobe was a goddess, born divine – and we are human beings, a race which dies. But still, it’s a fine thing for a woman, once she’s dead, to have it said she shared, in life and death, the fate of demi-gods.

^ A. D. Fitton Brown offered a reconstruction of the form of the play, in A. D. Fitton Brown (July 1954). "Niobe".

The Classical Quarterly .

4 (3/4): 175– 180.

doi : 10.1017/S0009838800008077 .

S2CID 246875795 .

^ John Myers O'Hara (1924).

The poems of Sappho: an interpretative rendition into English . Forgotten Books.

^ William Shakespeare , "The Tragedy of Hamlet , Prince of Denmark"  Act I, scii, l 149, of Queen Gertrude.

^ Dorothy L. Sayers , Murder Must Advertise , Gollancz, London, 1933 ^ Kate Daniels (1988).

The Niobe Poems .

University of Pittsburgh Press .

ISBN 0-8229-3596-1 .

^ identified by Webster, Der Niobidenmaler , Leipzig 1935; the iconography of the reverse subject and its possible relation to a lost Early Classical wall-painting by Polygnotes was examined in Erika Simon (1963). "Polygnotan Painting and the Niobid Painter".

American Journal of Archaeology .

67 (1): 43– 62.

JSTOR 502702 .

^ Jarrett A. Lobell (July–August 2005). "A tragic figure emerges from the ruins of a Roman villa".

Archaeology .

58 (4).

^ A sketch is found here .

^ Massey, T. H., 1870?–1946, Niobe [music] : gavotte (All smiles) / composed by T. H. Massey (in no linguistic content), Wm. Bruce & Co {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Niobe .

Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article  " Niobe ".

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Niobe ".

Modern scholarship [ edit ] Robert Manuel Cook , 1964.

Niobe and Her children ( Cambridge University Press ). Summary of the most recent research on ancient Niobid representations, pp. 6–30.

Albin-Lesky, "Niobe" in Realencyclopädie der Classischen Altertumswissenschaft xxxiii (1936:644–73) for a full discussion of the complexities of Niobe's theme.

Classical authors [ edit ] Virginia Brown's translation of Giovanni Boccaccio's Famous Women, pp. 33–35; Harvard University Press 2001; ISBN 0-674-01130-9 Ovid, Metamorphoses VI.145–310.

Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca III.5.6.

General reading [ edit ] Ekrem Akurgal (2002).

Ancient Civilizations and Ruins of Turkey: From Prehistoric Times Until the End of the Roman Empire .

Kegan Paul .

ISBN 0-7103-0776-4 .

George E. Bean (1967).

Aegean Turkey: An archaeological guide . Ernest Benn, London .

ISBN 978-0-510-03200-5 .

Cecil John Cadoux (1938).

Ancient Smyrna: A History of the City from the Earliest Times to 324 A.D .

Blackwell Publishing .

Peter James (January 2001).

"More on the 'weeping stone' simulacrum of Niobe in Turkey" .

Fortean Times . Archived from the original on 27 June 2007.

v t e Metamorphoses in Greek mythology Animals Avian Abas Acanthis Acanthus Acmon Aëdon Aegolius Aegypius Aëtos Aesacus Agrius and Oreius Agron Alcander Alcyone Alcyone and Ceyx Alcyonides Alectryon Anthus Antigone Argus Arne Sithonis Artemiche Ascalaphus Asteria Autonous Botres Bulis Byssa Caeneus Celeus Cerberus Chelidon Cinyras Clinis Combe Corone Ctesylla Cycnus (son of Apollo) Cycnus (son of Ares) Cycnus (son of Poseidon) Cycnus (son of Sthenelus) Daedalion Erinoma Erodius Eumelus Gerana Harmothoë Harpalyce Harpasus Harpe Hierax Hippodamia Hyperippe Hyria Ictinus Idas Ino Itys Iynx Laius Lelante Lycius Lycus Megaletor Meleagrids Memnonides Meropis Merops Minyades Munichus Neophron Nisus Nyctaea Nyctimene Oenoe Oenotropae Ortygius Pandareus Pelia Perdix Periphas Peristera Picus Pierides Phene Philaeus Philomela Pleiades Polyphonte Polytechnus Procne Rhexenor Schoeneus Scylla Tereus Timandra Non-avian Abas Actaeon Arachne Arcas Arge Aristaeus Ascalabus Atalanta Cadmus Calchus Callisto Cephissus Cerambus Cercopes Chelone Circe Curetes Cynosura Galanthis Gale Harmonia Hecuba Helice Hippomenes Io Lycaon Lycian peasants Lyncus Megisto Melanippe Melian nymphs Melissa Minyades Myia Myrmex Naïs Nerites Ocyrhoe Odysseus Pentheus Phalanx Phineus Phoenice Pompilus Taygete Theophane Tiresias Titanis Tithonus Tyrrhenian pirates Aethalides Alcimedon Dictys Epopeus Melas Medon Opheltes Base appearance Achilles Antigone Charybdis Lamia Medusa Midas Mulberry fruit Phaon Scylla Sirens White raven Humanoids Arne Calliste Cymodoce Cephalus' wife Galatea Leleges Myrmidons Nephele Spartoi Weasel Inanimate objects Aconteus Aglaurus Alcmene Anaxarete Ariadne Arsinoë Aspalis Battus Britomartis Calydon Cercopes Cragaleus Daphnis Iodame Laelaps Lethaea Lyco and Orphe Olenus Pallas Pandareus Phineus Polydectes Proetus Propoetides Pyrrhus Teumessian fox Wolf Landforms Achelous Acheron Acis Aea Alope Alpheus Arethusa (Boeotia) Arethusa (nymph) Asteria Atlas Aura Byblis Calliste Castalia Chione Cleite Comaetho Cyane Dirce Haemus Lichas Lilaeus Manto Marsyas Menippe and Metioche Niobe Perimele Pirene Pyramus and Thisbe Rhodope Rhodopis Sangas Selemnus Sybaris Opposite sex Caeneus Hermaphroditus Iphis Leucippus Salmacis Siproites Sithon Tiresias Plants Adonis Agdistis Ajax Amaracus Ambrosia Ampelus Anethus Attis Baucis and Philemon Carpus Carya Cissus Clytie Crocus Cyparissus Daphne Diopatra Dryope Elaea Elate Eteocleides Heliades Aegle Dioxippe Lampetia Merope Phaethusa Phoebe Hesperides Aegle Erytheia Hyacinthus Kalamos Leuce Leucothoe Libanus Lotis Lycurgus Mecon Melos Messapians Milk Minthe Myrice Myrina Myrsine Narcissus Oechalides Philyra Phyllis Picolous Pitys Platanus Psalacantha Saliva Side Smilax Smyrna Spear Syceus Syrinx Voluntary Greek gods Kobalos Mestra Periclymenus Other Cumaean Sibyl Echo Hyades Hylas Milk of Hera Pleiades False myths Acantha Amethyste Orchis Rhodanthe Metamorphoses Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Israel People DDB Other IdRef Kulturenvanteri monument Yale LUX References [ edit ] The Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (images of Niobe and the Niobids) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Niobe&oldid=1303600256 " Categories : Princesses in Greek mythology Queens in Greek mythology Metamorphoses into terrain in Greek mythology Mythological people from Anatolia Leto Deeds of Apollo Deeds of Artemis Deeds of Zeus Theban mythology Metamorphoses characters Atreidai Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 foreign language sources (ISO 639-2) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with Greek IPA Articles containing Turkish-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 23:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Niobe 44 languages Add topic

