Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 In psychology 3 In other fields 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Nomothetic 9 languages Dansk Español فارسی Italiano Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sociological terminology This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Nomothetic" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Nomothetic" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2009 ) This article needs additional or more specific categories .

Please help out by adding categories to it so that it can be listed with similar articles.

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Nomothetic literally means "proposition of the law" (Greek derivation) and is used in philosophy , psychology , and law with differing meanings.

Etymology [ edit ] In the general humanities usage, nomothetic may be used in the sense of "able to lay down the law", "having the capacity to posit lasting sense" (from Ancient Greek : νομοθετικός , romanized : nomothetikós , from νομοθέτης , nomothétēs , 'lawgiver', from νόμος , nómos , 'custom, law' and ultimately Proto-Indo-European : * nem- , lit.

'take, give, account, apportion' [ 1 ] ), e.g., 'the nomothetic capability of the early mythmakers' or 'the nomothetic skill of Adam, given the power to name things.' [ 2 ] In psychology [ edit ] In psychology , nomothetic refers to research about general principles or generalizations across a population of individuals. For example, the Big Five model of personality and Piaget's developmental stages are nomothetic models of personality traits and cognitive development respectively. In contrast, idiographic refers to research about the unique and contingent aspects of individuals, as in psychological case studies .

In psychological testing , nomothetic measures are contrasted to ipsative or idiothetic measures, where nomothetic measures are measures that are observed on a relatively large sample and have a more general outlook.

In other fields [ edit ] In sociology , nomothetic explanation presents a generalized understanding of a given case, and is contrasted with idiographic explanation , which presents a full description of a given case.  Nomothetic approaches are most appropriate to the deductive approach to social research inasmuch as they include the more highly structured research methodologies which can be replicated and controlled, and which focus on generating quantitative data with a view to explaining causal relationships.

[ 3 ] In anthropology , nomothetic refers to the use of generalization rather than specific properties in the context of a group as an entity.

In history , nomothetic refers to the philosophical shift in emphasis away from traditional presentation of historical text restricted to wars, laws, dates, and such, to a broader appreciation and deeper understanding.

See also [ edit ] Nomothetic and idiographic Nomological References [ edit ] ^ Linguistics Research Centre (2017).

"Indo-European Lexicon PIE Etymon and IE Reflexes" . Retrieved 29 August 2017 .

^ nomothetics ^ Butterworth-Heinemann, Elsevior (2005).

Research Methods . British Library: Elsevior Ltd. p. 32.

ISBN 9780750689533 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nomothetic&oldid=1302670901 " Category : Sociological terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional categories from July 2025 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Proto-Indo-European-language text This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 21:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nomothetic 9 languages Add topic

