Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Foundation 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ionian League 20 languages Беларуская Български Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Gaeilge Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Português Русский Slovenščina Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek political confederation of city-states in western Asia Minor 3rd-century coin of Kolophon with a representation of the gathering of the League at the temple of Apollo Klarios , and a bust of Emperor Valerian I [ 1 ] Part of a series on the History of Greece Neolithic Greece Pelasgians Greek Bronze Age Helladic chronology Cycladic ( c.

3100–1000 BC) Minoan ( c.

3100–1100 BC) Mycenean ( c.

1750–1050 BC) Ancient Greece Greek Dark Ages (1100 BC–750 BC) Archaic Greece (800 BC–480 BC) Classical Greece (500 BC–323 BC) Hellenistic Greece (323 BC–31 BC) Roman Greece (146 BC–330 AD) Medieval Greece Byzantine Greece Frankish and Latin states (1204-1579) Early modern Greece Venetian Crete (1205-1667) Venetian Ionian Islands (1363-1797) Ottoman Greece (1371-1822) Modern Greece Septinsular Republic (1800-1807) War of Independence (1821-1829) First Hellenic Republic (1822-1832) Kingdom of Greece (1832-1924, 1935-1973) National Schism (1914/15-1917) Second Hellenic Republic (1924-1935) 4th of August Regime (1936-1941) Axis occupation ( Collaborationist regime , Free Greece ) (1941-1944) Civil War (1946-1949) Military Junta (1967-1974) Third Hellenic Republic (1974-) History by topic Agriculture Alphabet Art Church Constitution Economy Ethnonyms Language Music Military Greece portal v t e The Ionian League ( Ancient Greek : Ἴωνες , romanized : Íōnes ; κοινὸν Ἰώνων , koinón Iōnōn ;  or κοινὴ σύνοδος Ἰώνων , koinē sýnodos Iōnōn , in Latin : commune consilium ), also called the Panionic League , was a confederation formed at the end of the Meliac War in the mid-7th century BC [ 2 ] comprising twelve Ionian Greek city-states (a dodecapolis , of which there were many others), and eventually thirteen city-states with the admission of Smyrna . The earliest union of city-states in the area was the Ionian League. The League survived through the Hellenistic and Roman periods, until the 3rd century AD.

Overview [ edit ] Ancient Greek colonization: the Ionians in green The twelve ancient city-states were listed by Herodotus as: [ 3 ] Miletus , Myus , and Priene — all located in Caria (a region in Asia Minor ). The three Greek cities spoke the same Ionic subdialect . Starting from the 7th century BC, Greek-Carian bilinguals in Caria suggest the Carians shared their former ancestral land amicably with the Greeks. The Carian language is not Greek but is a remnant of the Anatolian language group that dominated Anatolia before being pushed out by peoples from the Balkans. They seemed to get along well with the Greeks since the Bronze Age. Carian disappeared in the 1st century BC, suggesting their complete Hellenization by that date. They are known to have been partners of the Ionians in their sea-going business ventures.

Ephesus , Colophon , Lebedus , Teos , Clazomenae and Phocaea — all located in Lydia and/or the region known today as Ionia (both also in Asia Minor, Lydia extending inland much farther relative to Ionia), speaking another dialect; Chios (island) and Erythrae (Asia Minor) — with a common dialect; and Samos (island) — with its own dialect.

Smyrna , an originally Aeolic city bordering the Ionians, asked for admission and entered the League at a later date, being first attested in a decree of 289/8 BC.

[ 4 ] The league is still attested as having thirteen members as late as the 3rd century AD, but this may reflect tradition more than reality, as due to synoecisms and the fluctuation in importance of the various cities, some were incorporated into others over time (e.g. Myus became part of Miletus).

[ 5 ] One of the earliest known historical sources, the Histories of Herodotus , and early inscriptions refer to the legally constituted body customarily translated by "league" as "the Ionians" in the special sense of the cities incorporated by it. One therefore reads of the cities, council or decisions "of the Ionians." Writers and documents of the Hellenistic Period explicitly use the term koinon ("common thing") or synodos (" synod ") of the Ionians, and by anachronism apply it to the early league when they mention it.

Under the Roman Empire it was allowed to issue its own coinage under the name koinon Iōnōn on one side with the face of the emperor on the other.

Foundation [ edit ] The Meliac War was a final settlement between the ancient state of Caria and the Ionians who had been settlers on its land at the mouth of the Maeander for some centuries. Their last stronghold was the fortified settlement of Melia at the smaller peak of Dilek Daglari on the north slopes of Mycale , where the seat of their worship of Poseidon Heliconius was located. The fort was constructed in the early 7th century BC.

Carians and Ionians had been intermarrying for generations but a Carian state persisted until a coalition of Ionian cities defeated it and divided its lands among them. In view of the rising Persian threat, they decided to continue the coalition as the Ionian League, building a new religious and political center at Melia.

Delegates ( theoroi ) of the league gathered to celebrate the Panionia , a religious festival and games ( panegyris ) dedicated to Poseidon Heliconius at the sanctuary of Poseidon called the Panionium . The Ionians (who had amalgamated with the Carians) had decided to continue the worship of Poseidon. Eventually, a new temple to the god was erected about 540 BC. (Its ruins and the location of Melia were part of the Lohmann et al. discoveries of 2004; prior to then, other theories of the location had been prevalent.) See also [ edit ] Amphictyonic League List of ancient Greek alliances Ionia (satrapy) Ionian Revolt Notes [ edit ] ^ Hallmannsecker 2022 , pp. 66, 109–111.

^ "Recent Finds in Archaeology: Panionion Sanctuary Discovered in Southwest Turkey" .

Athena Review .

4 (2): 10– 11. 2005. Archived from the original on 2012-03-23 . Retrieved 2008-02-02 .

^ Herodotus.

The Histories , 1.142 .

^ Hallmannsecker 2022 , pp. 67–68.

^ Hallmannsecker 2022 , pp. 66–70.

References [ edit ] Bean, George E. (1979).

Aegean Turkey . London: Ernest Benn.

ISBN 0-510-03200-1 .

Hallmannsecker, Martin (2022).

Roman Ionia: Constructions of Cultural Identity in Western Asia Minor . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-009-15018-7 .

Herrmann, Peter (2002). "Das Koinon ton Ionon unter römischer Herrschaft". In Ehrhardt, N.; Günther, L.-M. (eds.).

Widerstand, Anpassung, Integration: die griechische Staatenwelt und Rom. Festschrift für Jürgen Deininger zum 65. Geburtstag (in German). Stuttgart: Steiner. pp.

223– 242.

ISBN 9783515079112 .

Herodotus ; Histories , A. D. Godley (translator), Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1920; ISBN 0-674-99133-8 .

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Ionian League at Wikimedia Commons v t e Ionian League Chios Clazomenae Colophon Ephesus Erythrae Lebedus Miletus Myus Phocaea Priene Samos Teos v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ionian_League&oldid=1288800240 " Categories : Ionian League Society of ancient Greece Ancient Smyrna 7th-century BC establishments in Greece Ancient Anatolia Greek city-state federations Former confederations Roman Anatolia 3rd-century disestablishments in the Roman Empire Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 20:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ionian League 20 languages Add topic

