Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Basic meaning as metaphor 2 In epistemology 3 In metaphysics 4 In metahistory 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Trope (philosophy) 8 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Português Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Nominalism This article is about the philosophical term "trope". For other uses, see Trope .

Trope denotes figurative and metaphorical language and one which has been used in various technical senses. The term trope derives from the Greek τρόπος ( tropos ), "a turn, a change", [ 1 ] related to the root of the verb τρέπειν ( trepein ), "to turn, to direct, to alter, to change"; [ 2 ] this means that the term is used metaphorically to denote, among other things, metaphorical language.

The term is also used in technical senses, which do not always correspond to its linguistic origin. Its meaning has to be judged from the context , some of which are given below.

Basic meaning as metaphor [ edit ] Here a trope is a figurative and metaphorical use of a word or a phrase. The verb to trope means then to make a trope.

In epistemology [ edit ] Main article: Pyrrhonism A trope or "mode" refers to skeptical stock arguments or "ways of refuting dogmatism ." [ 3 ] There are two sets of these tropes: the ten modes of Aenesidemus and the five modes of Agrippa .

In metaphysics [ edit ] See also: Nominalism § Varieties Trope theory (or trope nominalism ) in metaphysics is a version of nominalism . Here, a trope is a particular instance of a property, like the redness of a particular rose, or the specific nuance of green of a specific individual leaf. Trope theories assume that universals are unnecessary. This use of the term goes back to D. C. Williams (1953). The basic problem has been discussed previously in philosophy without using the term "trope". The following is a brief background: The basic problem is the problem of universals . One part of the problem of universals is determining what it is for two tokens (or separate instances of something) to be of the same type. How different things can be the same. The arguments are complex, and involve semantics , metaphysics and epistemology .

One classical solution is that of realism as found in the middle period of Plato 's philosophy, with the Republic as a crowning work. According to this solution there are ideas or forms for any property. These forms exist timelessly as singular, perfect individuals in a metaphysical (timeless, supra-sensible) world of their own. They correspond to what is later called " universals ". Somehow the form of a specific color creates many secondary images of itself, as when a prototype is used to make copies or an object casts several shadows. Expressed more abstractly, the individual colour-instances (the green of a leaf, the similar green of a frog) all partake in the same idea of green. In Plato the theory of forms is related to his theses about innate knowledge . In Phaedo the turn of the argument is that we cannot learn from experience what similarity is through abstraction , but must possess it in an innate form before we have any experience ( Phaedo 74a–75d).

Nevertheless, Plato in the Parmenides dialogue himself formulated several problems for his view. One is: How the idea can, being single, nevertheless be present in a multitude of separate instances without being split apart.

The other solution is that of nominalism . Here the thesis is that universals such as the ideas or forms of Plato are unnecessary in an explanation of language, thought and the world. Only single individuals are real, but they can be grouped together by a human observer through their similarities. Nominalists are usually empiricists .

George Berkeley , for example, argued against universals or Abstract objects using nominalistic arguments. He used the term idea to denote specific perceptions of an atomistic nature. They could be grouped through similarities or one could take a specific instance, for example, the green hue of a frog one is looking at now, as a kind of paradigm case or prototype, and regard everything that was similar to it as belonging to the same type or category. One attraction of the nominalistic program is that if it can be carried out it solves Plato's problem in Parmenides , since the need for a single idea or form or universal green then vanishes and it can be expunged through Occam's razor , i.e. the rule that, other things being equal, one should not multiply explanatory entities beyond necessity.

Bertrand Russell (1912, chapter IX) argued against Berkeley and took the same basic position as Plato. His argument was basically one against any form of nominalism. It says, briefly, that if we introduce several instances of green as separate individuals, we nevertheless have to accept that the reason that we group them together is because they are similar. Therefore, we must presume at least one true universal, that of similarity.

Two popular recent solutions to the problem of universals, as it relates to the possibility of entities existing in multiple locations at the same time, are as follows.

David Armstrong , a prominent Australian philosopher, argues, that there are instantiated universals, like Russell and the middle Plato. An instantiated universal is a property (such as being green) that can exist in multiple locations at the same time. Going back to the problem of universals, for six different objects to all be green would be for each object to instantiate the universal green. The very same, identical universal green, would be wholly located at each green object. To be even more specific, if a frog and a leaf are the same shade of green, the green of the frog and the green of the leaf are one and the same entity (qua green-ness), which happens to be multiply located.

D. C. Williams and Keith Campbell , among others, reject instantiated universals in favor of tropes. A trope is a property (such as being green) that can only exist in one location at one time. Trope theorists explain what it is for two tokens (individual instances) to be of the same type in terms of resemblance. As an example, for six different objects to all be green would be for each object to have its own distinct green trope. Each green trope would be a different entity from the other green tropes, but they would resemble each other and would all be taken to be green because of their resemblance.

In the phenomenological tradition, a metaphysical doctrine embracing both tropes and the objects on which the tropes depend was elaborated by Edmund Husserl in his Logical Investigations (1900–01), as part of what Husserl called " formal ontology ". Husserl's trope theory (" theory of moments " in his terminology; German : Momente ) in this respect were used as the basis for the theory of truthmaking put forward by analytic philosophers Kevin Mulligan , Peter Simons and Barry Smith in "Truth-Makers" (1984).

[ 4 ] According to this theory, it is tropes — including both individual qualities and events — that serve as the truthmakers for true atomic sentences such as "John is hot" or "Mary is loved by John" or "John kicked Bill".

In metahistory [ edit ] The use of tropes has been extended from a linguistic usage to the field of metahistory by, among other theorists, Hayden White in his Metahistory (1973).

Metahistorical tropes are generally understood to be styles of discourse — rather than figures of style — underlying the historian's writing of history. They are historically determined in as much as the historiography of every period is defined by a specific type of trope.

For Hayden White, tropes historically unfolded in this sequence: metaphor , metonymy , synecdoche , and finally, irony .

See also [ edit ] Trope (disambiguation) References [ edit ] ^ "Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, An Intermediate Greek-English Lexicon, τάβλα , τροπέω , τρόπος" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu .

^ "trope" , Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary , 2009 , retrieved 2009-10-16 ^ Weiner, E. S. C.; Simpson, J. A. (1992), The Compact Oxford English Dictionary , New York: Clarendon Press, p. 581, ISBN 0-19-861258-3 ^ Mulligan, K., Simons, P. M. and Smith B., " Truth-Makers ", Philosophy and Phenomenological Research , 44 (1984), 287–321.

Sources [ edit ] Costa, Claudio (2018). "Trope Theory and the Unsustainable Lightness of Being", in Philosophical Semantics: Reintegrating Theoretical Philosophy , Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.

Quine, W. V. O.

(1961). "On What There is", in From a Logical Point of View , 2nd ed. N.Y., Harper and Row.

Russell, Bertrand (1912).

The Problems of Philosophy , Oxford University Press.

White, Hayden (1973).

Metahistory , Johns Hopkins University Press.

Williams, D. C.

(1953). "On the Elements of Being: I.", Review of Metaphysics , 7(1), pp. 3–18.

Williams, D. C. (1953). "On the Elements of Being: II.", Review of Metaphysics , 7(2), pp. 171–92.

External links [ edit ] Maurin, Anna-Sofia.

"Tropes" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Rodriguez-Pereyra, Gonzalo.

"Nominalism in Metaphysics" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Universals entry by Mary C. MacLeod and Eric M. Rubenstein in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐dwcdk
Cached time: 20250814225519
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.273 seconds
Real time usage: 0.350 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 722/1000000
Revision size: 10598/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 10004/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 457/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 16621/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.200/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14719905/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  324.649      1 -total
 36.61%  118.861      1 Template:Langx
 28.30%   91.878      1 Template:Reflist
 21.00%   68.162      1 Template:Cite_web
 20.12%   65.312      1 Template:Short_description
 11.12%   36.098      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.11%   19.844      1 Template:About
  5.70%   18.503      3 Template:Main_other
  5.15%   16.727      1 Template:SDcat
  5.09%   16.534      2 Template:Cite_SEP Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8376433:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814225519 and revision id 1283204078. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trope_(philosophy)&oldid=1283204078 " Categories : Tropes Concepts in epistemology Concepts in metaphysics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 31 March 2025, at 01:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trope (philosophy) 8 languages Add topic

