Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Equipment 2 Dogs 3 Location 4 References Toggle the table of contents Upland hunting Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Method of bird hunting Upland hunting is an American term for a form of bird hunting (fowling) in which the hunter pursues upland birds including quail , pheasant , grouse , woodcock , prairie chicken , chukar , grey partridge , and other landfowls .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Unlike aquatic and semiaquatic bird species ( waterfowls and shorebirds ), upland birds are terrestrial and tend to be found strictly on the dry lands above the high mark of waterbodies , often hidden in heavy groundcover , so hunters generally employ the use of gun dogs to locate, expose and retrieve game . The average group consists of 2-4 hunters with 1-2 dogs.

Depending upon their method of work, some dogs ( pointers and setters ) are tasked to detect game, and some ( spaniels ) to purposefully startle ("flush") game.  When the birds are forced to flee out of concealment and into the open, either by the hunter or the dog, the hunter then attempts to shoot down the birds on the wing , also known as wingshooting .  Once downed, the game is usually either incapacitated or immobilized, and is then retrieved with a dog ( retrievers ) or by the hunter himself.

Equipment [ edit ] Upland hunters use all types of shotguns from break-action single-shots to semi-automatics , calibered from .410 bore through to 12-gauge . The quintessential shotgun for upland hunting is a double-barrel shotgun in a smaller gauge such as a 16-, 20- or 28-gauge, using small round pellets known as birdshots , which are also commonly used in duck hunting .

Hunters often wear specialized vests with external hardpoints and/or hooks to carry collected games, though there is a trend toward more functional technical daypacks specifically designed for the demands of more rigorous upland hunting in remote areas. In North America some states such as Alabama and Arkansas require upland hunters to wear blaze orange clothing for safety.

[ 3 ] Dogs [ edit ] Upland hunters work specially trained gun dogs to find game.

Spaniels and pointing breeds are used most often, though retrievers are worked with considerable success when hunting pheasant in many areas.

Upland hunters traditionally walk when finding game, though quail hunters in the southern states often employ buggies or vehicles due to the sparseness of game. Because of the large area that must be covered in order to find bobwhite quail , many hunters employ specially designed hunting buggies to haul gears and kennels for fresh dogs. On the other hand, chukar and grey partridge hunters of much of the western regions will hunt with one or two dogs on the ground for the duration of the hunt, hiking 8+ miles of steep mountainous terrain in a single hunt with well-conditioned dogs.

Location [ edit ] Pheasant hunting , the most popular form of upland hunting takes place primarily in open fields which provides cover for birds.  Upland birds can be hunted in a wide variety of habitats from deserts to high mountain elevations. This variety of locations is part of what makes upland hunting so popular. Some states such as South Dakota derive a significant portion of their revenue from upland hunters who travel into the state to take advantage of the ideal fauna .  Numerous pheasant hunting lodges are prevalent throughout South Dakota, most of them in the eastern half of the state.

Upland birds are found throughout the United States and much of the world, although it is most popular (by number of participants) in the United States. There are two different ways that hunters can approach upland hunting, the more challenging way is hunting wild birds in less populated parts of the country especially the Midwest ; the second way is hunting farmed birds.

Popular game birds by region in the United States: Northeast — ruffed grouse and American woodcock Southeast — bobwhite quail and American woodcock Midwest / Prairie — ring-necked pheasant , greater prairie chicken , huns and sharp-tailed grouse North Woods — ruffed grouse and American woodcock Intermountain West — chukar partridge , dusky grouse , huns , sage-grouse , sharp-tailed grouse, and white-tailed ptarmigan Southwestern United States — quail References [ edit ] ^ "Upland Game Hunting" . Retrieved September 10, 2011 .

^ "Hunting" .

^ "Hunter Orange Requirements" . Archived from the original on November 3, 2016 . Retrieved November 1, 2016 .

v t e Game animals and shooting in North America Game birds Bobwhite quail Chukar Hungarian partridge Greater prairie-chicken Mourning dove Ring-necked pheasant Ptarmigan Ruffed grouse Sharp-tailed grouse Snipe (common snipe) Spruce grouse Turkey Woodcock Waterfowl hunters Waterfowl Black duck Canada goose Canvasback Gadwall Greater scaup Lesser scaup Mallard Northern pintail Redhead Ross's goose Snow goose Wood duck Big game Bighorn sheep Black bear Razorback Brown bear Bison (buffalo) Caribou Cougar (mountain lion) Elk Moose White-tailed deer Wolf Mountain goat Mule deer Pronghorn Muskox Dall sheep Polar bear Whales Other quarry American alligator Badger Bobcat Coyote Fox squirrel Gray fox Gray squirrel Opossum Rabbit Raccoon Red fox Snowshoe hare See also Bear hunting Big-game hunting Bison hunting Deer hunting Fox hunting Waterfowl hunting Whaling Fishing Wolf hunting Upland hunting v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Upland_hunting&oldid=1305977127 " Categories : Fowling Hunting in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2024 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 05:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Upland hunting Add languages Add topic

