Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission overview 2 Objectives 3 Proposed development 4 Science instruments Toggle Science instruments subsection 4.1 Science team members 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Oceanus (Titan orbiter) 3 languages Français 한국어 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2017 proposed NASA Triton orbiter space probe This article is about the Titan orbiter. For the Uranus orbiter, see Oceanus (Uranus orbiter) .

Oceanus Overview Mission type Titan orbiter Operator NASA Spacecraft properties Manufacturer Lockheed Martin Solar array manufacturer Orbital ATK Mission management NASA / JPL Start of mission Expected flight time 10 years Science operations 4 years Instruments Mass Spectrometer Infrared Camera Radar Altimeter Radio Science New Frontiers Program Oceanus is a NASA/JPL orbiter mission concept proposed in 2017 for the New Frontiers mission #4, but it was not selected for development. If selected at some future opportunity, Oceanus would travel to Saturn's moon Titan to assess its habitability .

[ 1 ] Studying Titan would help understand the early Earth and exoplanets which orbit other stars. The mission is named after Oceanus , the Greek god of oceans.

Mission overview [ edit ] Titan is a world of two oceans. One ocean is on the surface and consists of mainly liquid methane ( CH 4 ) and ethane ( C 2 H 6 ). The second ocean is under the surface and is made up of brine . Titan is a moon of Saturn but Titan is a large moon that is comparable in size to many planets. Titan is about the size of Mercury and about 40% the size of Earth.  Ancient Earth may have had a methane-rich atmosphere with a reducing chemistry like Titan does today. By observing Titan's organic processes at work, Oceanus could help understand the role of organic haze in the early Earth.

[ 2 ] Oceanus would explore Titan and help understand habitability across the Universe.

Oceanus was proposed to launch in February 2024 with a 10-year flight time to Titan. The spacecraft would spend two years orbiting Saturn and flying by Titan which would be followed by two years in a circular Titan orbit. The spacecraft would be powered by solar panels . A small lake probe may also be considered for this mission.

[ 3 ] Methane clouds on the surface of Titan Abiotic organic synthesis occurs high in Titan's atmosphere, and a vast water ocean lies far beneath the icy crust, setting up possible chemistry and environment for abiogenesis and potential habitable niches for microorganisms.

Oceanus would conduct its science investigations with a multistage mass spectrometer , an infrared camera that sees through the atmosphere, [ 1 ] and a radar altimeter with great vertical resolution.

Oceanus is led by Christophe Sotin, the chief scientist for Solar System exploration at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California.

[ 4 ] Objectives [ edit ] Infrared view of Titan Oceanus objectives are to reveal Titan's organic chemistry , geology, gravity, topography, collect 3D reconnaissance data, catalog the organics and determine where they may interact with liquid water.

[ 5 ] Titan has the basic ingredients for habitability: water, energy, and organic molecules. On a 4-year global exploration, Oceanus would characterize Titan's habitability globally, the photochemical synthesis of organics in the upper atmosphere, and determine places where they could potentially mix with liquid water.

Proposed development [ edit ] The mission would be managed by NASA / JPL . JPL would also build parts of the radar and camera, and provide a mass spectrometer. The spacecraft would be developed by Lockheed Martin and derived from their proven central core cylinder designs. This configuration has been successfully applied on Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter , Juno , MAVEN , and OSIRIS-REx . The spacecraft would use Ultraflex solar arrays made by Orbital ATK . The Italian Space Agency ( ASI ) and its contractor Thales would supply the digital portion of the radar altimeter and parts of the telecommunications system.

On 20 November 2017 NASA selected two other proposals for additional concept studies: Comet Astrobiology Exploration Sample Return (CAESAR), and Dragonfly ).

[ 6 ] Had Oceanus been selected, it would have launched in 2024.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Science instruments [ edit ] There are three science instruments on Oceanus plus radio science measurements: T-Mass is a multistage quadrupole ion-trap mass spectrometer which would investigate organics in the Titan atmosphere.

T-Cam is an infrared camera that would see through the infrared windows in Titan's atmosphere to be able to image Titan surface despite the atmospheric haze.

T-Alt is a radar altimeter which would help to establish Titan's topography and, jointly with radio science observations, would allow accurate ocean measurements. T-Alt, jointly with T-Cam, will allow the scientists to assess how the organic material is transported on the surface and where are the possible locations where mixing between water and organics could take place.

Science team members [ edit ] The Principal Investigator of the mission is Christophe Sotin (JPL), his Deputy is Alexander Hayes (Cornell University), the Project Scientist is Michael Malaska (JPL) and the legacy Project Scientist is Julie Castillo-Rogez. The Science Team come from JH APL, Lockheed Martin, JPL, ASI, Caltech, Cornell University, MIT, SWRI, University of Arizona, USGS, PSI, UCSC, University of Idaho, and several foreign universities.

See also [ edit ] Lakes of Titan Explorer of Enceladus and Titan (E 2 T) Journey to Enceladus and Titan (JET) Titan Lake In-situ Sampling Propelled Explorer (TALISE) Titan Mare Explorer References [ edit ] ^ a b Sotin, C., Hayes, A., Malaska, M., Nimmo, F., Trainer, M. D., Tortora, P.. (2017).

"OCEANUS: A New Frontiers orbiter to study Titan’s potential habitability." 19th EGU General Assembly, EGU2017, proceedings from the conference held 23–28 April 2017 in Vienna, Austria., p.10958 ^ Arney, G., Meadows, V., Domagal-Goldman, S., Deming, D., Robinson, T. D., Tovar, G., Wolf, E., and Schwieterman, E. (2016).

"Pale orange dots: The impact of organic haze on the habitability and detectability of earthlike exoplanets." In AAS/Division for Planetary Sciences Meeting Abstracts, volume 48 ^ Short Course on Ocean Worlds, International Planetary Probe Workshop, The Hague, Netherlands, June 10–11, 2017 ^ Chang, Kenneth (15 September 2017).

"Back to Saturn? Five Missions Proposed to Follow Cassini" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2017-09-18 .

^ Tortora, P., Zannoni, M., Nimmo, F., Mazarico, E., Iess, L., Sotin, C., Hayes, A., Malaska, M.  (2017) “Titan gravity investigation with the Oceanus mission.” 19th EGU General Assembly, EGU2017, proceedings from the conference held 23–28 April 2017 in Vienna, Austria., p.17876 ^ Glowatz, Elana (20 December 2017).

"NASA's New Frontier Mission Will Search For Alien Life Or Reveal The Solar System's History" .

IB Times .

^ Foust, Jeff (January 8, 2016).

"NASA Expands Frontiers of Next New Frontiers Competition" .

Space News . Retrieved January 20, 2016 .

^ Clark, Stephen (September 7, 2016).

"NASA official says new mission selections on track despite InSight woes" .

Spaceflight Now . Retrieved September 8, 2016 .

^ New Frontiers fourth announcement of opportunity . NASA, January 6, 2016.

External links [ edit ] Landing on Titan: Pictures from Huygens Probe on Saturn Moon NASA Cassini Mission Page NASA Gets Last Close Look at This Eerie Alien Moon Oceanus Distributed Sensing on Titan v t e NASA Planetary Missions Program Office Discovery program Missions Main NEAR Shoemaker Mars Pathfinder Lunar Prospector Stardust Genesis CONTOUR † MESSENGER Deep Impact Dawn Kepler GRAIL InSight Lucy Psyche DAVINCI VERITAS Opportunity ASPERA-3 EPOXI NExT Moon Mineralogy Mapper Strofio MEGANE Proposals Finalists Mission 12 Comet Hopper Titan Mare Explorer Mission 13 and 14 NEOCam Mission 15 and 16 Io Volcano Observer Trident Candidates Enceladus Life Finder Icebreaker Life ISOCHRON JET LIFE MANTIS Mars Geyser Hopper Moon Diver PADME Phobos Surveyor Whipple New Frontiers program Missions New Horizons Juno OSIRIS-REx Dragonfly Proposals Finalists Mission 2 MoonRise Mission 3 MoonRise SAGE Mission 4 CAESAR Candidates CONDOR CORSAIR ELF ELSAH Oceanus SPRITE VICI VISAGE VOX Solar System Exploration program Missions DART JUICE instruments Europa Clipper Underline indicates active current missions Italics indicate missions yet to launch Symbol † indicates failure en route or before intended mission data returned v t e Titan Atmosphere Climate Life Lakes and seas Seas Kraken Mare Ligeia Mare Punga Mare Lakes Abaya Lacus Bolsena Lacus Feia Lacus Hammar Lacus Jingpo Lacus Kivu Lacus Koitere Lacus Ladoga Lacus Mackay Lacus Müggel Lacus Neagh Lacus Ontario Lacus Sionascaig Lacus Sotonera Lacus Albano Lacus Rivers Elivagar Flumina Vid Flumina Dry lakes Eyre Lacuna Ngami Lacuna Woytchugga Lacuna Features Adiri Arrakis Planitia Dilmun Doom Mons Erebor Mons Ganesa Macula Guabonito Irensaga Montes Mayda Insula Menrva Mezzoramia Mindolluin Montes Misty Montes Mithrim Montes Perkunas Virgae Selk Shangri-La Shikoku Facula Sinlap Sotra Patera Taniquetil Montes Tsegihi Tui Regio Xanadu Exploration Past Pioneer program Pioneer 11 Voyager program Voyager 1 Voyager 2 Cassini–Huygens Huygens Planned and proposed Dragonfly (2028) AVIATR Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Journey to Enceladus and Titan TALISE Titan Mare Explorer Titan Submarine Titan Saturn System Mission Titan Winged Aerobot Oceanus Related Colonization of Titan In fiction In mythology v t e Spacecraft missions to Saturn Past Flybys Pioneer 11 Voyager 1 Voyager 2 Orbiters Cassini–Huygens timeline retirement Landers Huygens (on Titan) Planned Dragonfly (to Titan, 2028) Proposed Saturn , rings Kronos Saturn Atmospheric Entry Probe SPRITE Titan Saturn System Mission Enceladus Enceladus Orbilander Breakthrough Enceladus mission Enceladus Life Finder Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Explorer Life Investigation For Enceladus Titan AVIATR Oceanus TALISE Titan Mare Explorer Titan Submarine Several moons Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Journey to Enceladus and Titan There are no ongoing missions to Saturn v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oceanus_(Titan_orbiter)&oldid=1250832362 " Categories : Missions to Saturn Titan (moon) New Frontiers program proposals Proposed NASA space probes Proposed astrobiology space missions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 October 2024, at 19:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Oceanus (Titan orbiter) 3 languages Add topic

