Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Prehistory 2 The struggle for the right to vote Toggle The struggle for the right to vote subsection 2.1 First campaign for women's rights 2.2 Working group for women 2.3 Action Sleeping Beauty (AD) 2.4 Men for women's suffrage (MfdF) 3 Unsuccessful referendums Toggle Unsuccessful referendums subsection 3.1 Popular vote in 1971 3.2 Referendum 1973 4 Right to vote 5 The successful 3rd men's vote from 1984 6 Social impact 7 Women in political office 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Women's suffrage in Liechtenstein 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Women's suffrage in Liechtenstein" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(October 2020) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the German article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,846 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Frauenstimmrecht in Liechtenstein]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Frauenstimmrecht in Liechtenstein}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Women's suffrage in Liechtenstein was introduced on 1 July 1984 (41 years ago) ( 1984-07-01 ) , after the 1984 Liechtenstein women's suffrage referendum .

[ 1 ] This was the last nation in Europe to introduce this right.

Prehistory [ edit ] In the early modern period , the right to have a say and co-determination in public life for men and women were linked to ownership and tax liability. These rights were not recorded in writing but were exercised as self-government or common law . In very rural Liechtenstein , the community was organized at the community level. In the 19th century, however, these rights were lost due to new legislation. In the first state constitution, which was enacted in the Principality of Liechtenstein in 1818 based on the German Federal Act during the Congress of Vienna , the right to vote was only provided for men. The only exception was for widows when they were the head of the household.

In 1914, a brief message about the struggle of the suffragettes in England appeared for the first time in a Liechtenstein newspaper. In the eleven lines, the allegedly caused material damage by the "voting rights activists" was quantified. Although the active and passive right to vote for women was introduced in both Germany and Austria in 1918, the discussions in the Liechtenstein Parliament at that time were inconclusive. At that time it was unseemly for Liechtenstein women to appear in public – not even in writing. Women were certainly present in everyday life, but they had to correspond to a certain image of women. This was Catholic-conservative and characterized by motherliness and caring and left no room for participation in public space. When the state constitution, introduced in 1921, contained universal suffrage for men only, there was no public discussion about it.

Before the state elections in 1957, a party-affiliated state newspaper appealed to women to exercise their influence over the votes of their male family members, but their political equality was not seriously discussed. A short time later, in 1959, the first Swiss women's suffrage was held unsuccessfully and without any particular observation in the Liechtenstein press.

It was not until the mid-1960s that the issue of women's suffrage became topical again in Liechtenstein – as in Switzerland – in connection with other political developments.

In October 1965, Liechtenstein founded a youth parliament to which both men and women between the ages of 16 and 30 were allowed to belong. In the first year, the parliament had 123 members, but when it was dissolved in 1969 only 39. Among other things, the introduction of women's suffrage was also discussed here. Young Liechtensteiners, including the girl scouts, campaigned for women emancipatory issues.

Two attempts to introduce women’s right to vote and to vote based on a state parliament resolution were made in 1965 by the state parliament member and Vaduz building contractor Roman Gassner , and in 1968 by the state parliament member and lawyer Ernst Büchel . Both men were members of a different long-established political party and had the support of the state parliament member Otto Schaedler and the then head of government Gerard Batliner . Despite the support in principle, there was disagreement at the time about the correct political approach: a men's vote or a decision by the state parliament.

On 4 July 1968, women were allowed to take part in a referendum in the form of a consultative vote and, with a turnout of 61%, voted for their voting rights with a narrow majority of 50.5%. This opinion poll was decided negatively due to the clear rejection of the men (60.2%; participation 56%) with a rejection rate of 54.5%.

From 1969 onwards, Prince Franz-Josef II announced his support for the introduction of women's suffrage and voting rights several times, even if he did nothing politically.

The struggle for the right to vote [ edit ] First campaign for women's rights [ edit ] As a result of the defeat in 1968, a " Committee for Women's Suffrage " was founded on 7 November 1969. The main initiators Bernadette Brunhart (née Biedermann) and Elfriede Winiger (née Seger) were working as secretaries in the state administration at the time. The committee tried to promote a positive change through discussion evenings and active participation in the political parties. The prevailing image of women in Liechtenstein, which emphasizes tradition and which was based on feminine charm and need for help, continued to serve as a yardstick. Women in Liechtenstein initially kept their distance from fighting in the style of the internationally known suffragettes. In the public discussion at that time, the legal position and social role of "married foreigners" came up in the context of a broader discussion about the "foreign infiltration" of the country.

Working group for women [ edit ] On the occasion of the negative outcome of the plebiscite of 1971, the "Working Group for Women" was formed, a non-partisan organization that only dissolved in 1986 in favour of organizations founded later and in 1984 after political equality had been achieved.

The goal of "achieving meaningful equality" expressed in the later statutes of the association reflects the cautious approach of the working group. There was disagreement as to whether the women should conduct active public relations work or rather stay in the background and leave political actions to the parties.

Action Sleeping Beauty (AD) [ edit ] Eight years after the negative outcome of the second referendum and after the introduction of women's suffrage at the community level in only two of Liechtenstein's eleven communities, Regina Marxer and Barbara Rheinberger launched the Sleeping Beauty Campaign in May 1981.

Men for women's suffrage (MfdF) [ edit ] In 1982 "Aktion Dornröschen" received important support from initially 12 men who had accepted a personal invitation to take an active part in the group's public campaigns.

Unsuccessful referendums [ edit ] Popular vote in 1971 [ edit ] On 5 October 1970, the Progressive Citizens' Party (FBP) launched a constitutional initiative, and on 17 December 1970 the introduction of women's rights to vote and suffrage was unanimously decided in the state parliament. In February 1971, however, this constitutional draft was narrowly rejected by the men entitled to vote in a referendum with a turnout of 85.9% with 1897 (51%) against 1816 votes (48.9%). Party-political rivalries between the FBP and the Fatherland Union (VU), which won the state elections for the first time in 1970, were cited as an explanation for this result, which deviated from the state parliament decision. The election results also showed that the majority of men in Liechtenstein were not yet ready to give up their electoral power and privileges.

Shortly afterwards, a small number of Liechtenstein women took to the streets for the first time to demonstrate for their rights. A few days later, the high school students marched through the main street of Vaduz, but were violently attacked and insulted by opponents of women's suffrage, some of whom uttered "Nazi ideas". Again the problem of xenophobia came to the fore.

Almost at the same time in February 1971 in Switzerland, through a referendum in which only male voters were allowed to participate, and with over 65% of the votes, women’s right to vote was introduced in Switzerland. Thus, Liechtenstein was the very last state in Europe that denied women equal political rights.

Referendum 1973 [ edit ] From 1972 onwards, representatives of the newly formed "Working Group for Women" met with representatives from both parliamentary groups (FBP and VU) as well as the youth of the party. A renewed attempt at the referendum was supported at this political level. However, there was also a counter-movement that counteracted it with leaflets. However, the working group and its allies had made a conscious decision not to conduct a publicity campaign with posters.

On 19 October 1972 an application for the introduction of women's suffrage was submitted jointly by the FBP and VU in the state parliament. In particular, the foreign policy dimensions of the topic were brought up there, because Liechtenstein, as a small state, only had observer status (until 1978) at the Council of Europe and was not yet a member of the United Nations. The fact that these political and economic aspects played a role for the government of the country was clearly stated by Government Councillor Walter Oehry in the daily newspaper Liechtensteiner Vaterland on 8 February 1973, just one day before the vote: "I think most of them have recognized that women's suffrage is not a women's whim, but that a lot depends on it for our country. If we didn't have to look to the right and left, we might still be more indifferent to how the vote ends. But people no longer believe our attempts to portray us as a progressive state with a living democracy. That would be a serious setback for the reputation of our country in the world." - Walter Oehry : Liechtensteiner Vaterland daily newspaper on February 8, 1973 The setback was evident after the vote in February 1973 with 55.9% of the vote (with a turnout of 86%) for the rejection of a corresponding constitutional law. With 451 no votes compared to the 81 no votes in 1971, the defeat was particularly severe and showed that a large number of Liechtensteiners were not yet ready to give up their traditional patriarchal attitudes. As in Switzerland, the strategy was then changed and political equality was sought on a smaller scale.

Right to vote [ edit ] On 7 July 1976, the state parliament authorized the state's eleven municipalities to vote on women's suffrage and, if necessary, to introduce it at the municipal level. It took a total of ten years before the last three municipalities followed the example of Vaduz on 20 April 1986. With votes in 1981 and 1984, the municipality of Schaan even needed two attempts.

Chronology of the introduction of women's suffrage at community level Date Community Yes votes Vote for no 17-19 September 1976 Vaduz 315 265 9 May 1980 Gamprin 90 62 23-25 October 1981 Schaan (rejected) 270 384 8 December 1983 Planken 34 15 11 December 1983 Ruggell 144 115 11 December 1983 Schellenberg 75 59 13-15 January 1984 Eschen 275 267 30 June-1 July 1984 Schaan 404 331 30 August-1 September 1985 Mauren 196 187 20 April 1986 Balzers 325 263 20 April 1986 Triesen 249 221 20 April 1986 Triesenberg 235 207 The successful 3rd men's vote from 1984 [ edit ] As in previous years, advocates of women's suffrage were divided over which course of action could lead to success. Representatives of the state parliament countered the argument of "Aktion Dornröschen" that the right to vote and to vote was a fundamental right by pointing out the necessary democratic process. The attempt to implement equality by law through a resolution of the state parliament was rejected with 7: 8 votes by the representatives of the state parliament in December 1983. While the opposition party FBP held on to the request for a state parliament resolution in April 1984, VU insisted on holding a men's vote. The president of the Landtag, Karlheinz Ritter (VU), even described the men's vote as a "deeply democratic decision".

The constitutional law passed by the state parliament on 11 April 1984, introducing women’s right to vote and suffrage was followed by a third male vote on 29 June and 1 July 1984. Although both parties advocated it, the result was modest: with 2370 votes in favour (51.3%) to 2251 votes against (48.7%) and a turnout of 86.2%, political equality at the state level was also achieved introduced a total difference of only 119 votes. The difference in votes in one of the two Liechtenstein constituencies, Unterland (which includes the municipalities of Ruggell, Schellenberg, Gamprin, Eschen and Mauren) was only three votes.

Social impact [ edit ] The introduction of voting rights for women was a partial success. It was not until 1992 that Article 31 of the constitution was paraphrased and explicitly stated that men and women have equal rights. An equality law was passed in 1999.

Women in political office [ edit ] After receiving the right to stand as a candidate, women had the option of going into active politics and holding office as elected representatives.

At the municipal level, three women were given municipal council seats in 1983 in the municipalities of Vaduz and Gamprin. In the municipality of Gamprin, Maria Marxer was the first woman in Liechtenstein to be elected head of the municipality in 1991.

In the first state parliament election after 1984, Emma Eigenmann was elected as the only woman in the then 15-member state parliament in 1986. In 1989 she was re-elected as the only female member of the now 25-member state parliament. From 1993 Renate Wohlwend and Ingrid Hassler-Gerner belonged to the Liechtenstein Parliament . Thus, the proportion of women in the state parliament was 8%. In the legislative period from 2009 to 2013, six women sat in the state parliament, the highest number so far. Since 2009, a woman has been elected vice president of the State Parliament in every legislative period.

As the highest legislative body, the state parliament has the task of proposing to the prince a five-person government (as an executive body). Until 2019, no woman had ever been appointed head of government. Since 1993, seven women have been in office among the four councillors of the respective governments. On 2 July 2019, Aurelia Frick , who had been a member of three governments since 2009, was withdrawn from office by the state parliament.

See also [ edit ] 1968 Liechtenstein referendums 1971 Liechtenstein women's suffrage referendum 1973 Liechtenstein referendums 1984 Liechtenstein women's suffrage referendum Komitée für das Frauenstimmrecht References [ edit ] ^ Thomas Ernst Wanger: Vom Frauenstudium zum Frauenwahlrecht in der Schweiz und in Liechtenstein. In: Internationaler Verein für Geschichte des Bodensees und seiner Umgebung (Hrsg.): Schriften des Vereins für Geschichte des Bodensees und seiner Umgebung. Band 122. Jan Thorbecke Verlag, Ostfildern 2004, ISBN 3-7995-1710-3 v t e Suffrage Basic topics Universal suffrage Right to run for office Age of candidacy banned Women Suffragette Women's liberation movement Men Black Youth Demeny voting Non-citizen Non-resident citizen One man, one vote Multiple citizenship Voting age Free and fair election Secret ballot Compulsory voting Disfranchisement Voter turnout Wasted vote By country Austria Australia 1902 Commonwealth Franchise Act aboriginal women Canada Chile Colombia Ecuador Hong Kong India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein Mexico New Zealand Spain (Civil War, Francoist) Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom women Cayman Islands Scotland Wales laws 1832 1918 1928 United States women African Americans Native Americans felons foreigners District of Columbia Puerto Rico states Constitutional amendments: 15th , 19th , 23rd , 24th , 26th Indian Citizenship Act 1965 Voting Rights Act Events International International Woman Suffrage Alliance conferences 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th Hong Kong Hong Kong 1 July marches 2014 Hong Kong protests 2019–2020 Hong Kong protests United Kingdom WSPU march (1906) Mud March (1907) Women's Sunday (1908) Black Friday (1910) Battle of Downing Street (1910) Women's Coronation Procession (1911) Great Pilgrimage (1913) Open Christmas Letter (1914) Suffragette bombing and arson campaign United States Seneca Falls Convention (1848) Declaration of Sentiments (1848) Rochester Convention (1848) Ohio Women's Convention (1850) Ohio Women's Convention (1851) National Women's Rights Convention (1850–1869) Trial of Susan B. Anthony (1872–1873) Suffrage Hikes (1912–1914) Woman Suffrage Procession (1913) Suffrage Torch Suffrage Special (1916) Silent Sentinels (1917–1919) Night of Terror Prison Special 1920 United States presidential election "Give Us the Ballot" (1957) Freedom Summer (1964) Selma to Montgomery marches (1965) Women (memorials) List of suffragists and suffragettes Timeline of women's suffrage US in majority-Muslim countries Historiography of the Suffragettes Women's suffrage organizations and publications Women's rights activists Leser v. Garnett Belmont–Paul Monument Rise up, Women (Emmeline Pankhurst statue) Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst Memorial Elizabeth Cady Stanton statue Suffragette Memorial Portrait Monument Women's Rights Pioneers Monument Forward statue Kate Sheppard National Memorial Millicent Fawcett statue Great Petition (2008 sculpture) Centenary of Women's Suffrage Commemorative Fountain Resilience Turning Point Suffragist Memorial Eagle House Pankhurst Centre Paulsdale Suffragette Handkerchief Holloway banner Holloway brooch Holloway Jingles Hunger Strike Medal Justice Bell Suffrage jewellery Suffragette penny Suffrage Oak Women's Rights National Historical Park Women's Suffrage National Monument International Women's Day Susan B. Anthony Day Women's Equality Day Popular culture " The Women's Marseillaise " "The March of the Women" (1910 song) The Mother of Us All (1947 opera) "Sister Suffragette" (1964 song) Suffrage plays Women's suffrage in film Votes for Women (1912 film) Shoulder to Shoulder (1974 series) Not for Ourselves Alone (1999 documentary) Iron Jawed Angels (2004 film) Up the Women (2013 sitcom) Selma (2014 film) Suffragette (2015 film) Sylvia (2018 musical) Suffs (2022 musical) Lioness (upcoming film) Susan B. Anthony dollar National Voting Rights Museum (US) New Zealand ten-dollar note Women's Suffrage Centennial silver dollar (2020 U.S. commemorative) 2020 US ten-dollar bill Art in the women's suffrage movement in the United States Music and women's suffrage in the United States Portals : Feminism Politics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Women%27s_suffrage_in_Liechtenstein&oldid=1287340782 " Categories : Women's suffrage in Liechtenstein Women's rights in Liechtenstein Electoral reform in Liechtenstein Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Use dmy dates from November 2021 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 25 April 2025, at 16:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Women's suffrage in Liechtenstein 1 language Add topic

