Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Career 2 Publications 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Edward Francis Kelly Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American professor Edward Francis Kelly Occupation Neuroscientist Edward Francis Kelly is an American neuroscientist and parapsychologist. He is a Research Professor in the Division of Perceptual Studies at the University of Virginia School of Medicine .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Kelly's research interests include cognitive neuroscience and mind–body dualism , with a focus on phenomena (for example, from parapsychology and the paranormal ) that challenge the current neuroscientific view of mind.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Among his interests are intensive neuroimaging studies of persons in various kinds of altered states of consciousness .

[ 1 ] Kelly has published peer-reviewed works in which he argues for a break from the dominant physicalist view of human mind and nature for a strong dualistic account of mind-brain problem which argues for post mortem survival of consciousness, drawing upon evidence from psychical research such as mystical experience , near-death experience and stigmata . He served as the lead author for the two books Irreducible Mind and Beyond Physicalism .

[ 4 ] Career [ edit ] After completing his doctoral degree, Kelly spent more than fifteen years working in parapsychology nearly full time, first at J. B. Rhine’s Institute for Parapsychology in Durham, North Carolina, then (for ten years) through the Department of Electrical Engineering at Duke University , and finally through the Spring Creek Institute, a nonprofit research institute in Chapel Hill, North Carolina.

[ 5 ] During this time he published various papers on experimental, methodological, and theoretical topics in parapsychology, as well as a book, Computer Recognition of English Word Senses (with P. J. Stone).

[ 5 ] From 1988 to 2002 he worked with a large neuroscience group at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , conducting EEG and fMRI studies of human somatosensory cortical adaptation to natural tactile stimuli.

[ 5 ] In 2002 he once again took up full-time psychical research.

[ 5 ] By 2018 he had returned to his central long-term research interest—the application of modern functional neuroimaging methods to detailed psychophysiological studies of altered states of consciousness and psi in exceptional subjects.

[ 5 ] He served for several years as the co-director of the Westphal Neuroimaging Laboratory at the University of Virginia.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In June of 2024 Jim B. Tucker , director of the University's Division of Perceptual Studies, announced that in July Kelly and his colleague Ross Dunseath would step down as co-directors of the laboratory, which they had been instrumental in founding, in favor of a successor, though they would continue to actively participate in the Division's research.

[ 7 ] Publications [ edit ] In 2007, Kelly, along with his wife, Emily Williams Kelly, and Adam Crabtree, Alan Gauld , Michael Grosso, and Bruce Greyson , published a book titled Irreducible Mind , in which they attempt to bridge contemporary cognitive psychology and mainstream neuroscience with  "rogue phenomena", which the authors argue exist in near-death experiences , psychophysiological influence, automatism , memory, genius, and mystical states. They argue for a dualist interpretation of the mind-brain relation in which the brain only acts as a "filter" or "transmitter" of consciousness, which survives death of the body.

In 2015, Kelly, Adam Crabtree, and Paul Marshall published a more theoretical sequel to Irreducible Mind , titled Beyond Physicalism, in which they seek to understand how the world must be constituted so that the empirical phenomena catalogued in Irreducible Mind would be possible.

Kelly and Marshall and colleagues have also published a third book, Consciousness Unbound, building on earlier works.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "Stories by Edward F. Kelly" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 2024-05-17 .

^ a b "Ed Kelly" .

University of Virginia School of Medicine . 2024.

^ Ash, Mitchell G; Gundlach, Horst; Sturm, Thomas (2010). "Reviewed Work: Irreducible Mind: Toward a Psychology for the 21st Century by Edward F. Kelly, Emily Williams Kelly, Adam Crabtree, Alan Gauld, Michael Grosso, and Bruce Greyson".

The American Journal of Psychology .

123 (2): 246– 250.

doi : 10.5406/amerjpsyc.123.2.0246 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Stories by Edward F. Kelly" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 2024-05-17 .

^ a b c d e f Presti, David E., ed. (2018).

Mind beyond Brain: Buddhism, Science, and the Paranormal . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-18956-9 .

, pp. 97‒98 ^ "Neuroimaging studies of psi" .

University of Virginia School of Medicine . Retrieved June 22, 2024 .

^ Tucker, Jim B (June 2024).

"Division of Perceptual Studies Newsletter" . Retrieved June 27, 2024 .

^ "Consciousness Unbound: Liberating Mind from the Tyranny of Materialism" .

Division of Perceptual Studies . Retrieved 2023-11-23 .

External links [ edit ] Edward Francis Kelly at University of Virginia School of Medicine v t e Mind–body dualism Types Cartesian dualism Emergent dualism Non-Cartesian dualism Predicate dualism Property dualism Substance dualism Thomistic dualism Dualists Robert F. Almeder Mario Beauregard Frank B. Dilley John Beloff René Descartes Michael Egnor C. Stephen Evans Edward Feser Richard Fumerton Brie Gertler Stewart Goetz W. D. Hart William Hasker Michael Huemer Edward Francis Kelly Charles Landesman E. J. Lowe David. H. Lund Geoffrey Madell J. P. Moreland Denyse O'Leary Martine Nida-Rümelin Scott B. Rae Daniel N. Robinson Howard D. Roelofs Howard Robinson Jeffrey M. Schwartz Richard Swinburne Charles Taliaferro William Homan Thorpe Peter Unger Keith Yandell Dean Zimmerman Related Cartesianism Dualism (Indian philosophy) Interactionism Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Edward_Francis_Kelly&oldid=1255588334 " Categories : American consciousness researchers and theorists American parapsychologists American neuroscientists Dualists University of Virginia faculty Living people Near-death experience researchers Psychonautics researchers Yale College alumni Harvard Medical School alumni Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 5 November 2024, at 18:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Edward Francis Kelly Add languages Add topic

