Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 Historical use of the term Toggle Historical use of the term subsection 2.1 English Civil War purge, 1648–1650 2.2 Soviet Union 2.3 Nazi Germany 2.4 France after WWII 2.5 Japan after WWII 2.6 Communist Cuba 2.7 United States: Red Scares, HUAC and McCarthyism 3 In the 21st century Toggle In the 21st century subsection 3.1 China 3.2 Iran 3.3 Iraq 3.4 North Korea 3.5 Turkey 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents Purge 28 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית Jawa 日本語 Polski Português Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Forceful removal of people considered undesirable For other uses, see Purge (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Russian Count Nikolay Yevdokimov , who organized the extermination campaigns of " Tsitsekun ", designated Russian military operations targeting Circassian natives by the term “ ochishchenie ” (cleansing).

In history , religion and political science , a purge is a position removal or execution of people who are considered undesirable by those in power from a government, another, their team leaders, or society as a whole. A group undertaking such an effort is labeled as purging itself. Purges can be either nonviolent or violent, with the former often resolved by the simple removal of those who have been purged from office, and the latter often resolved by the imprisonment , exile , or murder of those who have been purged.

[ 1 ] Characteristics [ edit ] The Shanghai massacre of 1927 in China and the Night of the Long Knives of 1934 in Nazi Germany, in which the leader of a political party turns against a particular section or group within the party and kills its members, are commonly called "purges". Mass expulsions of populations on the grounds of racism and xenophobia , such as the deportation of the Crimean Tatars in the Soviet Union, are not.

[ citation needed ] Though sudden and violent purges are notable, most purges do not involve immediate execution or imprisonment, for example the periodic massive purges of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia on grounds of apathy or dereliction, or the purge of Jews and political dissenters from the German Civil Service in 1933–1934.

Beginning in 1966, Chairman Mao Zedong and his associates purged much of the Chinese Communist Party 's leadership , including the head of state , President Liu Shaoqi and the then- Secretary-General , Deng Xiaoping , as part of what the leaders termed the Cultural Revolution . In Maoist states, sentences usually involved hard labor in laogai camps and executions. Deng Xiaoping acquired a reputation for returning to power after he had been purged several times.

[ citation needed ] Historical use of the term [ edit ] English Civil War purge, 1648–1650 [ edit ] Main article: Pride's Purge The earliest use of the term dates back to the English Civil War 's Pride's Purge . In 1648–1650, the moderate members of the English Long Parliament were purged by the New Model Army . The Parliament of England would suffer subsequent purges under Oliver Cromwell 's Commonwealth of England , including the purge of the entire House of Lords . Counter-revolutionaries such as royalists and more radical revolutionaries such as the Levellers were purged. After the Stuart Restoration , obstinate republicans were purged while some [ which?

] fled to the New England Colonies in British America .

Soviet Union [ edit ] Main articles: Red Terror , Great Purge , Political repression in the Soviet Union , Purges of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union , Mass killings under communist regimes , and Mass operations of the NKVD Purges were frequent in the Soviet Union.

[ 2 ] In the Soviet Union, military and internal security elites were more likely to be detained than civilian elites.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The term "purge" is often associated with Stalinism . While leading the USSR, Joseph Stalin carried out repeated purges which resulted in tens of thousands of people sentenced to Gulag labor camps and the outright executions of rival communists, military officers, ethnic minorities , wreckers , and citizens accused of plotting against communism .

[ 4 ] Stalin together with Nikolai Yezhov initiated the most notorious of the CPSU purges , the Great Purge , during the mid to late 1930s.

[ 5 ] Nazi Germany [ edit ] Main article: Night of the Long Knives In 1934, Chancellor Adolf Hitler ordered the execution of Ernst Röhm , other leaders of the Sturmabteilung militia, and political opponents.

France after WWII [ edit ] Main articles: Épuration légale and Pursuit of Nazi collaborators After France's liberation by the Allies in 1944, the Provisional Government of the French Republic and particularly the French Resistance carried out purges of former collaborationists , the so-called " vichystes ". The process became known in legal terms as épuration légale ("legal purging"). Similar processes in other countries and on other occasions included denazification in Allied-occupied Germany and decommunization in post-communist states .

Japan after WWII [ edit ] The Red Purge was an anticommunist movement in occupied Japan from the late 1940s to the early 1950s.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Carried out by the Japanese government and private corporations with the aid and encouragement of the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers (SCAP), the Red Purge resulted in tens of thousands of alleged members, supporters, or sympathizers of left-wing groups, especially those said to be affiliated with the Japanese Communist Party , removed from their jobs in government, the private sector, universities, and schools.

[ 9 ] The Red Purge emerged from rising Cold War tensions and the Red Scare after World War II, [ 10 ] [ 11 ] and was a significant element within a broader " Reverse Course " in Occupation policies.

[ 12 ] The Red Purge reached a peak following the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950, [ 12 ] when communist China supported North Korea. It began to ease after General Douglas MacArthur was replaced as commander of the Occupation by General Matthew Ridgway in 1951, and came to a conclusion with the end of the Occupation in 1952.

Communist Cuba [ edit ] Main article: Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution After the Cuban Revolution in 1959, Fidel Castro of Cuba often purged those who had previously been involved with the Batista regime . Purges usually involved the execution of the condemned. Castro periodically carried out purges in the Communist Party of Cuba thereafter. One prominent purge was carried out in 1989 when a high-ranking Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces general named Arnaldo Ochoa was sentenced to death and executed by firing squad on charges of drug trafficking . Purges became less common in Cuba during the 1990s and 2000s.

United States: Red Scares, HUAC and McCarthyism [ edit ] See also: Red Scares , House Un-American Activities Committee , and McCarthyism In the period 1938–1975, the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC),  an investigative committee of the United States House of Representatives , carried out a campaign of purging alleged "communist sympathizers" from positions in public life. While non-violent, HUAC's campaign destroyed the careers of many individuals, particularly in the entertainment industry, where HUAC attempted to purge left-wing voices entirely from the industry through the Hollywood blacklist .

While not part of HUAC, U.S. Senator Joseph McCarthy was a major driver of efforts to purge perceived communist sympathizers through the 1940s and 1950s, which ended in his condemnation and censure in 1954.

In the 21st century [ edit ] China [ edit ] Main article: Anti-corruption campaign under Xi Jinping Some observers consider the anti-corruption campaign under Xi Jinping to be a purge.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] A far-reaching campaign against corruption began in China following the conclusion of the 18th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party in 2012. The campaign, carried out under the aegis of Xi Jinping , General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party , was the largest organized purported anti-graft effort in the history of Communist rule in China.

Iran [ edit ] Main articles: Consolidation of the Iranian Revolution and Cultural Revolution in Iran The Supreme Council of the Cultural Revolution of the Iranian government purged universities.

In August 2023, the government reportedly had a program to hire 15,000 replacements for people in universities and to place clerics in schools.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] It also removed Tehran University of Art ’s major curricula for sculpting, music and cinematography/filmmaking.

[ 17 ] The government added Islamic studies even more so.

[ 18 ] Many academics were terminated/fired.

[ 19 ] On 14 December 2023 the Ministry of Education announced that it would hire 7000 clerics instead of teachers.

[ 20 ] Iraq [ edit ] Main article: De-Ba'athification De-Ba'athification was undertaken by the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) and subsequent Iraqi governments to remove the Ba'ath Party 's influence in the new Iraqi political system after the U.S.-led invasion in 2003.

[ 21 ] It was first outlined in CPA Order 1 which entered into force on 16 May 2003.

[ 21 ] The order declared that all public sector employees affiliated with the Ba'ath Party were to be removed from their positions and to be banned from any future employment in the public sector.

[ 21 ] It is estimated that, before 2007, 50,000 civil government employees, as well as employees of other organizations listed in Annex A of Order No. 2 , were removed from their positions as a result of de-Ba'athification.

[ 22 ] Another estimate places the number, also before 2007, at "100,000 civil servants, doctors, and teachers", who were forcibly removed from the public sector due to low-level affiliation.

[ 23 ] North Korea [ edit ] Main article: Political repression in North Korea Members of the Kim family have each periodically purged their political rivals or perceived threats since consolidating their control over North Korea , beginning in the 1950s. The most senior Kim purged those who opposed his son's succession to the supreme leadership of North Korea.

Kim Il Sung 's most prominent purge occurred during the " August Incident " in 1956, when the pro-Soviet and pro-Chinese Yanan factions of the Workers' Party of Korea (WPK) attempted to depose Kim. Most of those involved in the plot were executed while some others fled to the USSR and China. While some purges were carried out under Kim Jong Il , they were not as common as they were under his father/son.

Kim Jong Un purged several high-ranking officials and generals installed by his father Kim Jong Il in the former's first years in power, including, most prominently, his uncle Jang Song-thaek .

Turkey [ edit ] Main article: 2016–present purges in Turkey After the failed 2016 Turkish coup d'état attempt , the Government of Turkey under Recep Tayyip Erdoğan began a purge against members of its civil service and the Turkish Armed Forces . The purge ostensibly focused mainly on public servants and soldiers alleged to be part of the Gülen movement , the group the government blamed for the coup. As part of the purge, about 200,000 public officials, including thousands of judges, were dismissed and detained. Politicized Kurds in Turkey have also been a major target of the Justice and Development Party -led purge.

See also [ edit ] Genocide Lustration Extrajudicial killing Political cleansing of population Political repression Proscription Reign of Terror Martial law under Ferdinand Marcos Dirty War 1979 Ba'ath Party Purge References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Goldring & Matthews (2022) , pp. 575–593.

^ a b Matthews, Austin S. (2024).

"Elite Threats and Punitive Violence in Autocratic Regimes: Evidence from Communist Eastern Europe" .

Comparative Politics .

56 (4).

doi : 10.5129/001041524X17078378055516 .

^ Saijo, Harunobu (2025).

"How the Strategic Purges of State Security Personnel Protect Dictators" .

Security Studies .

doi : 10.1080/09636412.2025.2468755 .

ISSN 0963-6412 .

^ Hunt, Lynn; et al. (2008).

The Making of the West: Peoples and Cultures . Vol. C: Since 1740 (3rd ed.). Bedford/St. Martin's. p. 846.

ISBN 9780312465100 .

^ Bukovsky, Vladimir; et al. (1956).

The Permanent Purge. The Purge as a Technique of Soviet Totalitarian Politics from the Rise of Stalin to the Fall of Malenkov (1st ed.). Harvard University Press. p. 7.

^ Kumano 2010 , p. 513: "The notorious "Red Purge" was instituted nationwide in the final phase of the occupation, from July 1947 to April 1951, and proved to be a critical test for the survival of academic freedom." ^ Dower & Tetsuo 2007 , p. 3: "The Red Purge was a series of arbitrary layoffs by government agencies and corporations aimed at heavy-handedly eliminating from the workplace those workers who had been unilaterally branded 'Red'. [...] The purge occurred during the US occupation of Japan from 1949 to 1951." ^ Kingston 2011 , p. 13: "From 1947, the Japanese government, supported by MacArthur, unleashed a Red Purge that targeted those Japanese considered to have left-wing views." ^ Kapur 2018 , p. 10.

^ Kumano 2010 , p. 514: "Eells's anticommunist speeches echoed America's Cold War policy [...] during the ideological struggle of the Cold War." ^ Kumano 2010 , p. 529: "Since Eells's address in July 1949, the dilemma over communist teachers had become a national obsession, verging in some quarters on hysteria." ^ a b Kapur 2018 , pp. 9–10.

^ "Charting China's 'great purge' under Xi" . 2017-10-23 . Retrieved 2019-09-24 .

^ Shih, Gerry (2018-10-22).

"In China, investigations and purges become the new normal" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2019-09-24 .

^ "یک استاد دانشگاه شریف، جذب مخفیانه پانزده هزار استاد همسو با حکومت را "فاجعه" خواند" .

Voice of America . Retrieved 2023-09-26 .

^ "پیشنهادات جدید از لایحه حجاب؛ از ممنوعیت کاشت ناخن و اجباری شدن چادر در دانشگاه و مدارس تا استخدام طلاب در مدارس و اعطای مجوز شوکر و اسپری به بسیجیان" .

اعتمادآنلاین (in Persian). 2023-09-26 . Retrieved 2023-09-26 .

^ "هنر در تاریکخانه فراموشی" . 20 August 2023.

^ "تغییرات وسیع کنکور امسال؛ به ضرر رشته‌های هنری و علوم انسانی و به نفع "علوم اسلامی" " .

BBC News فارسی (in Persian). 2023-08-27 . Retrieved 2023-09-26 .

^ Motamedi, Maziar.

" 'Academic decline': Why are university professors being expelled in Iran?" .

www.aljazeera.com . Retrieved 2023-09-26 .

^ "وزیر آموزش و پرورش: ۷ هزار نیروی جهادی و مربی قرآن برای جبران کمبود معلم جذب کردیم" . 14 December 2023.

^ a b c "Coalition Provisional Authority Order Number 1: De-Ba'athification of Iraqi Society" (PDF) . Coalition Provisional Authority. Archived from the original on 21 June 2004 . Retrieved 24 September 2010 .

^ Ferguson, C.

No End in Sight: Iraq's Descent into Chaos.

New York: PublicAffairs, 2008.

^ Wirtz, James (2007). "The Exquisite Problem of Victory: Measuring Success in Unconventional Operations". In Joseph Cerami and Jay Boggs (ed.).

The Interagency and Counterinsurgency Warfare: Aligning and Integrating Military and Civilian Roles in Stability, Security, Transition, and Reconstruction Operations . Strategic Studies Institute. p. 275.

Sources [ edit ] Dower, John ; Tetsuo, Hirata (12 July 2007).

"Japan's Red Purge: Lessons from a Saga of Suppression of Free Speech and Thought" .

The Asia-Pacific Journal: Japan Focus .

5 (7) . Retrieved 8 July 2021 .

Goldring, Edward; Matthews, Austin S. (2022).

"To Purge or Not to Purge? An Individual-Level Quantitative Analysis of Elite Purges in Dictatorships" .

British Journal of Political Science .

53 (2): 575– 593.

doi : 10.1017/S0007123421000569 .

ISSN 0007-1234 .

S2CID 245290566 .

Kapur, Nick (2018).

Japan at the Crossroads: Conflict and Compromise after Anpo . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674984424 .

Kingston, Jeff (2011).

Japan in transformation, 1945-2010 (2nd ed.). Harlow, England: Longman.

ISBN 9781408234518 . Retrieved 8 July 2021 .

Kumano, Ruriko (2010).

"Anticommunism and Academic Freedom: Walter C. Eells and the "Red Purge" in Occupied Japan" .

History of Education Quarterly .

50 (4): 513– 537.

doi : 10.1111/j.1748-5959.2010.00292.x .

ISSN 0018-2680 .

JSTOR 25799354 .

S2CID 141683333 . Retrieved 8 July 2021 .

v t e Censorship Media regulation Books books banned Films banned films Internet circumvention Music Postal Press Radio Speech and expression Student media Televisions banned televisions Thought Video games banned video games Methods Bleeping Book burning Broadcast delay By copyright Cancel culture Censor bars Chilling effect Collateral censorship Concision Conspiracy of silence Content-control software Damnatio memoriae De-banking Deplatforming Euphemism Minced oath Expurgation Fogging Gag order Gatekeeping Hallin's spheres Heckling Heckler's veto Hush money Internet police Malinformation Media blackout Memory hole National intranet News embargo Newspaper theft Non-disclosure agreement Opinion corridor Overton window Pixelization Political correctness Prior restraint Propaganda Purge Redaction Revisionism Sanitization Self-censorship Shadow banning Social rejection Speech code Spiral of silence Strategic lawsuit Super-injunction Surveillance computer and network mass Taboo Whitewashing Word filtering Contexts AI Algorithmic Chinese censorship abroad Criminal Corporate Apple Facebook Google Hate speech Online Ideological Academic LGBT issues Media bias Moral police Moralistic fallacy Naturalistic fallacy Political censorship Banned parties Political prisoner Propaganda model Religious Blasphemy law Islamic Police Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Wikipedia By location Censorship by country Blasphemy law Freedom of speech Internet censorship In the Middle East In South Asia v t e Abuse Types Adverse childhood experiences Anti-social behaviour Bullying Child abuse neglect sexual military marriage Cruelty to animals Disability abuse military draft Domestic abuse Elder abuse Financial Marriage Gaslighting Harassment Humiliation Incivility Institutional abuse Intimidation Neglect Persecution Professional abuse Psychological abuse Physical abuse Police brutality Religious abuse Social abuse Sexual abuse Stalking Structural abuse Substance abuse Alcohol abuse Surveillance abuse Referee and umpire abuse Verbal abuse more...

Related topics Abusive supervision Abuse of power Controlling behavior Complex post-traumatic stress disorder Dehumanization Denial Destabilisation Discrimination Exaggeration Just-world fallacy Lying Manipulation Minimisation Narcissism Playing the victim Psychological projection Psychological trauma Psychopathy Rationalization Sexual grooming Traumatic bonding Victim blaming Victimisation Victimology v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Purge&oldid=1303505936 " Categories : Political and cultural purges Political repression Persecution Informal legal terminology Historical negationism Human rights abuses Racism Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1 Persian-language sources (fa) CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2013 This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 11:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Purge 28 languages Add topic

