Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 References Toggle References subsection 2.1 Bibliography 3 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Capital (Marxism) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Central concept in marxian critique of political economy Part of a series on the Marxian critique of political economy Concepts Capitalist mode of production Capital Commodity Concrete and abstract labour Critique of political economy Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Relations of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Wage labour Wage slavery Wertkritik Wertabspaltungskritik Value-form Topics Crisis theory Imperialism Historical materialism Technological unemployment Falling profit-rate tendency Works Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 Wage Labour and Capital A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Grundrisse Das Kapital Theories of Surplus Value Value, Price and Profit People Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Roman Rosdolsky Isaak Illich Rubin Étienne Balibar Robert Kurz Mark Fisher Claus Peter Ortlieb Moishe Postone NML Hans-Georg Backhaus Helmut Reichelt Michael Heinrich Journals Monthly Review New School Economic Review Crisis and Critique Historical Materialism Socialist register Capital & Class Related topics Critique of political economy Economics Marxist sociology Socialism portal v t e Capital is a central concept in Marxian critique of political economy , and in Marxian thought more generally.

Marxists view capital as a social relation reproduced by the continuous expenditure of wage labour . Labour and capital are viewed as historically specific [ clarification needed ] forms of social relations.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Marx stated that " Capital is dead labour, that, vampire-like, only lives by sucking living labour, and lives the more, the more labour it sucks.

" [ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Property is theft!

Private property#Criticism Reification (Marxism) – Treatment of social attributes as real, in Marxist theory Forms of capital in Marxism: Constant capital — Capital invested in the means of production .

Variable capital — Capital invested in labour power .

Fictitious capital – Marxist Doctrine Monopoly Capital Key figures: Robert Kurz Moishe Postone Roman Rosdolsky References [ edit ] ^ Marx, Karl; Nicolaus, Martin (1993).

Grundrisse : foundations of the critique of political economy (rough draft) . London: Penguin Books in association with New Left Review. pp. 296, 239, 264.

ISBN 0-14-044575-7 .

OCLC 31358710 .

^ Postone 1993 .

^ Marx, Karl; Nicolaus, Martin (1993).

Grundrisse : foundations of the critique of political economy (rough draft) . London: Penguin Books in association with New Left Review. pp. 296, 239, 264.

ISBN 0-14-044575-7 .

OCLC 31358710 .

^ Pradella, Lucia (2015).

Globalisation and the critique of political economy: new insights from Marx's writings . Abingdon, Oxon. p. 147.

ISBN 978-1-317-80072-9 .

OCLC 897376910 .

The analysis of the production process as a whole, namely, as a reproduction process, removed the illusion of the autonomy of value, revealing that capital entirely consists of objectified labour. Workers are faced with their own labour, objectified in means of production and of subsistence, which becomes capital, thus recreating the conditions for their exploitation.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Capital, Vol. I, Chapter Ten" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2021-11-25 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Postone, Moishe (1993).

Time, labor, and social domination: a reinterpretation of Marx's critical theory . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511570926 .

ISBN 9780511570926 .

Further reading [ edit ] Pradella, Lucia (2015).

Globalisation and the critique of political economy : new insights from Marx's writings . Abingdon, Oxon.

ISBN 978-1-317-80072-9 .

OCLC 897376910 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) v t e Types of capital By form Academic Accumulation of capital Circulating / Floating Cultural Cross-cultural Educational Financial Fixed Human Individual Information Intangible Intellectual Natural Organizational Physical Political Public Reputation Sexual Social Symbolic Venture Working By term Liquid (short) vs.

Patient (long) Marxist analytical Constant Variable Fictitious Marxist historical Monopoly Financial capital This article about the economy is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Capital_(Marxism)&oldid=1300896935 " Categories : Economy stubs Marxian critique of political economy Marxism Capital (economics) Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2022 All stub articles This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 00:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Capital (Marxism) Add languages Add topic

