Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Display 2 Intensity 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Tornado vortex signature 2 languages Español Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Weather radar pattern Strong mesocyclone on a thunderstorm near Tuscaloosa, Alabama , that was analyzed as fitting the characteristics of a TVS. It was associated with a tornado .

A tornadic vortex signature , abbreviated TVS , is a Pulse-Doppler radar weather radar detected rotation algorithm that indicates the likely presence of a strong mesocyclone that is in some stage of tornadogenesis .

[ 1 ] It may give meteorologists the ability to pinpoint and track the location of tornadic rotation within a larger storm, and is one component of the National Weather Service 's warning operations.

[ 2 ] The tornadic vortex signature was first identified by Donald W. Burgess , Leslie R. Lemon, and Rodger A. Brown in the 1970s using experimental Doppler radar at the National Severe Storms Laboratory (NSSL) in Norman, Oklahoma . The National Weather Service (NWS) now uses an updated algorithm developed by NSSL, the tornado detection algorithm ( TDA ) based on data from its WSR-88D system of radars. NSSL also developed the mesocyclone detection algorithm ( MDA ).

[ 3 ] Display [ edit ] Typical display of a tornado vortex signature (the downward-pointing triangle near the mesocyclone) on a National Weather Service Doppler weather radar display (here the case of the 1999 Bridge Creek-Moore tornado ).

The conditions causing a TVS are often visible on the Doppler weather radar storm relative velocity (SRV) product as adjacent inbound and outbound velocities , a signature known as a velocity couplet or "gate-to-gate" shear.

[ 4 ] In most cases, the TVS is a strong mesocyclone aloft, not an actual tornado , although the presence of an actual tornado on the ground can occasionally be inferred based on a strong couplet in concert with a tornadic debris signature ( TDS ) (i.e. a "debris ball" on reflectivity or certain polarimetric characteristics), or through confirmation from storm spotters . When the algorithm is tripped, a TVS icon (typically a triangle representing a vortex ) and pertinent information appear.

[ 5 ] Radar analysis of the velocity couplet as well as the automated TVS are very significant to issuing tornado warnings and can suggest the strength and location of possible tornadoes.

[ citation needed ] Although many tornadoes, especially the stronger ones, coincide with a TVS, many weak EF0-EF1 tornadoes can and do occur without a TVS, especially if they are not produced from an identified mesocyclone. Likewise, phenomena such as "fair-weather" waterspouts , landspouts , and gustnadoes , though cyclonic and occasionally damaging, do not normally produce a signature identifiable by a TVS.

[ 6 ] Rotation associated with quasi-linear convective systems (QLCSs) or squall lines can trip the TVS but do so less reliably as the couplets typically are more transient, are shallower, smaller, and weaker. This rotation may be considered a mesovortex rather than a mesocyclone but these do produce tornadoes and damaging straight-line winds .

Intensity [ edit ] A TVS can be measured by intense gate to gate wind shear , which is the change of wind speed and/or direction across the two gates of inbound and outbound velocities. Gates are the individual pixels on the radar display. For example, if the inbound velocity is −48 knots (−89 km/h) and the outbound is 39 knots (72 km/h), then there is 87 knots (161 km/h) of gate to gate shear.

[ 7 ] The impressiveness of a TVS not only has to do with the strength of the gate to gate shear, but it also incorporates the size and depth of the TVS, and the strength of any surrounding mesocyclone, among other factors, including several vertically-polarized variables with the advent of dual-polarization.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Convective storm detection Hook echo Bounded weak echo region (BWER) Warning Decision Training Branch , Cooperative Institute for Mesoscale Meteorological Studies , Center for Analysis and Prediction of Storms , Advanced Radar Research Center Notes [ edit ] ^ WSR-88D Distance Learning Operations Course , slides 3 & 4 ^ "NWS Radar: Key Indicators in Warning Decisions" . National Weather Service.

^ "Tornado Detection" .

Severe Weather 101 . National Severe Storms Laboratory . Retrieved 2014-05-17 .

^ WSR-88D Distance Learning Operations Course , slides 3 & 4 ^ WSR-88D Distance Learning Operations Course , slide 13 ^ WSR-88D Distance Learning Operations Course , slide 30 ^ WSR-88D Distance Learning Operations Course , slide 4 ^ WSR-88D Distance Learning Operations Course , slide 9 References [ edit ] Paul Schlatter (September 2009).

"WSR-88D Distance Learning Operations Course; Topic 5, Lesson 21" . Online . Retrieved 2009-11-29 .

Rodger Brown; Vincent Wood (April 2012).

"The Tornadic Vortex Signature: An Update" .

Weather and Forecasting .

27 (2). Online: 525– 530.

Bibcode : 2012WtFor..27..525B .

doi : 10.1175/WAF-D-11-00111.1 .

S2CID 122590037 .

Rodger Brown; Leslie R. Lemon; Donald W. Burgess (January 1978).

"Tornado Detection by Pulsed Doppler Radar" .

Monthly Weather Review .

106 (1): 29– 38.

Bibcode : 1978MWRv..106...29B .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0493(1978)106<0029:TDBPDR>2.0.CO;2 .

External links [ edit ] Tornado Vortex Signatures in Doppler radial velocity patterns v t e Tornadoes Outline of tornadoes Overview Glossary of tornado terminology Tornado outbreak Science Intensity Fujita scale Enhanced Fujita scale International Fujita scale TORRO scale Tornado damage ( Cycloidal marks · Tornado damage survey ) Disagreements on the intensity of tornadoes F4, EF4, and IF4 tornadoes ( 1950–1959 · 1960–1969 · 2000–2009 · 2010–2019 · 2020–present ) F5, EF5 and IF5 tornadoes ( EF5 drought ) Composition Tornadogenesis Supercell Mesocyclone ( vertical draft ) Wall cloud Funnel cloud Multiple-vortex structure Rear flank downdraft Radar observation Weather radar ( WSR-57 · WSR-74 · NEXRAD · Advanced Technology Demonstrator ) Mobile radar observation of tornadoes ( Doppler on Wheels · RaXPol ) Convective storm detection Hook echo Tornado vortex signature Tornado debris signature Bounded weak echo region Descending reflectivity core Important individuals Ted Fujita John Park Finley Thomas P. Grazulis Timothy P. Marshall Joshua Wurman Karen Kosiba Robin Tanamachi Broadcast meteorology Weather presenter The Weather Channel Gary England James Spann Ryan Hall, Y'all Storm chasing Storm chasing Reed Timmer ( SRV Dominator ) TWISTEX ( Tony Laubach · Tim Samaras · Carl Young ) Tornado Intercept Vehicle Research History of research Case studies (2020–present) Satellite tornado Debris fallout List of meteorology institutions ( National Weather Service · European Severe Storms Laboratory · TORRO · AccuWeather ) Forecasting Numerical weather prediction ( Rapid Refresh · North American Mesoscale Model · European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts · Warn-on-Forecast ) Tornado watch Tornado warning Impact-based warning ( Particularly dangerous situation · Tornado emergency · List of tornado emergencies ) History Important storms 1764 ( Woldegk tornado ) 1814 ( Burning of Washington ) 1896 ( St. Louis tornado ) 1925 ( Tri-state tornado ) 1948 ( Tinker Air Force Base tornadoes ) 1953 ( Waco tornado · Flint–Beecher tornado ) 1965 ( Palm Sunday outbreak ) 1974 ( Super Outbreak · Xenia tornado ) 1989 ( Daulatpur–Saturia tornado ) 1990 ( Plainfield tornado ) 1997 ( Jarrell tornado ) 1999 ( Bridge Creek–Moore tornado ) 2007 ( Greensburg tornado ) 2011 ( Super Outbreak · Tuscaloosa–Birmingham tornado · Joplin tornado ) 2013 ( Moore tornado · El Reno tornado ) 2021 ( Western Kentucky tornado ) 2024 ( Greenfield tornado ) Miscellaneous Tornado myths ( Overpass myth ) Tornadoes by year Tornado records Lists of tornadoes and tornado outbreaks In media Twister Twisters Greensburg The Twister: Caught in the Storm Atomic Twister Sharknado Night of the Twisters (film) Related phenomena Thunderstorm ( Lightning · Downburst · Graupel · Hail ) Mesoscale convective system ( Derecho · Squall line · Bow echo ) Mesovortex ( Cyclone · Tropical cyclone ) Whirlwind ( Landspout · Waterspout · Dust devil · Gustnado · Steam devil · Fire whirl ) Tornadoes portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tornado_vortex_signature&oldid=1278785846 " Categories : Severe weather and convection Radar meteorology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2014 This page was last edited on 4 March 2025, at 16:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tornado vortex signature 2 languages Add topic

