Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Construction principle 2 Components Toggle Components subsection 2.1 Top buoy 2.1.1 Surface buoys 2.1.2 Submerged buoys 2.2 Instrument housing 2.2.1 Prawlers 3 Depth correction 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Mooring (oceanography) 3 languages Deutsch Igbo Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Collection of devices, connected to a wire and anchored on the sea floor Mooring as deployed in Fram Strait with top buoy , a CTD -sensor, two rotor current meters , acoustic release and train wheels as anchor .

A mooring in oceanography is a collection of devices connected to a wire and anchored on the sea floor. It is the Eulerian way of measuring ocean currents , since a mooring is stationary at a fixed location. In contrast to that, the Lagrangian way measures the motion of an oceanographic drifter , the Lagrangian drifter .

Construction principle [ edit ] The mooring is held up in the water column with various forms of buoyancy such as glass balls and syntactic foam floats. The attached instrumentation is wide-ranging but often includes CTDs (conductivity, temperature depth sensors), current meters (e.g.

acoustic Doppler current profilers or deprecated rotor current meters ), and biological sensors to measure various parameters. Long-term moorings can be deployed for durations of two years or more, powered with alkaline or lithium battery packs .

Components [ edit ] Top buoy [ edit ] WHOI moored surface buoy with meteorological sensors and satellite transmitters [ 1 ] Surface buoys [ edit ] Moorings often include surface buoys that transmit real time data back to shore. The traditional approach is to use the Argos System . Alternatively, one may use the commercial Iridium satellites which allow higher data rates.

Syntactic foam sphere used as a subsurface float Submerged buoys [ edit ] In deeper waters, areas covered by sea ice , areas within or near shipping lines or areas that are prone to theft or vandalism, moorings are often submerged with no surface markers. Submerged moorings typically use an acoustic release or a Timed Release that connects the mooring to an anchor weight on the sea floor. The weight is released by sending a coded acoustic command signal and stays on the ground. Deep water anchors are typically made from steel and may be as large as 100 kg. A common deep water anchor consists of a stack of 2–4 railroad wheels. In shallow waters anchors may consist of a concrete block or small portable anchor.

The buoyancy of the floats , i.e. of the top buoy plus additional packs of glass bulbs of foam, is sufficient to carry the instruments back to the surface. In order to avoid entangled ropes, it has been practical to place additional floats directly above each instrument.

Instrument housing [ edit ] Prawlers [ edit ] Prawlers (profiling crawlers) are sensor bodies which climb and descend the cable, to observe multiple depths.  The energy to move is "free," harnessed by ratcheting upward via wave energy , then returning downward via gravity.

[ 2 ] Depth correction [ edit ] Similar to a kite in the wind, the mooring line will follow a so-called (half-) catenary .
The influence of currents (and wind if the top buoy is above the sea surface) can be modeled and the shape of the mooring line can be determined by software.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] If the currents are strong (above 0.1 m/s ) and the mooring lines are long (more than 1 km ), the instrument position may vary up to 50 m .

See also [ edit ] Benthic lander , a mooring which does not have any mooring line References [ edit ] ^ Toole, John M.; McCartney, Michael S.; Hogg, Nelson; Weller, Robert A. (2000).

"Outposts in the Ocean" .

Oceanus Magazine .

42 (1). Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.

^ "Prawlers, Engineers, and the Future of Oceanography at Sea. Retrieved 27 Jan 2013" . 5 October 2012.

^ Dewey, Richard K.

"Mooring Design & Dynamics - A Matlab Package for Designing and Testing Oceanographic Moorings And Towed Bodies" . Centre for Earth and Ocean Research, University of Victoria. Archived from the original on 2013-10-12 . Retrieved 2012-09-25 .

^ Dewey, Richard K. (1 December 1999). "Mooring Design & Dynamics—a Matlab® package for designing and analyzing oceanographic moorings".

Marine Models .

1 ( 1– 4): 103– 157.

doi : 10.1016/S1369-9350(00)00002-X .

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mooring_(oceanography)&oldid=1208352535 " Categories : Oceanography Physical oceanography Oceanographic instrumentation Ocean currents Biological oceanography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 February 2024, at 05:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mooring (oceanography) 3 languages Add topic

