Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Establishment of Gender and Women's Studies 3 Issues with and responses to feminist bookstores 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Feminist bookstore 11 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা Deutsch Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Монгол Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bookshops that sell material relating to women's issues, gender, and sexuality Bluestockings , Lower East Side , New York, 2006 Antigone Books in Tucson, Arizona Feminist bookstores sell material relating to women's issues, gender , and sexuality . These stores served as some of the earliest open spaces for feminist community building and organizing.

[ 1 ] Prior to the spread of feminist bookstores, bookselling was a trade dominated by white men in the United States. There was a lack of awareness and interest within this bookstore leadership to meet the demands for woman-centered literature being raised by feminists at the time.

[ 1 ] Though some bookstores featured small sections of women's literature or feminist books, these were limited and did not provide the range and depth representative of this category, treating topics not centered around men as an extra section of bookshops rather than an integral part.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Feminist bookstores emerged within this context as spaces not only for buying books, but building communities for women, lesbians, and feminists more broadly as part of the growing feminist movement of the mid-20th century.

[ 3 ] These independent bookstores formed a network across the United States and abroad during the 1960s and after as part of the second-wave feminist movement .

[ 4 ] Sisterwrite , Britain's first feminist bookshop, [ 5 ] opened in 1978; it was run as a collective.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] In addition to their function as booksellers, feminist bookstores served as places of learning and organizing for social change.

[ 9 ] Many feminist bookstores were collectively run by boards of women in a non-hierarchical structure. This was an anti-capitalist business model in line with second-wave feminists' belief that system change was needed in order to create meaningful change in women's lives.

[ 10 ] Magic Speller Bookstore The call for more diverse types of feminist and lesbian spaces took place in-part because queer businesses and locations for community building were few and far between, with the notable exception of the gay bar scene [ citation needed ] . Even within explicitly LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) spaces lesbians were ostracized, in addition to the broader societal discrimination which they faced.

[ 11 ] Feminist bookstores such as Magic Speller Bookstore which was run by Zoe Nicholson from California, were created in part to combat this homophobia and lesbophobia , in response to the lack of safe spaces for lesbians and bisexual women.

[ 12 ] Establishment of Gender and Women's Studies [ edit ] Feminist bookstores were essential to the establishment and growth of feminist studies in the academy.

[ 1 ] By consolidating feminist literature and providing spaces for open discussion of issues relating to women, these bookshops became incubators for feminist intellectuals.

Critical race and gender theories were produced in part by these intellectuals and activists, and feminist bookstores were key to developing the content necessary for the field to be established in the academy. Because these bookstores were open to the public and provided resources through the products sold as well as the women who ran the shops, people who had never had access to that knowledge before then had access. This enabled a more widespread call, first for women's studies and then for gender studies , as academic departments across the nation.

[ 13 ] Issues with and responses to feminist bookstores [ edit ] Though many bookstores were intentional about creating a board of owners that was diverse so as to represent diverse experiences of being a woman, white feminism was a present issue within some leadership. In the case of A Woman's Place bookstore , an alleged lack of understanding of intersectionality was suggested as a cause of the eventual deterioration of the cooperative board and a high-profile legal debate.

[ 14 ] One way women of color dealt with this environment was to open businesses run by and centered around their own experiences and made to raise up experiences of other women of color.

Kitchen Table Press is one such example; this was a publishing company that produced literature exclusively written by women of color from all backgrounds and then sold to the public, often through feminist bookstores.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] List of independent bookstores Feminist businesses Feminist literature References [ edit ] ^ a b c Onosaka, Junko (2013-10-14).

Feminist Revolution in Literacy: Women's Bookstores in the United States . Routledge.

ISBN 9781135499150 .

^ Travis, Trysh (2008-09-12).

"The Women in Print Movement: History and Implications" .

Book History .

11 (1): 275– 300.

doi : 10.1353/bh.0.0001 .

ISSN 1529-1499 .

S2CID 161531900 .

^ Hogan, Kristen Amber (2006-01-01).

Reading at Feminist Bookstores: Women's Literature, Women's Studies, and the Feminist Bookstore Network .

ISBN 9780542770135 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Hogan, Kristen (2016-04-15).

The Feminist Bookstore Movement: Lesbian Antiracism and Feminist Accountability . Duke University Press Books.

ISBN 9780822361299 .

^ "Closed chapter: Sisterwrite, Britain's first women's bookstore,..." Chicago Tribune . 15 August 1993 . Retrieved 2022-07-04 .

^ Crockett, Moya (2019-03-08).

"The UK's feminist bookshops are making a triumphant comeback" .

Stylist . Retrieved 2022-07-04 .

^ "In conversation with members of Sisterwrite Collective" .

The Feminist Library . 3 July 2020. Archived from the original on 2020-11-01 . Retrieved 2022-07-04 .

^ "Sisterwrite Bookshop" .

islington.humap.site . Retrieved 2022-07-04 .

^ Liddle, Kathleen (2005-07-12). "More than a Bookstore".

Journal of Lesbian Studies .

9 ( 1– 2): 145– 159.

doi : 10.1300/J155v09n01_14 .

ISSN 1089-4160 .

PMID 19780272 .

S2CID 7766207 .

^ Love, Barbara J. (2006-09-22).

Feminists Who Changed America, 1963-1975 . University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 9780252031892 .

love, feminists who changed america.

^ Rosen, Ruth (2013-02-05).

The World Split Open: How the Modern Women's Movement Changed America . Tantor eBooks.

ISBN 9781618030986 .

^ "ZOE NICHOLSON VFA Fabulous Feminist" .

www.veteranfeministsofamerica.org . Retrieved 2024-04-20 .

^ Mantilla, Karla (2007). "Feminist Bookstores: Where Women's Lives Matter".

Off Our Backs .

37 : 48– 50.

^ "A Woman's Place Bookstore records" .

www.oac.cdlib.org . Retrieved 2017-03-28 .

^ Smith, Barbara (1989-01-01). "A Press of Our Own Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press".

Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies .

10 (3): 11– 13.

doi : 10.2307/3346433 .

JSTOR 3346433 .

v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminist_bookstore&oldid=1305175718 " Categories : Lesbian history Feminist bookstores Second-wave feminism Independent bookstores Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 14:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminist bookstore 11 languages Add topic

