Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Jewish History 2 Main sights 3 Sport 4 Notes 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Sagunto 60 languages አማርኛ العربية Aragonés Asturianu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Català Cebuano Čeština Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Italiano עברית ქართული Ladin Ladino Latina Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Winaray Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 39°40′48″N 0°16′42″W ﻿ / ﻿ 39.68000°N 0.27833°W ﻿ / 39.68000; -0.27833 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the Spanish municipality. For the Spanish Navy ship, see Spanish ironclad Sagunto .

Municipality in Valencian Community, Spain Sagunto Sagunt ( Valencian ) Sagunto ( Spanish ) Municipality Flag Coat of arms Sagunto Location in Spain Show map of Province of Valencia Sagunto Sagunto (Valencian Community) Show map of Valencian Community Sagunto Sagunto (Spain) Show map of Spain Coordinates: 39°40′48″N 0°16′42″W ﻿ / ﻿ 39.68000°N 0.27833°W ﻿ / 39.68000; -0.27833 Country Spain Autonomous community Valencian Community Province Valencia Comarca Camp de Morvedre Founded Before 219 BC Government • Type Mayor-council government • Body Ajuntament de Sagunt • Mayor Darío Moreno Lerga (2019-) ( PSPV-PSOE ) Area • Total 132 km 2 (51 sq mi) Elevation 49 m (161 ft) Population (2023) [ 1 ] • Total 70,486 • Density 532/km 2 (1,380/sq mi) Demonym(s) Saguntí, saguntina Saguntino, saguntina Morvedrí, morvendrina Official languages Valencian Spanish Website Official website The Castle of Sagunto Sagunto [ a ] ( Valencian : Sagunt ) [ b ] [ 2 ] is a municipality of Spain , located in the province of Valencia , Valencian Community. It belongs to the modern fertile comarca of Camp de Morvedre . It is suburb of Valencia located approximately 30 km (19 mi) north of the city center. Lies on the Costa de Valencia on the Mediterranean Sea .

It is best known for the remains of the ancient Iberian and Roman city of Saguntum . The siege of Saguntum in 219 BC was the trigger of the Second Punic War between the Carthaginians and the Romans.

The municipality includes three differentiated urban nuclei: Ciutat Vella (Sagunto), Grau Vell [ es ] and Puerto de Sagunto .

[ 3 ] Over half of the population lives in the coastal settlement of Puerto de Sagunto.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Gaspar Juan Escolano, in his Decades of the History of Valencia (1610-11), writes that the first settlers of Sagunto were Armenian families, the Sagas, who came to the peninsula with Tubal and laid the first foundations of the city [ 4 ] naming it Sagunt (Armenian: of Saga). There is also speculation that Achaeans, probably from the Greek island of Zakynthos , could have founded Saguntum as one of the 5 colonies of the Greeks on the western coast of the Mediterranean Sea in the 5th century BC.

[ 5 ] During the 5th c. BC the Iberians built a walled settlement on the hill overseeing the plain; a stretch of cyclopean limestone slabs from the former Temple of Diana survives, close to the modern church of Santa Maria. The city traded with coastal colonies in the western Mediterranean such as Carthage and, under their influence, minted its own coins . During this period, the city was known as Arse ( Iberian : Arsesken ) [ 6 ] [ 7 ] By 219 BC, Saguntum was a large and commercially prosperous town, which sided with the local colonists and Rome against Carthage, and drew Hannibal 's first assault, his siege of Saguntum , which triggered the Second Punic War, one of the most important wars of antiquity. After stiff resistance over the course of eight months [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Saguntum was captured by Hannibal.

Seven years later, the town was retaken by the Romans. In 214 BC, it became a municipium , was rebuilt and flourished.

Hispania was not easily pacified and Romanized, as the Iberian career of Quintus Sertorius makes clear.

[ citation needed ] Saguntum minted coins under his protection, and continued to house a mint in later Roman times. The Romans built a great circus in the lower part of the city and a theatre seating 8,000 spectators. Texts found indicate that the city had an amphitheatre and had about 50,000 inhabitants. This prosperity lasted for most of the empire, and is attested by inscriptions and ruins (notably a theatre , demolished by Napoleon's marshal Louis Gabriel Suchet , who also destroyed the Roman tower of Hercules).

Sagunto kiln, 1951 Saguntum Forum Saguntum Theatre Saguntum rear wall of ancient theatre Under the Arian Visigothic kings , Saguntum received its Catholic patron saint , a bishop named Sacerdos , "the priest", who died peacefully of natural causes about AD 560.

In the early 8th century, the Muslim Arabs conquered Hispania and the city became part of the Caliphate of Cordoba and at that time the city reached an era of splendor, with baths, palaces, mosques and schools open for its cosmopolitan population. Then, the town was known as Morvedre in latin ( Morviedro in Spanish).

Morvedre was also the origin of the Arabic name of the city مُرْبَاطَرُ or مُرْبِيطَرُ (Morbāṭar or Morbīṭar), furthermore, the latin name was derived from muri veteres "ancient walls." However, as Valencia grew, Saguntum declined.

In 1098, the city was conquered by El Cid but the Muslims recovered it shortly thereafter. The city had been under the Muslim Arab rule for over 500 years when James I of Aragon conquered it in 1238.

During the Peninsular War , a Spanish attempt to raise the French siege of the castle failed in the Battle of Saguntum on 25 October 1811. In the weeks before the battle, the Spanish garrison made a valiant and successful defense; but it surrendered the day after the battle.

[ 10 ] Historian Charles Oman stated that the site was converted into a fortress in 1810–1811 by General Joaquín Blake at the suggestion of British officer Charles William Doyle . At that time, much of the largely intact Roman theater was dismantled to provide stone for restoring the old walls.

[ 11 ] Saguntum was badly damaged in warfare, but has retained many Valencian Gothic structures. In the late 19th century, a steel-making industry grew up that supported the modern city, which extends in the coastal plain below the citadel hill. The last steel oven closed in April 1984. It has been restored and is now a tourist attraction.

Jewish History [ edit ] Sagunto was once home to a Jewish community. According to a Jewish legend, a tombstone was found in Sagunto with the inscription "Adoniram, treasurer of King Solomon , who came to collect the tax tribute and died." Jews were already living in the city during Muslim rule. After the Massacre of 1391 , the Jewish community in Sagunto became the only surviving community in Valencia. During the 1492 expulsion of the Jews , there is documentation that 500 Jews left Sagunto to North Africa and other parts of Europe.

The Judería is one of the most well-preserved Jewish quarters in Spain. The entrance of the quarter is through an arch called "Portal de la juheria," which lies between Sang Vella Street and Castillo Street.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Main sights [ edit ] The remains of Sagunto Castle may be seen on top of the hill. It preserves much of its walled ramparts, of Roman and Moorish origin.

A Roman theater, partly restored in late 20th century. It is found on the northern slope of the citadel hill. It was the first official National Monument declared in Spain (1896).

The Gothic Església de Santa Maria (St Mary's Church), in the Plaça Major (Main Square).

The Palau Municipal (City Palace), or town hall; a beautiful 18th century building with a neoclassical façade.

The early Gothic Església del Salvador (Church of Our Savior).

The narrow streets of the Juderia (Old Jewish Quarter), on the hillside on the way up to the citadel.

The 13th century Santa Ana convent adjacent to the Plaça de Pi .

The Sagunto History Museum , located in the house of Mestre Peña , a building in the Jewish quarter dating from the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. The largest collection is from the Ibero-Roman Period.

Sport [ edit ] CD Acero is the town's association football team. Its stadium is El Fornás , located in El Puerto de Sagunto.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Spanish pronunciation: [saˈɣunto] ^ Valencian pronunciation: [saˈɣunt] References [ edit ] ^ Municipal Register of Spain 2018 .

National Statistics Institute .

^ Both Valencian and Spanish are official names.

^ a b Bodí Ramiro 2015 , p. 13.

^ Escolano, Gaspar (1611).

Decada primera de la historia de la insigne, y coronada ciudad y reyno de Valencia (in Spanish). Pedro Patricio Mey.

Archived from the original on 11 May 2024 . Retrieved 24 November 2020 .

^ Appian, Wars in Spain, 2 ^ Hill, G. F. (1931).

Notes on the ancient coinage of Hispania Citerior . ANS Digital Library: Notes on the ancient coinage of Hispania citerior. http://numismatics.org/digitallibrary/ark:/53695/nnan86651 ^ Ripollès i Alegre 2002 ^ Livy: History of Rome ^ Silius Italicus: Punica ^ Oman 1996 , pp. 31–46.

^ Oman 1996 , pp. 11–12.

^ "Sagunto" .

JGuide Europe . Retrieved 1 July 2024 .

^ "Murviedro" .

Jewish Virtual Library . Retrieved 1 July 2024 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Bodí Ramiro, Julio (2015).

De chatarra a patrimonio. El proceso de patrimonialización de las antiguas instalaciones metalúrgicas de Puerto de Sagunto (1984-2014) (PDF) .

Universitat de València .

Ripollès i Alegre, P.P. (2002).

Arse-Saguntum: historia monetaria de la ciudad y su territorio . Fundación Bancaja.

ISBN 8484710270 .

Oman, Charles (1996) [1914].

A History of the Peninsular War Volume V . Vol. 5. Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania: Stackpole.

ISBN 1-85367-225-4 .

External links [ edit ] Official website of the city of Sagunto Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sagunt - Sagunto .

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Sagunto .

Articles related to Sagunto / Sagunt v t e Municipalities of Camp de Morvedre Albalat dels Tarongers Alfara de la Baronia Algar de Palancia Algímia d'Alfara Benavites Benifairó de les Valls Canet d'en Berenguer Estivella Faura Gilet Petrés Quart de les Valls Quartell Sagunto Segart Torres Torres v t e Municipalities of the province of Valencia Ademuz Ador Agullent Aielo de Malferit Aielo de Rugat Alaquàs Albaida Albal Albalat de la Ribera Albalat dels Sorells Albalat dels Tarongers Alberic Alborache Alboraya Albuixech Alcublas Alcàntera de Xúquer Alcàsser Aldaia Alfafar Alfara de la Baronia Alfara del Patriarca Alfarp Alfarrasí Alfauir Algar de Palancia Algemesí Algimia de Alfara Alginet Almiserà Almoines Almussafes Almàssera Alpuente L'Alqueria de la Comtessa Alzira Andilla Anna Antella Aras de los Olmos Atzeneta d'Albaida Ayora Barx Barxeta Bellreguard Bellús Benaguasil Benagéber Benavites Beneixida Benetússer Beniarjó Beniatjar Benicolet Benifairó de la Valldigna Benifairó de les Valls Benifaió Beniflà Benigànim Benimodo Benimuslem Beniparrell Benirredrà Benissanó Benissoda Benissuera Bicorp Bocairent Bolbaite Bonrepòs i Mirambell Bufali Bugarra Burjassot Buñol Bèlgida Bétera Calles Camporrobles Canals Canet d'En Berenguer Carcaixent Carlet Carrícola Casas Altas Casas Bajas Casinos Castelló Castelló de Rugat Castielfabib Castellonet de la Conquesta Catadau Catarroja Caudete de las Fuentes Cerdà Chella Chelva Chera Cheste Chiva Chulilla Cofrentes Corbera Cortes de Pallás Cotes Cullera Càrcer Daimús Domeño Dos Aguas El Genovés El Palomar Emperador Enguera Estivella Estubeny Faura Favara Foios Fontanars dels Alforins Fortaleny Fuenterrobles Gandia Gavarda Gestalgar Gilet Godella Godelleta Guadasséquies Guadassuar Guardamar de la Safor Gátova Higueruelas Jalance Jarafuel L'Alcúdia L'Alcúdia de Crespins L'Eliana L'Énova L'Olleria La Font d'En Carròs La Font de la Figuera La Granja de la Costera La Llosa de Ranes La Pobla Llarga La Pobla de Farnals La Pobla de Vallbona La Pobla del Duc La Yesa Llanera de Ranes Llaurí Llocnou d'En Fenollet Llocnou de Sant Jeroni Llombai Llutxent Llíria Loriguilla Losa del Obispo Lugar Nuevo de la Corona Macastre Manises Manuel Marines Massalavés Massalfassar Massamagrell Massanassa Meliana Millares Miramar Mislata Mogente Moncada Montserrat Montaverner Montesa Montichelvo Montroy Museros Navarrés Novelé Náquera Oliva Olocau Ontinyent Otos Paiporta Palma de Gandía Palmera Paterna Pedralba Petrés Picanya Picassent Piles Pinet Polinyà de Xúquer Potries Puebla de San Miguel El Puig Puçol Quart de Poblet Quart de les Valls Quartell Quatretonda Quesa Rafelbunyol Rafelcofer Rafelguaraf Real de Gandía Real de Montroi Requena Riba-roja de Túria Riola Rocafort Rotglà i Corberà Rugat Ráfol de Salem Ròtova Sagunt Salem San Antonio de Benagéber San Juan de Énova Sedaví Segart Sellent Sempere Senyera Serra Siete Aguas Silla Simat de la Valldigna Sinarcas Sollana Sot de Chera Sueca Sumacàrcer Tavernes Blanques Tavernes de la Valldigna Teresa de Cofrentes Terrateig Titaguas Torrebaja Torrella Torrent Torres Torres Tous Turís Tuéjar Utiel Valencia Vallada Vallanca Vallés Venta del Moro Vilamarxant Villalonga Villar del Arzobispo Villargordo del Cabriel Vinalesa Xeraco Xeresa Xirivella Xàtiva Yátova Zarra v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Phoenician cities and colonies Algeria Camarata Cartennae ( Tenes ) Hippo Regius Icosium ( Algiers ) Igilgili ( Jijel ) Iol (Cherchell) Iomnium ( Tigzirt ) Cirta ( Constantine ) Kissi (Djinet) Macomades Malaca Rachgoun Rusazus ( Azeffoun ) Rusguniae ( Tamentfoust ) Rusicade (Skikda) Rusippisir (Taksebt) Rusubbicari ( Zemmouri El Bahri) Rusuccuru (Dellys) Sarai ( Aïn Oulmene ) Thagora ( Taoura ) Tipasa in Mauretania Tipasa in Numidia Timici Cyprus Dhali Kition ( Larnaca ) Lapathus Marion Greece Callista (Santorini) Paxi Rhodes Delos Israel Tell Abu Hawam ( Haifa ) Achzib Akka (Acre) Dora Michal Jaffa Reshef Shikmona ( Haifa ) Strato's Tower (Caesarea) Italy Bitan ( Chia ) Cape Melqart (Cefalù) Drepanum ( Trapani ) Eryx ( Erice ) Heraclea Minoa Kapara (Soluntum) Karaly ( Cagliari ) Lilybaeum Motya Neapolis Nora Olbia Pantelleria Selinunte Sulci ( Sant'Antioco ) Tharros Ṣiṣ (Palermo) Lebanon Amia Ampi Arqa Athar (Tripoli) Baalbek Birut ( Beirut ) Botrys (Teros) Gebal (Byblos) Ornithon (Tell el-Burak) Porphyreon (Jieh) Sarepta Sidon Sur (Tyre) , Ushu (Palaetyrus) Umm al-Amad Libya Lepcis ( Khoms ) Oyat ( Tripoli ) Tsabratan Malta Maleth ( Cospicua ) Ann ( Mdina ) Gaulos (Gozo) Għajn Qajjet Mtarfa Ras il-Wardija Tas-Silġ Morocco Azama (Azemmour) Arambys (Mogador) Caricus Murus Heq she Elisha (Ksar es-Seghir) Likush ( Larache ) Shalat (Chellah) Tamusida Tinga ( Tangier ) Anfa ( Casablanca ) Volubilis 1 Mogador Rusadir Oualidia Zilil Gadir Sala Thymiaterium Rusibis Portugal Portus Hannibalis Portus Magonis (Portimão) Olissipona (Lisbon) Ossonoba (Faro) Balsa ( Tavira ) Spain Abdera ( Adra ) Abyla ( Ceuta ) Akra Leuka ( Alicante ) Gadir (Cadiz) Herna Iboshim ( Ibiza ) Mahón Malake ( Málaga ) Onoba Carthage (Cartagena) Rushadir ( Melilla ) Saguntum Sexi ( Almunecar ) Tagilit (Tíjola) Toscanos ( Velez ) Tyreche Syria Arwad Marat (Amrit) Balanaea (Baniyas) Carne Paltus Safita Shuksi Sumur Ugarit Tunisia Aspis (Kelibia) Bulla Regia Carthage Hadrumetum ( Sousse ) Hippo Diarrhytus (Bizerte) Kerkouane Lepcis ( Monastir ) Maqom Hadesh (Ounga) Meninx ( Djerba ) Ruspe Ruspina Sicca (El Kef) Tabarka Tayinat ( Thyna ) Thapsus Thysdrus ( El Djem ) Utica Other Myriandus Phoenicus Gibraltar Tahpanhes Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nqj5j
Cached time: 20250817051406
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.008 seconds
Real time usage: 1.287 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6996/1000000
Revision size: 13023/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 363523/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 107951/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 27/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 91508/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.579/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18702881/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 2/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1023.381      1 -total
 46.24%  473.210      1 Template:Infobox_settlement
 34.69%  354.978      1 Template:Infobox
 18.34%  187.660      1 Template:Navboxes
 11.65%  119.191     13 Template:Navbox
 11.14%  113.997      2 Template:Reflist
 10.91%  111.643     25 Template:Main_other
  9.63%   98.594      2 Template:Native_name
  8.02%   82.077      1 Template:Citation
  6.79%   69.520      1 Template:Camp_de_Morvedre Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8146537:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051406 and revision id 1302511290. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sagunto&oldid=1302511290 " Categories : Sagunto Archaeological sites in Spain Phoenician colonies in Spain Roman towns and cities in Spain Roman sites in Spain Camp de Morvedre Municipalities in the Province of Valencia Mediterranean port cities and towns in Spain Greek colonies in Iberia Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Spain Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages with Spanish IPA Pages with Valencian IPA CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Use dmy dates from December 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Valencian-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using infobox settlement with possible demonym list Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Commons link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 21:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sagunto 60 languages Add topic

