Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Writings 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Tobias Cohn 5 languages العربية Deutsch Français עברית مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tobias Cohn Tobias Cohn or Tobias Kohn (in Hebrew, Toviyyah ben Moshe ha-Kohen , Tuvia Harofeh – Tuvia the doctor; in Polish, Tobiasz Kohn ) (also referred to as Toviyah Kats ) (1652–1729) was a Polish-Jewish physician of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. He was born at Metz in 1652.

Biography [ edit ] Cohn's grandfather was the physician Eleazar Kohn , who emigrated from the Holy Land to Poland, and settled in Kamenetz-Podolsk , where he practised medicine until his death. His father was the Polish rabbi and physician Moses Kohn of Narol , in the district of Bielsk , who moved to Metz in 1648 to escape persecution during the Chmielnicki Uprising and became rabbi there. After his father's death, Phega, Cohn's mother, married Moses Samson Bacharach , rabbi of Worms , and Cohen become the step brother of the famous rabbi Yair Bacharach .

[ 1 ] His mother, Phega,  Tobias and his elder brother returned to Poland after the death of their father in 1673. He received his education at Kraków and the universities of Frankfort-on-the-Oder (at the expense of the great elector of Brandenburg ) and Padua , graduating from the latter as doctor of medicine . He practised for some time in Poland, and moved later to Adrianople , where he became physician to five successive Ottoman sultans — Mehmed IV , Suleiman II , Ahmed II , Mustafa II , and Ahmed III , moving with the court to Constantinople . In 1724 he went to Jerusalem , where he lived until his death in 1729.

Writings [ edit ] The House of the Body. An allegorical design comparing the organs of the body to the divisions of a house, from Cohn's Ma'aseh Toviyyah (1708) Cohn was familiar with ten languages – Hebrew, German, Polish, Italian, French, Spanish, Turkish, Latin, Greek, and Arabic. This great linguistic knowledge made it possible for him to write his Ma'aseh Toviyyah (Work of Tobias), published in Venice in 1707, and reprinted there in 1715, 1728, 1769, and 1850. The work is encyclopedic, and is divided into eight parts: (1) theology; (2) astronomy; (3) medicine; (4) hygiene; (5) syphilitic maladies; (6) botany; (7) cosmography; and (8) an essay on the four elements.

The most important is the third part, which contains an illustration showing a human body and a house side by side and comparing the members of the former to the parts of the latter (see illustration).

In part 2 are found an astrolabe and illustrations of astronomical and mathematical instruments. Inserted between parts 6 and 7 is Turkish-Latin-Spanish dictionary; and prefixed to the work is a poem by Solomon Conegliano .

Cohn's medical knowledge and experiences seem to have been of considerable importance. He gave, from his own observations, the first description of the "plica polonica," as well as many local symptoms and newly discovered medicinal herbs. He also published in three languages a list of remedies.

References [ edit ] ^ Kaufmann, David (1891).

"Jair Chayim Bacharach: A Biographical Sketch" .

The Jewish Quarterly Review .

3 (2): 306.

doi : 10.2307/1449883 .

ISSN 0021-6682 .

Hirsch, Biog. Lex. s.v.; Rev. Et-Juives, xvii. 293; xxi. 140, 318; M. Bersohn, Tobiasz Kohn, Warsaw, 1872.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herman Rosenthal , Frederick T. Haneman (1901–1906).

"Cohn, Tobias" . In Singer, Isidore ; et al. (eds.).

The Jewish Encyclopedia . New York: Funk & Wagnalls.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tobias Cohn .

Illustration at "Dream Anatomy", National Library of Medicine Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Israel People Deutsche Biographie DDB Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tobias_Cohn&oldid=1292633483 " Categories : 1652 births 1729 deaths 17th-century Polish physicians 18th-century Polish–Lithuanian physicians 17th-century physicians from the Ottoman Empire 18th-century physicians from the Ottoman Empire 17th-century Polish Jews Ashkenazi Jews from Ottoman Palestine Ashkenazi Jews from the Ottoman Empire Levites Polish medical writers 17th-century Jewish physicians 18th-century Jewish physicians Physicians from Metz Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 01:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tobias Cohn 5 languages Add topic

