Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 1.1 Chinese lunisolar calendar 2 Movable feasts in the Christian calendars, related to the lunar cycle 3 Reconciling lunar and solar cycles Toggle Reconciling lunar and solar cycles subsection 3.1 Determining leap months 3.2 With uncounted time 4 List of lunisolar calendars 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Lunisolar calendar 59 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kiswahili Latina Македонски Malagasy მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Calendar with lunar month, solar year Not to be confused with Lunarsolar .

Record of the Chinese lunisolar calendar for 1834, 1835, and 1836 during the Qing dynasty under the Daoguang Emperor 's Reign (道光十四年，道光十五年，道光十六年) A lunisolar calendar is a calendar in many cultures , that combines monthly lunar cycles with the solar year . As with all calendars which divide the year into months, there is an additional requirement that the year have a whole number of months (Moon cycles). The majority of years have twelve months but every second or third year is an embolismic year , which adds a thirteenth intercalary , embolismic, or leap month.

Lunisolar calendars are lunar calendars but, in contrast to purely lunar calendars such as the Islamic calendar , have additional intercalation rules that reset them periodically into a rough agreement with the solar year and thus with the seasons.

Examples [ edit ] The Chinese , Buddhist , Burmese , Assyrian , Hebrew , Jain , traditional Nepali, Hindu , Japanese , Korean , Mongolian , Tibetan , and Vietnamese calendars (in the East Asian Chinese cultural sphere ), plus the ancient Hellenic , Coligny , and Babylonian calendars are all lunisolar. Also, some of the ancient pre-Islamic calendars in south Arabia followed a lunisolar system.

[ 1 ] The Chinese, Coligny and
Hebrew [ a ] lunisolar calendars track more or less the tropical year whereas the Buddhist and Hindu lunisolar calendars track the sidereal year. Therefore, the first three give an idea of the seasons whereas the last two give an idea of the position among the constellations of the full moon.

Chinese lunisolar calendar [ edit ] Main article: Chinese calendar The Five Phases and Four Seasons of the traditional Chinese lunisolar calendar , with English translation.

The Chinese calendar (華夏曆法) or Chinese lunisolar calendar is also called Agricultural Calendar [農曆; 农历; Nónglì; 'farming calendar'], or Yin Calendar [陰曆; 阴历; Yīnlì; 'yin calendar']), as movements of the sun (representing Yang ) and moon (representing Yin) are the references for the Chinese lunisolar calendar calculations.

[ citation needed ] The Chinese lunisolar calendar is the origin of some variant calendars adopted by other neighboring countries, such as Vietnam and Korea.

Together with astronomical, horological, and phenological observations, definitions, measurements, and predictions of years, months, and days were refined. Astronomical phenomena and calculations emphasized especially the efforts to mathematically correlate the solar and lunar cycles from the perspective of the earth, [ citation needed ] which however are known to require some degree of numeric approximation or compromise.

The earliest record of the Chinese lunisolar calendar was in the Zhou dynasty (1050 BC – 771 BC,  around 3000 years ago.

[ 2 ] Throughout history, the Chinese lunisolar calendar had many variations and evolved with different dynasties with increasing accuracy, including the "six ancient calendars" in the Warring States period , the Qin calendar in the Qin dynasty , the Han calendar or the Taichu calendar in the Han dynasty and Tang dynasty , the Shoushi calendar in the Yuan dynasty , and the Daming calendar in the Ming dynasty , etc. Starting in 1912, the western solar calendar is used together with the lunisolar calendar in China.

The most celebrated Chinese holidays, such as the Chinese New Year (華夏新年), Lantern Festival (元宵節), Mid-Autumn Festival (中秋節), and Dragon Boat Festival (端午節) are all based upon the Chinese lunisolar calendar . In addition, the popular Chinese zodiac is a classification scheme based on the Chinese calendar that assigns an animal and its reputed attributes to each year in a repeating twelve-year cycle. The traditional calendar used the sexagenary cycle-based ganzhi system's mathematically repeating cycles of Heavenly Stems and Earthly Branches .

[ citation needed ] Movable feasts in the Christian calendars, related to the lunar cycle [ edit ] The Gregorian calendar (the world's most commonly used) is a solar one but the Western Christian churches use a lunar-based algorithm to determine the date of Easter and consequent movable feasts .

[ 3 ] Briefly, the date is determined with respect to the ecclesiastical full moon that follows the ecclesiastical equinox in March. (These events are almost, but not quite, the same as the actual astronomical observations.) The Eastern Christian churches have a similar algorithm that is based on the Julian calendar .

Reconciling lunar and solar cycles [ edit ] Determining leap months [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Lunisolar calendar" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A tropical year is approximately 365.2422 days long and a synodic month is approximately 29.5306 days long, [ 4 ] so a tropical year is approximately 365.2422 / 29.5306 ≈ 12.36826 months long.  Because 0.36826 is between 1 ⁄ 3 and 1 ⁄ 2 , a typical year of 12 months needs to be supplemented with one intercalary or leap month every 2 to 3 years.  More precisely, 0.36826 is quite close to 7 ⁄ 19 (about 0.3684211): several lunisolar calendars have 7 leap months in every cycle of 19 years (called a ' Metonic cycle '). The Babylonians applied the 19-year cycle in the late sixth century BCE.

[ 5 ] Intercalation of leap months is frequently controlled by the " epact ", which is the difference between the lunar and solar years (approximately 11 days). The classic Metonic cycle can be reproduced by assigning an initial epact value of 1 to the last year of the cycle and incrementing by 11 each year. Between the last year of one cycle and the first year of the next the increment is 12 –  the saltus lunae ( Latin for 'leap of the moon') –  which causes the epacts to repeat every 19 years. When the epact reaches 30 or higher, an intercalary month is added and 30 is subtracted. The Metonic cycle states that 7 of 19 years will contain an additional intercalary month and those years are numbered: 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17 and 19. Both the Hebrew calendar and the Julian calendar use this sequence.

[ citation needed ] The Buddhist and Hebrew calendars restrict the leap month to a single month of the year; [ citation needed ] the number of common months between leap months is, therefore, usually 36, but occasionally only 24 months. Because the Chinese and Hindu lunisolar calendars allow the leap month to occur after or before (respectively) any month but use the true apparent motion of the Sun , [ citation needed ] their leap months do not usually occur within a couple of months of perihelion , when the apparent speed of the Sun along the ecliptic is fastest (now about 3 January). This increases the usual number of common months between leap months to roughly 34 months when a doublet of common years occurs, while reducing the number to about 29 months when only a common singleton occurs.

[ citation needed ] With uncounted time [ edit ] An alternative way of dealing with the fact that a solar year does not contain an integer number of lunar months is by including uncounted time in a period of the year that is not assigned to a named month.

[ 6 ] Some Coast Salish peoples used a calendar of this kind. For instance, the Chehalis began their count of lunar months from the arrival of spawning chinook salmon (in Gregorian calendar October), and counted 10 months, leaving an uncounted period until the next chinook salmon run .

[ 7 ] List of lunisolar calendars [ edit ] The following is a list of lunisolar calendars sorted by family.

Babylonian calendar family – common use of the Metonic cycle Ancient Macedonian calendar Hebrew calendar Umma calendar Hindu calendar family – shared astronomical roots Vikram Samvat Buddhist calendar Burmese calendar ( Pyu calendar) Chula Sakarat Nepal Sambat Thai lunar calendar Vira Nirvana Samvat ( Jain calendar) Chinese calendar family – years start on second new moon after winter solstice (save for leaps) Japanese calendar Korean calendar Mongolian calendar Tibetan calendar Vietnamese calendar Unclassified or independent Attic calendar A lunisolar calendar devised by Plethon , né Georgios Gemistos, in his Book of Laws Ptolemic Egyptian calendar Inca calendar Celtic calendar , including Coligny calendar Muisca calendar Nisg̱a'a calendar Old Eastern Ojibwe calendar See also [ edit ] List of calendars Callippic cycle – Astronomical cycle lasting 76 years Calendar reform Nasi' – Aspect of the pre-Islamic Arabian calendar Other non-solar calendars Roman calendar (probably a lunisolar calendar with common years of 355 days and leap years of 378 days.) Runic calendar – Perpetual calendar based on the 19-year-long Metonic cycle of the Moon Notes [ edit ] ^ The modern Hebrew calendar, since it is based on rules rather than observations, does not exactly track the tropical year, and in fact the average Hebrew year of about 365.2468 days is intermediate between the tropical year (about 365.2422 days) and the sidereal year (about 365.2564 days).

References [ edit ] ^ F.C. De Blois, "TAʾRĪKH": I.1.iv. "Pre-Islamic and agricultural calendars of the Arabian peninsula", The Encyclopaedia of Islam , 2nd edition, X :260.

^ Xu, Zhaofeng.

"Considering Chengzhou ("Completion of Zhou") and Wangcheng ("City of the King")" (PDF) .

Chinese Archaeology .

8 : 172– 177. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-07-22 . Retrieved 2023-09-20 .

^ Richards, E. G. (2013). "Calendars". In Urban, Sean; Seidelmann, P. Kenneth (eds.).

Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Almanac (3rd ed.). Mill Valley, CA: University Science Books. pp. 583, 592, §15.4.

ISBN 978-1-891389-85-6 .

^ P. Kenneth Seidelmann, ed. (1992).

Explanatory Supplement to the Astronomical Almanac . p. 577.

For convenience, it is common to speak of a lunar year of twelve synodic months, or 354.36707 days.

(which gives a mean synodic month as 29.53059 days or 29 days 12 hours 44 minutes and 3 seconds) ^ van Gent, R.H. (July 2021).

"The Babylonian Calendar" . Utrecht University.

^ Nilsson, Martin P.

(1920), "Calendar Regulation 1. The Intercalation", Primitive Time-Reckoning: A Study in the Origins and First Development of the Art of Counting Time among the Primitive and Early Culture Peoples , Lund: C. W. K. Gleerup, p. 240, The Lower Thompson Indians in British Columbia counted up to ten or sometimes eleven months, the remainder of the year being called the autumn or late fall. This indefinite period of unnamed months enabled them to bring the lunar and solar year into harmony.

^ Suttles, Wayne P.

Musqueam Reference Grammar , UBC Press, 2004, p. 517.

Further reading [ edit ] Dershowitz, Nachum ; Reingold, Edward M.

(2008).

Calendrical Calculations . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521885409 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lunisolar calendars .

Introduction to Calendars Archived 2019-06-13 at the Wayback Machine , US Naval Observatory, Astronomical Applications Department.

Luni-Solar Calendar v t e Calendars Systems Lunar Lunisolar Solar In wide use Astronomical Buddhist Chinese Ethiopian Gregorian Hindu Lunar Hijri Solar Hijri ISO Unix time In more limited use Akan Armenian Assamese (Bhāshkarābda) Assyrian Baháʼí Badí‘ Bali Pawukon Saka Bengali Bangladeshi Berber Borana Burmese Chinese Earthly Branches Heavenly Stems Minguo Solar term Germanic heathen Georgian Hebrew Hindu Vikram Samvat Saka Hmong Igbo Iranian Jalali medieval Zoroastrian Irish Gaelic Islamic Fasli Tabular Jain Japanese Javanese Korean Juche Kurdish Lithuanian Maithili Malayalam Mandaean Manipuri (Meitei) Melanau Mizo (Lushai) Mongolian Nepal Nepal Sambat Vikram Samvat Yele Sambat Nanakshahi Nisg̱a'a Odia Punjabi Romanian Shona Somali Sesotho Slavic Slavic Native Faith Macedonian Tamil Thai lunar solar Tibetan Tripuri Tulu Vietnamese Wicca Xhosa Yoruba Zulu Types Runic Mesoamerican Long Count Calendar round Christian variants Coptic Ethiopian and Eritrean Julian Revised Liturgical year Eastern Orthodox Saints Historical Arabian Attic Aztec Tōnalpōhualli Xiuhpōhualli Babylonian Bulgar Byzantine Cappadocian Celtic Cham Culāsakaraj Coligny Egyptian Enoch Florentine French Republican Germanic Greek Hindu Inca Macedonian Maya Haabʼ Tzolkʼin Muisca Pentecontad Pisan Qumran Rapa Nui Roman Rumi Sexagenary Soviet Swedish Turkmen By specialty Holocene anthropological Proleptic Gregorian / Proleptic Julian historiographical Darian Martian Dreamspell New Age Discordian 'Pataphysical Reform proposals Hanke–Henry Permanent International Fixed Pax Positivist Sexagesimal Symmetry454 World Displays and applications Electronic Perpetual Wall Year naming and numbering Terminology Era Epoch Leap year New Year Regnal name Regnal year Year zero Systems Ab urbe condita Anka year Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Lucis Anno Martyrum Anno Mundi Assyrian Before Present Chinese Imperial Chinese Minguo English and British regnal year Hijri year Human (Holocene) Japanese Korean Nirayana system Seleucid Spanish Yugas Satya Treta Dvapara Kali Vietnamese Fictional Discworld ( Discworld ) Greyhawk ( Dungeons & Dragons ) Middle-earth ( The Lord of the Rings ) Stardate ( Star Trek ) List of calendars Category v t e Moon Outline Physical properties Internal structure Topography Atmosphere Gravity field Hill sphere Magnetic field Sodium tail Moonlight Earthlight Orbit Orbital elements Distance Perigee and apogee Libration Nodes Nodal period Precession Syzygy New moon Full moon Eclipses Lunar eclipse Total penumbral lunar eclipse Tetrad Solar eclipse Solar eclipses on the Moon Eclipse cycle Supermoon Tide Tidal force Tidal locking Tidal acceleration Tidal range Lunar station Surface and features Selenography Terminator Limb Hemispheres Near side Far side Poles North pole South pole Face Maria List Mountains Peak of eternal light Valleys Volcanic features Domes Calderas Lava tubes Craters List Ray systems Permanently shadowed craters South Pole–Aitken basin Regolith swirls Rilles Wrinkle ridges Rocks Lunar basalt 70017 Changesite-(Y) Water Space weathering Micrometeorite Sputtering Quakes Transient lunar phenomenon Selenographic coordinate system Science Observation Libration Lunar theory Origin Giant-impact hypothesis Theia Lunar magma ocean Geology Timescale Late Heavy Bombardment Lunar meteorites KREEP Volcanism Experiments Lunar laser ranging ALSEP Lunar sample displays Apollo 11 Apollo 17 Lunar seismology Exploration Missions Apollo program Explorers Probes Landing Colonization Moonbase Tourism Lunar resources Time-telling and navigation Lunar calendar Lunisolar calendar Month Lunar month Nodal period Fortnight Sennight Lunar station Lunar distance Phases and names New Full Names Crescent Super and micro Blood Blue Black Dark Wet Tetrad Daily phenomena Moonrise Meridian passage Moonset Related Lunar deities Lunar effect Earth phase Moon illusion Pareidolia Man in the Moon Moon rabbit Craters named after people Artificial objects on the Moon Memorials on the Moon Moon in science fiction list Apollo era futuristic exploration Hollow Moon Moon landing conspiracy theories Moon Treaty " Moon is made of green cheese " Natural satellite Double planet Lilith (hypothetical second moon) Splitting of the Moon Category v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Big History Paleontology Time Periods Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Bosporan era Bostran era Byzantine era Seleucid era Era of Caesar (Iberia) Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time ( Yuga ) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolkʼin Haabʼ Regnal year Anka year Canon of Kings English and British regnal year Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar ( Hebrew , Hindu ) Solar Lunar ( Islamic ) Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Iranian ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count New Earth Time Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium–neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Lead–lead Potassium–argon Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Thermoluminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Synchronoptic view Timeline Year zero Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐knxft
Cached time: 20250814214904
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.673 seconds
Real time usage: 0.816 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3674/1000000
Revision size: 14172/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 165568/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6017/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 57002/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.416/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17960331/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  666.818      1 -total
 19.54%  130.282      2 Template:Reflist
 17.85%  119.021      9 Template:Navbox
 15.00%  100.015      1 Template:Langnf
 14.03%   93.533      1 Template:Calendars
 12.26%   81.779      1 Template:Cite_journal
 10.87%   72.455      5 Template:Citation_needed
 10.58%   70.541      7 Template:Fix
  7.66%   51.046      1 Template:Short_description
  7.39%   49.291      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18382:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214904 and revision id 1290893512. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lunisolar_calendar&oldid=1290893512 " Categories : Calendars Lunisolar calendars Phases of the Moon Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles needing additional references from July 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 17 May 2025, at 19:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lunisolar calendar 59 languages Add topic

