Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Bibliography 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Deformed workers' state 7 languages Español 한국어 Italiano Polski Português Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in Trotskyist political theory This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Deformed workers' state" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Not to be confused with Degenerated workers' state .

Part of a series on Trotskyism Concepts Anti-fascism Anti-Stalinism Bureaucratic collectivism Critique of political economy Cross-class alliance Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state Democratic centralism Decentralized economic planning Entryism Leninism Permanent revolution Political revolution Proletarian internationalism Social revolution Soviet democracy State capitalism Substitutionism Transitional demand Uneven and combined development Union democracy United front Vanguard party World communism World revolution Variants Orthodox Trotskyism Third camp Posadism Pabloism People Trotsky Abern Ali Antonov-Ovseenko Bensaïd Blanco Callinicos Cannon Deutscher Dowson Draper Duxiu Cliff Frank Grant Hallas Hansen Healy James Khan Lambert Maitan Mandel Moreno North Novack Pablo Posadas Preobrazhensky Rakovsky Sedov Shachtman Smirnov Tạ Thu Thâu Taaffe Woods Works 1905 (1908) Terrorism and Communism (1920) Trotsky's Military Writings (1923-1925) Literature and Revolution (1924) New Course (1924) Lessons of October (1924) Towards Socialism or Capitalism?

(1925) Leon Trotsky on China (1925) History of the Russian Revolution (1930) The Spanish Revolution, 1931-1939 (1931-1939) The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (1931-40) The Revolution Betrayed (1936) Their Morals and Ours (1938) Transitional Program (1938) In Defence of Marxism (1942) Thesis of Pulacayo (1946) The Stalinist Legacy (1984) The Dilemmas of Lenin (2017) History Russian Revolution October Revolution Joseph Stalin's rise to power The Declaration of 46 Left Opposition Lenin's Testament Bloc of Soviet Oppositions French Turn Minneapolis general strike of 1934 Great Purge Moscow trials Proletarian Military Policy New York Intellectuals May 68 1968–1969 Japanese university protests 1970s Hong Kong student protests Militant in Liverpool Parties Active Internationalist Workers' Left (Greece) Lanka Sama Samaja Party Lutte Ouvrière People Before Profit Socialist Action (Hong Kong) Socialist Alternative (Australia) Socialist Alternative (U.S.) Socialist Equality Party Socialist Party (England and Wales) Socialist Workers Party (UK) Solidarity The Struggle Pakistan Trade Unionist and Socialist Coalition Workers' Cause Party Workers' Left Front Workers Revolutionary Party (UK) Defunct Bolshevik–Leninist Party of India, Ceylon and Burma Communist League of America International Marxist Group International Socialist Organization League for Socialist Action (Canada) Militant tendency Revolutionary Communist Party (UK, 1944) Socialist Appeal (UK, 1992) Socialist Workers Party (U.S.) Young Socialist Alliance Workers Party of the United States Internationals Current Committee for a Workers' International (refounded) Fourth International (post-reunification) International Committee of the Fourth International International Communist League International Revolutionary Left International Socialist Alternative International Socialist Tendency International Workers' League Internationalist Communist Union League for the Fourth International Revolutionary Communist International Trotskyist Fraction – Fourth International Historical Committee for a Workers' International (1974–2019) Fourth International Fourth International–Posadist Permanent Revolution Revolutionary Workers Ferment By country Argentina Australia China Denmark France Greece Ireland Japan Pakistan Russia Soviet Union United Kingdom United States Vietnam Related topics Betrayal thesis Campism Chavismo Democracy in Marxism Fifth International Johnson–Forest Tendency Leon Trotsky bibliography Maoism Marxism–Leninism Orthodox Marxism Shachtmanism Socialist economics Socialist Equality Party Socialist Worker Stalinism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e In Trotskyist political theory, deformed workers' states are states where the capitalist class has been overthrown, the economy is largely state-owned and planned , but there is no internal democracy or workers' control of industry. In a deformed workers' state, the working class has never held political power like it did in Russia shortly after the Russian Revolution . These states are considered deformed because their political and economic structures have been imposed from the top (or from outside), and because revolutionary working class organizations are crushed. Like a degenerated workers' state , a deformed workers' state is considered to be a state that cannot be transitioning to socialism.

Most Trotskyists cite examples of deformed workers' states today as including Cuba , the People's Republic of China , North Korea and Vietnam .  The Committee for a Workers' International has also included states such as Syria or Burma at times when they have had a nationalised economy.

History [ edit ] The concept of deformed workers' states was developed by the theorists of the Fourth International after World War II , when the Soviet Union had militarily defeated Nazi Germany and the Eastern Bloc had been created. Taking Leon Trotsky 's concept of the Soviet Union as a degenerated workers' state , the 1951 Third World Congress of the International described the new regimes as deformed workers' states.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Rather than advocating a social revolution, as in the capitalist countries, the Fourth International advocated political revolution to oust the Stalinist bureaucracy in the Soviet Union (which was degenerated) and in the buffer states.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] This approach has been defended by the Trotskyist currents that trace their political continuity through the World Congresses between 1951 and 1965, [ 4 ] such as the reunified Fourth International and CWI . The League for the Fifth International argues that the Eastern European states were degenerate workers states, in that they were "degenerate from birth" being qualitative degenerated rather than having quantitative deformations. Therefore, a political revolution would be needed.

[ citation needed ] Those Trotskyist currents that split from the Fourth International before 1948 over differences with Trotsky on the Soviet Union tend to disagree with this interpretation and have adopted theories describing the post-war Stalinist states as being state capitalist or bureaucratic collectivist .

[ 5 ] Some Trotskyist groups such as Socialist Action , while having some disagreements with the Cuban leadership, consider Cuba a healthy workers' state .  Others, such as the Freedom Socialist Party , say that the People's Republic of China has gone too far on the road of capitalist restoration to be considered a deformed workers' state.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Grassroots dictatorship New class State socialism Statism Socialist-leaning countries References [ edit ] ^ David-West 2012 , p. 5.

^ Alexander 1991 , pp. 12–13, 29.

^ Frank, Pierre (November 1951).

"Evolution of Eastern Europe" .

Fourth International .

12 (6): 176, 213– 218 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ a b Alexander 1991 , pp. 24–30.

^ David-West 2012 , p. 1.

Bibliography [ edit ] Alexander, Robert J.

(1991).

International Trotskyism 1929–1985: A Documented Analysis of the Movement .

Duke University Press .

ISBN 0-8223-1066-X .

David-West, Alzo (2012).

"North Korea and the Theory of the Deformed Workers' State: Definitions and First Principles of a Fourth International Theory" .

Cultural Logic: A Journal of Marxist Theory & Practice .

19 .

doi : 10.14288/clogic.v19i0.190909 .

ISSN 1097-3087 .

External links [ edit ] Third World Congress of the Fourth International, Class Nature of Eastern Europe Pierre Frank , Evolution of Eastern Europe , Report to the Third World Congress Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deformed_workers%27_state&oldid=1293899428 " Categories : Marxist terminology Political science terminology Forms of government Trotskyism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2022 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 09:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Deformed workers' state 7 languages Add topic

