Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ownership 2 History 3 Operations Toggle Operations subsection 3.1 Economist Intelligence Corporate Network 4 Corporate affairs Toggle Corporate affairs subsection 4.1 Governance 4.2 Financial data 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents The Economist Group 9 languages Deutsch فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Media company headquartered in London, England The Economist Newspaper Limited Trade name The Economist Group Company type Private limited company Founded 1843 ; 182 years ago ( 1843 ) in London Founder James Wilson Headquarters London , England, UK Area served Worldwide Key people Paul Deighton ( chairman ) Lara Salameh Boro ( CEO ) Products Newspapers, magazines, books, films, podcasts Services Market intelligence , conferences Revenue £367.0 million (2024) Operating income £47.4 million (2024) Net income £31.2 million (2023) Total assets £187.5 million (2023) Total equity £(76.1) million (2023) Owners Exor N.V.

(43.4%) Rothschild (26.7%) Cadbury Schroder Layton Number of employees 1,641 (2023) Divisions Economist Intelligence Unit , EuroFinance Website economistgroup .com Footnotes / references Financials as of 31 March 2023 [update] .

[ 1 ] The Economist Newspaper Limited (commonly The Economist Group ) is a British media company headquartered in London , England. It is best known as publisher of The Economist newspaper and its sister lifestyle magazine, 1843 . The Economist Group specialises in international business and world affairs information. Its principal activities are in print and digital media as well as in conferences and market intelligence .

Ownership [ edit ] After the death of its founder James Wilson in 1860, The Economist was held in testamentary trust for his six daughters and their dependents. The eldest, Mrs Bagehot, whose husband Walter was editor at the time of Wilson's death, maintained a close personal interest in the paper until her death in 1921. Subsequently, the Wilson trustees were concerned whether surviving beneficiaries would keep touch with the paper's direction, as further deaths formed subsidiary trusts over time. So in 1928 the Wilson Trust decided to sell the paper, whilst creating a structure intended to maintain its reputation for 'independent judgment and unfettered criticism'. A non-controlling 50% went to the Financial Times , and the other half to an influential group of individual shareholders. A new board of independent trustees was created, with rights both to veto the transfer of voting shares and to choose or remove editors-in-chief, who in turn would have sole responsibility for the paper's policy.

[ 2 ] Ownership of the 50% shareholding passed to Pearson plc when they bought The Financial Times Limited (FT) in 1957. Later, however, when Pearson plc was negotiating the sale of FT, The Economist's independent trustees vetoed 'complicated attempts at a deal'.

[ 3 ] Finally, in August 2015, as part of their sale of the FT to Nikkei, Inc.

, Pearson sold their share in The Economist.

[ 4 ] The Agnelli family 's Exor paid £287 million to raise their stake from 4.7% to 43.4%, while The Economist paid £182 million for the balance of 5.04 million shares which will be distributed to current shareholders.

[ 5 ] Aside from the Agnelli family, smaller shareholders in the company include Cadbury , Rothschild (21%), Schroder , Layton and other family interests as well as a number of staff and former staff shareholders.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] History [ edit ] The origins of The Economist Group date back to the foundation of The Economist: A Political, Commercial, Agricultural, & Free-Trade Journal by James Wilson in 1843.

[ 7 ] In 1946, the Economist Intelligence Unit began providing business intelligence to both The Economist newspaper and external clients.

[ 7 ] In the same year, the Economist bookshop was established as a 50:50 joint venture with the London School of Economics.

[ 7 ] Economist Conferences was established as a division of Economist Intelligence Unit in 1956 to offer government roundtables .

[ 7 ] In 1995, The Economist Group acquired the Journal of Commerce , a US-based provider of information for the shipping and transportation industries .

[ 7 ] In the same year the Group launched European Voice , the first pan-European Union weekly newspaper.

[ 7 ] In July 2004, The Economist Group launched an upmarket lifestyle magazine called Intelligent Life , an annual publication. This magazine was redesigned as a quarterly in September 2007, and became a bi-monthly publication in August 2011. In March 2016, the magazine was renamed 1843 .

Launched in 2010, the Ideas People Channel is a vertical online advertising network of around 50 sites defined by the mindset of the audience. The sites recruited for the network were identified by the readers of The Economist as their favourite online destinations for topics on business, globalisation, innovation and culture. The channel competes in the lower-cost, high-volume network advertising market, a category not previously served by The Economist online.

[ 8 ] Also recently launched is Economist Education, providing e-learning courses.

In March 2012, The Economist Group acquired the London-based marketing communications agency TVC Group for an undisclosed sum.

[ 9 ] In April 2012, the Economist Intelligence Unit expanded in Asia with the acquisition of Clearstate, a market intelligence firm specialising in customised strategic advisory and primary research in the healthcare and life sciences domains.

[ 7 ] In July 2015, Canback & Company, a strategy consulting firm operating in more than 70 countries was acquired.

[ 10 ] It is now known as EIU Canback.

Operations [ edit ] The Economist Group is headquartered in London, England , and has offices worldwide, including in Brussels, Belgium , Frankfurt, Germany , Geneva, Switzerland , Paris, France , Dubai, United Arab Emirates , Johannesburg, South Africa , Hong Kong , mainland China , Singapore , Tokyo, Japan , India , New York City and Washington, D.C.

in the United States .

[ 11 ] The Economist Group's principal activities are newspapers, magazines, conferences and market intelligence. Publications and services delivered under The Economist brand include The Economist newspaper, The Economist online, Economist Intelligence Unit , Economist Conferences, Economist Corporate Network , The World In series and a bi-monthly lifestyle magazine, 1843 . The group's other brands include CQ Roll Call (aimed at decision-makers on Capitol Hill), EuroFinance, a cash and treasury management event business, and a digital media agency, TVC.

European Voice (Brussels), formerly a sister publication of CQ Roll Call, was sold to the French company Selectcom in 2013.

Economist Intelligence Corporate Network [ edit ] The Economist Intelligence Corporate Network is a members-only service within The Economist Group providing global and regional business intelligence briefings, presentations and advice to its subscribers.

[ 12 ] The Corporate Network relies on the "information, insight, and interaction" provided by regional experts in its parent organization.

[ 13 ] 81% of its customers are business executives at the director or senior management levels. It has offices in Dubai , Johannesburg , Beijing , Hong Kong , Shanghai , Singapore and Tokyo .

[ 14 ] Corporate affairs [ edit ] Governance [ edit ] The current members of the board of directors of The Economist Group are: Rupert Pennant-Rea (Chairman), Zanny Minton Beddoes (editor-in-chief of The Economist ), Lady Suzanne Heywood , Brent Hoberman , David Bell , John Elkann , Alex Karp , Sir Simon Robertson , Lady Lynn Forester de Rothschild , Chris Stibbs and Baroness Jowell, Mustafa Suleyman .

[ 15 ] Former board members include: Andrew Rashbass, Rona Fairhead, Philip Mengel [ 15 ] and Eric Schmidt (of Alphabet, parent company of Google).  The current trustees of the Group are: Virginia Bottomley , Gus O'Donnell , Tim Clark and Bryan Sanderson.

[ 16 ] Financial data [ edit ] 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 Group turnover (in £M) 248 266 313 320 347 359 343 328 324 331 353 367 333 320 310 346 377 Group operating profit (in £M) 36 44 56 58 63 63 64 55 59 61 54 47 31 53 42 46 42 Source: [ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "Annual report 2023" (PDF) . The Economist Group.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 December 2023 . Retrieved 10 February 2024 .

^ "The Change of Ownership in the "Economist" of London" .

Commercial and Financial Chronicle . Vol. 127, no. 3292. 28 July 1928. p. 469.

^ Edgecliffe-Johnson, Andrew.

"Hands-off owner hands over FT after 58 years" .

Financial Times . The Financial Times Limited.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2022 . Retrieved 30 September 2020 .

with editorial independence protected by a four-person trust — another factor that complicated past attempts at a deal. The issue was taken off the table on Thursday when the stake was excluded from the Nikkei deal.

^ Sweney, Mark (12 August 2015).

"Pearson sells Economist Group stake for £469m" .

The Guardian . Guardian News & Media Limited.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2015 . Retrieved 30 September 2020 .

^ a b Karl West (15 August 2015).

"The Economist becomes a family affair" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2015 . Retrieved 15 August 2015 .

Pearson, the education and publishing giant that has held a non-controlling 50% stake since 1928, is selling the holding for £469m. The deal will make Italy's Agnelli family, founders of the Fiat car empire, the largest shareholder ^ Spence, Alex (11 August 2015).

"Agnellis, Rothschilds close in on Economist" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2018 . Retrieved 1 December 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g "Our history" . The Economist Group.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2017 . Retrieved 15 December 2012 .

^ Moses, Lucia "Economist Launches Online Ad Net" Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Adweek , 27 October 2010. Retrieved 12 July 2010.

^ "The Economist Group acquires TVC Group in move to create content" . PR Week. 14 March 2012 . Retrieved 15 December 2012 .

^ "The Economist Intelligence Unit Acquires Canback & Company, a Boston-Based Predictive Analytics Consulting Firm" .

businesswire.com . 22 July 2015.

Archived from the original on 31 October 2021 . Retrieved 22 March 2021 .

^ "Locations | Economist Group" .

www.economistgroup.com .

Archived from the original on 6 June 2019 . Retrieved 6 June 2019 .

^ Michelle Teo (15 April 2013).

"Brighter outlook for Asia in 2013, says Economist Corporate Network's Wood" .

The Edge (Malaysia) . Archived from the original on 24 April 2013 . Retrieved 7 February 2017 – via The Edge (Singapore).

^ "About Economist Intelligence Corporate Network" . Economist Intelligence Corporate Network. Archived from the original on 23 March 2010.

^ "Get in touch with Economist Corporate Network" .

Economist Corporate Network . Archived from the original on 23 March 2010 . Retrieved 31 August 2017 .

^ a b "Directors" . The Economist Group.

Archived from the original on 28 April 2021 . Retrieved 18 February 2015 .

^ "Trustees" . The Economist Group.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2013 . Retrieved 15 April 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Official website The Economist Group companies grouped at OpenCorporates v t e The Economist Group Publications Current The Economist 1843 Former CFO Congressional Quarterly European Voice Roll Call Subsidiaries and divisions Economist Intelligence Unit Economist Corporate Network Capitol Advantage Congress.org People Walter Layton, 1st Baron Layton James Wilson Other Business International Corporation Global Liveability Survey Category Links to related articles v t e Rothschild General Genealogy of the Rothschild family Mayer Amschel Rothschild Amschel Mayer Rothschild Rothschild Mausoleum Rothschild Park Prix Rothschild Baron Rothschild Baron Rothschild (Austria) British Empire French Empire Austro-Hungarian Empire Kingdom of the Two Sicilies Holy See Banking and companies Rothschild & Co RIT Capital Partners Edmond de Rothschild Group de Rothschild Frères S. M. von Rothschild Imerys Eramet Club Med Libération Economist Group ( The Economist ) Mouton Cadet Opus One Winery Chemins de Fer du Nord Vítkovice Mining and Iron Corporation Palestine Jewish Colonization Association Yad Hanadiv Creditanstalt British South Africa Company Rio Tinto De Beers Caspian and Black Sea Oil Company Emperor Ferdinand Northern Railway Asia Resource Minerals Genel Energy Alliance Assurance Properties Rothschild properties in the Home counties Ascott House Aston Clinton House Champneys Eythrope Exbury Gardens Gunnersbury Park Halton House Mentmore Towers Tring Park Mansion Waddesdon Manor Spencer House Palais Rothschild Château Mouton Rothschild Abbaye des Vaux de Cernay Château Clarke Château de Ferrières Château Lafite Château de Laversine Château des Laurets Château de la Muette Château Rothschild, Boulogne-Billancourt Haras de Meautry Hôtel Lambert Hôtel de Marigny Hôtel de Pontalba Hôtel Salomon de Rothschild Talleyrand Building Austria Salomon Mayer von Rothschild Anselm Salomon von Rothschild Mathilde Hannah von Rothschild Nathaniel Mayer Anselm von Rothschild Ferdinand de Rothschild Salomon Albert Anmselm von Rothschild Ludwig (Louis) von Rothschild Eugéne Daniel von Rothschild Jeanne Stuart von Rothschild Alice Charlotte von Rothschild United Kingdom Alfred de Rothschild Amschel Mayor James Rothschild Sir Anthony de Rothschild, 1st Baronet Anthony Gustav de Rothschild Anthony James de Rothschild Charles Rothschild Charlotte Henriette de Rothschild David Mayer de Rothschild Dorothy de Rothschild Edmund Leopold de Rothschild Emma Georgina Rothschild Evelina de Rothschild Evelyn Achille de Rothschild Sir Evelyn de Rothschild Ferdinand de Rothschild Hannah de Rothschild, Countess of Rosebery Jacob Rothschild, 4th Baron Rothschild Kathleen (Nica de Koenigswarter) Rothschild Leopold de Rothschild Leopold David de Rothschild Lionel de Rothschild Lionel Nathan de Rothschild Lynn Forester de Rothschild Mayer Amschel de Rothschild Miriam Louisa Rothschild Nathaniel de Rothschild Nathan Mayer Rothschild Nathan Rothschild, 1st Baron Rothschild Nathaniel Rothschild, 5th Baron Rothschild Nicky Hilton Rothschild Serena Rothschild Victor Rothschild, 3rd Baron Rothschild Walter Rothschild, 2nd Baron Rothschild France Alphonse James de Rothschild Aline Caroline de Rothschild Ariane de Rothschild Arthur de Rothschild Béatrice Ephrussi de Rothschild Benjamin de Rothschild Betty von Rothschild Charlotte de Rothschild Bethsabée de Rothschild David René de Rothschild Edmond Adolphe de Rothschild Edmond James de Rothschild Édouard Etienne de Rothschild Edouard Alphonse de Rothschild Élie de Rothschild Elisabeth de Rothschild Guy de Rothschild Hélène de Rothschild Henri de Rothschild Jacqueline Rebecca de Rothschild James Armand de Rothschild James Mayer de Rothschild Marie-Hélène de Rothschild Nadine de Rothschild Nathaniel Robert de Rothschild Nicole de Rothschild Pauline de Rothschild Philippe de Rothschild Philippine de Rothschild Salomon James de Rothschild Maurice de Rothschild Gustave de Rothschild Robert de Rothschild Alain de Rothschild Éric de Rothschild Marie Angliviel de la Beaumelle Naples Charlotte von Rothschild Carl Mayer von Rothschild Mayer Carl von Rothschild Adelheid von Rothschild Wilhelm Carl von Rothschild Berthe von Rothschild Thérèse von Rothschild Marguerite de Rothschild Bina von Rothschild Category: Rothschild family v t e Pearson plc Pearson School Heinemann (outside US) York Notes Pearson Higher Education Addison-Wesley Allyn & Bacon Benjamin Cummings Longman Pearson Education Prentice Hall College Propero Pearson Professional Addison-Wesley Professional Adobe Press Apple Certified Allyn & Bacon Professional Cisco Press FT Press IBM Press InformIT Peachpit Pearson Assessment & Information Pearson VUE Prentice Hall Professional Sams Publishing Wharton School Press Other BTEC Connections Academy Eighty Strand Edexcel Pearson College London Pearson Language Tests Glen Moreno Weetman Pearson, 1st Viscount Cowdray Marjorie Scardino Former/defunct companies All American Television Financial Times Pearson Television Penguin Random House RTL Group Fremantle Scotti Brothers Records The Economist Group The Software Toolworks Category v t e Media in the United Kingdom UK national newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals Newspapers ( history , circulation ) Broadsheet Financial Times The Daily Telegraph The Sunday Telegraph The Sunday Times Compact The i Paper The Times The Guardian The Observer Middle-market Daily Express Daily Mail The Mail on Sunday Tabloid Daily Mirror Sunday Mirror Morning Star The Sunday People Daily Star Daily Star Sunday The Sun Sunday Sport Weekend Sport Midweek Sport Online 5Pillars Magazines and other periodicals List of magazines in the United Kingdom List of magazines by circulation Radio in the UK National stations BBC BBC Radio 1 BBC Radio 1Xtra BBC Radio 2 BBC Radio 3 BBC Radio 4 BBC Radio 4 Extra BBC Radio 5 Live BBC Radio 5 Sports Extra BBC Radio 6 Music BBC Asian Network BBC World Service BBC National DAB (multiplex) Independent / commercial Absolute Radio Network BFBS Radio Capital Capital Xtra Classic FM Digital One (multiplex) Gold Greatest Hits Radio Heart Hits Radio Jazz FM Kiss Network LBC LBC News Magic Magic Classical Premier Christian Radio RNIB Connect Radio Sound Digital (multiplex) Smooth Radio talkSPORT TalkRadio Times Radio UCB UK Virgin Radio UK Radio X Regional and local stations BBC List of BBC Local Radio stations BBC Radio Scotland BBC Radio nan Gàidheal BBC Radio Ulster BBC Radio Foyle BBC Radio Wales BBC Radio Cymru Cymru 2 Independent / commercial List of community radio stations List of local commercial radio stations List of semi-national / regional analogue and digital radio stations Other stations List of hospital radio stations Pirate radio Restricted Service Licence (RSL) List of RSL stations List of student radio stations Other Broadcasting House FM broadcasting Radio Academy Radio Academy Awards Radio Independents Group RAJAR Most listened to programmes Television in the UK Principal channels ( list ) BBC / UKTV BBC One BBC Two BBC Three BBC Four BBC News BBC Parliament BBC Alba BBC Scotland CBBC CBeebies U&Alibi U&Dave U&Drama U&Eden U&Gold U&W U&Yesterday ITV ITV1 / STV / UTV ITV2 ITV3 ITV4 ITV Quiz Channel 4 / S4C Channel 4 S4C E4 E4 Extra Film4 More4 4seven Paramount 5 5Star 5USA 5Select 5Action Comedy Central Comedy Central Extra MTV MTV Music MTV 80s MTV 90s Club MTV Nickelodeon Nicktoons Nick Jr.

Sky UK Challenge Sky Arts Sky Atlantic Sky Cinema Sky Comedy Sky Crime Sky Documentaries Sky History Sky History 2 Sky Kids Sky Max Sky Mix Sky Nature Sky News Sky Replay Sky Sci-Fi Sky Showcase Sky Sports Box Office Sky Sports F1 Sky Sports News Sky Sports Racing Sky Sports Sky Witness Warner Bros. Discovery Animal Planet Boomerang Cartoon Network Cartoonito CNN International Discovery Channel Discovery History Discovery Science Discovery Turbo DMAX Food Network HGTV Investigation Discovery Quest Quest Red Really TLC TNT Sports Narrative Entertainment UK Limited Great! Action Great! Movies Great! Romance Great! Real Great! TV Pop Tiny Pop Services and platforms Current Amazon Prime Video BBC iPlayer cable Channel 4 digital digital terrestrial List of channels Disney+ EE TV 5 Freely Freesat Freesat+ Freeview high-definition List of channels ITV ITVX STV Player local television Now Netflix Paramount+ Pop Player Restricted Service Licence satellite List of channels Sky Group Sky Q Sky Glass Sky Stream TalkTalk TV TVPlayer U Virgin Media FilmFlex TiVo YouView Defunct analogue analogue terrestrial BBC Store Film4oD Real Digital Sky Group Freesat from Sky On Demand Sky+ Sky+ HD TalkTalk TV Store Top Up TV Virgin Media V+ Studios Current 3 Mills Studios BBC Cymru Wales New Broadcasting House BBC Elstree Centre BBC Pacific Quay The Bottle Yard Studios Broadcasting House Broadcasting House, Belfast Broadcasting House, Bristol Dock10 Elstree Studios (Shenley Road) Gas Street Studios The Leeds Studios The Maidstone Studios Mailbox Birmingham MediaCityUK Old Granada Studios Riverside Studios Roath Lock The Sharp Project Sky Campus Space Studios Manchester Television Centre, London Defunct Broadcasting House, Cardiff Dickenson Road Studios Fountain Studios The Hospital Club Lime Grove Studios Limehouse Studios The London Studios MGM-British Studios New Broadcasting House, Manchester Pebble Mill Studios Teddington Studios Television Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne Television Centre, Southampton Upper Boat Studios Other Television in Northern Ireland in Scotland in Wales Defunct channels Edinburgh International Television Festival History List of years Viewing statistics Most-watched broadcasts Companies and organisations Major companies Banijay UK Productions Bauer Media Audio UK BBC Bloomsbury Publishing BT Group Channel Four Television Corporation Daily Mail and General Trust Dentsu International Economist Group EMI Music Publishing Future plc Global Media & Entertainment Guardian Media Group Haymarket Media Group Informa ITN ITV plc National World News Broadcasting News UK Newsquest Pearson plc Press Holdings Reach plc RELX Reuters Sky STV Group Syco TalkTalk Group Paramount Networks UK & Australia Virgin Media O2 The Walt Disney Company (UK) Ltd.

Warner Bros. Discovery EMEA Resources Arqiva List of largest UK book publishers Government and regulatory bodies Advertising Standards Authority BBC Board (formerly: BBC Trust Board of Governors of the BBC ) British Board of Film Classification British Film Institute Culture, Media, and Sport Select Committee Department for Culture, Media and Sport Independent Press Standards Organisation Ofcom Press Recognition Panel S4C Authority Industry and trades bodies British Academy of Film and Television Arts British Phonographic Industry Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union Clearcast Digital TV Group Equity Everyone TV Federation Against Copyright Theft Independent Publishers Guild National Union of Journalists The Publishers Association Royal Television Society United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting Other BBC Academy National Film and Television School National Science and Media Museum Regional and student media Regional media Media in England Birmingham London Manchester Media in Scotland Aberdeen Dundee Glasgow Media in Wales Cardiff Student media Student television Student press Category Authority control databases International VIAF National Czech Republic 2 Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Economist_Group&oldid=1291237767 " Categories : Economist Group Mass media companies of the United Kingdom Financial data vendors Mass media companies established in 1843 1843 establishments in the United Kingdom Multinational publishing companies Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from November 2012 Use dmy dates from July 2020 Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements OpenCorporates groupings This page was last edited on 19 May 2025, at 23:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Economist Group 9 languages Add topic

