Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Feminist post-structuralist discourse analysis 3 languages العربية فارسی Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Method of discourse analysis Feminist post-structuralist discourse analysis ( FPDA ) is a method of discourse analysis based on Chris Weedon 's [ 1 ] theories of feminist post-structuralism , and developed as a method of analysis by Judith Baxter [ 2 ] in 2003. FPDA is based on a combination of feminism and post-structuralism . While it is still evolving as a methodology, FPDA has been used by a range of international scholars of gender and language to analyse texts such as: classroom discourse (Castañeda-Peña 2008; [ 3 ] Sauntson 2012 [ 4 ] ), teenage girls' conversation (Kamada 2008; [ 5 ] 2010 [ 6 ] ), and media representations of gender (Baker 2013 [ 7 ] ). FPDA is an approach to analysing the discourse of spoken interaction principally.

The poststructualist part of FPDA views language as social practice and considers that people's identities and relationships are 'performed' through spoken interaction. FPDA analyses the ways in which speakers are 'positioned' by different and often competing 'discourses' according to Michel Foucault 's (1972: 49) definition as 'practices that systematically form the objects of which they speak'. According to this, speakers constantly move between powerful and powerless 'subject positions' as they talk and interact. FPDA is influenced by a poststructuralist rather than a Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) perspective: that is, the method is informed by the view that no speaker is wholly a victim and powerless, nor wholly dominant and powerful. Rather, speakers are constantly shifting their subject positions according to the interplay of discourses within specific settings. The feminist part of FPDA considers gender difference to be a dominant discourse among competing discourses when analysing all types of text. According to Baxter (2003), FPDA does not have an 'emancipatory' agenda for women but a 'transformative' one. This means that it aims to represent women's voices that have been 'silenced' or marginalised since FPDA considers that these have been historically absent in many cultures. For example, Kamada (2008a; 2008b and 2010) uses FPDA to show how a friendship group of half-Japanese girls, who are seen by their culture as 'less than whole', draw upon competing discourses to negotiate more positive versions of their 'hybrid' ethnic and gender identities.

Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Background [ edit ] The above definition of FPDA developed from the ideas of the formalist, Mikhail Bakhtin (1981)] and the poststructuralist thinkers Jacques Derrida (1987)] and Michel Foucault (1972) in relation to power, knowledge and discourses. It is also based on the feminist work of Victorial Bergvall (1998)], Judith Butler (1990), Bronwyn Davies (1997), Valerie Walkerdine (1990)] and especially Chris Weedon (1997). Adopters of FPDA include Judith Baxter in the analysis of classroom talk and business meeting interactions; Laurel Kamada (2008; 2008; 2010) in the analysis of 'hybrid' identities of half-Japanese girls, Harold Castañeda-Peña (2008) in the examination of pupils in an EFL classroom in Brazil; Helen Sauntson in the analysis of UK secondary school classroom talk; and Paul Baker(2013) in the study of newspaper representations of predatory women. FPDA is based on the following principles, which continue to be discussed and debated by scholars: Discourse as social practice (rather than, or additional to, 'language above the sentence' or as 'language in use' (Cameron, 2001) The performative (rather than the essentialist or possessive) nature of speakers' identities; gender is something people enact or do, not something they are or characterise (Butler 1990) The diversity and multiplicity of speakers' identities: thus, gender is just one of many cultural variables constructing speakers' identities (e.g. regional background, ethnicity, class, age), though it is still viewed as potentially highly significant The construction of meaning within localised or context-specific settings or communities of practice such as classrooms, board meetings, TV talk shows An interest in deconstruction: working out how binary power relations (e.g. males/females, public/private, objective/subjective) constitute identities, subject positions and interactions within discourses and texts, and challenging such binaries Inter-discursivity: recognising ways in which one discourse is always inscribed and inflected with traces of other discourses, or how one text is interwoven with another The need for continuous self-reflexivity: being continuously explicit and questioning about the values and assumptions made by discourse analysis.

See also [ edit ] Post-structuralism Discourse Critical Discourse Analysis Feminism Feminist theory References [ edit ] ^ Weedon, Chris (1997).

Feminist Practice & Poststructuralist Theory . Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 195.

ISBN 0631198253 .

^ Baxter, Judith (2003).

Positioning Gender in Discourse : A Feminist Methodology. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 215.

ISBN 0-333-98635-0 .

^ Castaneda-Pena, Harold-Andres (2008).

Gender and Language Research Methodologies . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 256-270.

ISBN 9780230550698 .

^ Sauntson, Helen (2012).

Approaches to Gender and Spoken Classroom Discourse . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 248.

ISBN 0230229948 .

^ Kamada, Laurel (2008).

Gender and Language Research Methodologies . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 174-192.

ISBN 9780230550698 ^ Kamada, Laurel (2010).

Hybrid Identities and Adolescent Girls: Being Half in Japan . Bristol: Multilingual Matters. pp. 258.

ISBN 9781847692320 ^ Baker, Paul (2013). The Bloomsbury Companion to Discourse Analysis. London: Bloomsbury Academic. pp. 416.

ISBN 9781441160126 Further reading [ edit ] Bakhtin, M. (1981), The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays . Austin, Texas: The University of Texas.

Baxter, J. (2007), 'Post-structuralist analysis of classroom discourse', in M. Martin-Jones and A.M. de Mejia (eds), Encyclopaedia of Language and Education: Discourse and Education, Vol 3 . New York: Springer, pp. 69 – 80.

Baxter, J. (2010) The Language of Female Leadership . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Baxter, J. (2008), 'FPDA – a new theoretical and methodological approach?' in K. Harrington, L.

Litosseliti, H.

Sauntson, and J. Sunderland (eds.) Gender and Language Research Methodologies . Palgrave: Macmillan, pp. 243 – 55.

Bergvall, V. L. (1998) 'Constructing and enacting gender through discourse: negotiating multiple roles as female engineering students.' In V.L. Bergvall, J.M. Bing and A.F.Fredd (eds.) Rethinking Language and Gender Research . Harlow: Penguin.

Butler, J. (1990) Gender Trouble, Feminism and the Subversion of Identity . New York: Routledge.

Davies, B.(1997) The subject of poststructuralism: A reply to Alison Jones . Gender and Education , 9, pp. 271–83.

Derrida, J. (1987), A Derrida Reader: Between the Blinds. Brighton: Harvester Wheatsheaf .

Foucault, M. (1972), The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language . New York: Pantheon.

Harré, R. (1995) 'Agentive discourse', in R. Harré and P. Stearns (eds.), Discursive Psychology in Practice . London: Sage, pp. 120 – 29.

Kamada, L. (2008), 'Discursive "embodied" identities of "half" girls in Japan: a multi-perspectival approach within Feminist Poststructuralist Discourse Analysis', in K. Harrington, L. Litosseliti, H. Sauntson, and J. Sunderland (eds.), Gender and Language Research Methodologies. Palgrave: Macmillan, pp. 174 – 90.

Litosseliti, L. and Sunderland, J. (2002), Gender Identity and Discourse Analysis. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Potter, J. and Reicher, S. (1987), 'Discourses of community and conflict: the organisation of social categories in accounts of a 'riot'.' British Journal of Social Psychology, 26: 25 – 40.

Potter, J. and Edwards, D. (1990), 'Nigel Lawson's tent: discourse analysis, attribution theory and social psychology of fact'. European Journal of Psychology, 20, 405 – 24.

Potter, J. and Wetherell, M. (1987), Discourse and Social Psychology: Beyond Attitudes and Behaviour . London: Sage.

Sunderland, J. (2004) Gendered Discourses . Basingstole: Palgrave.

Walkerdine, V. (1990) Schoolgirl Fictions . London: Verso.

Warhol, T. (2005), 'Feminist Poststructuralist Discourse Analysis and biblical authority'. Paper delivered at BAAL/CUP Seminar: Theoretical and Methodological Approaches to Gender and Language Study, Nov 18–19, 2005, University of Birmingham, UK.

Weedon, C. (1997) Feminist Practice and Post-structuralist Theory . 2nd edn. Oxford: Blackwell.

Wetherell, M. (1998), 'Positioning and interpretative repertoires: conversation analysis and poststructuralism in dialogue.' Discourse and Society, 9 (3), 387–412.

Wodak, R. (1996), Disorders of Discourse . London: Longman.

v t e Feminist theory Academic fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Film theory Literary criticism Biology Composition studies Criminology Digital humanities Economics FPDA Geography History International relations ( Constructivism ) Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Political ecology Political theory Postmodernism Psychology Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology Womanist Asian Feminism portal Related subjects Ecofeminism Feminist method Hegemonic masculinity Women's history Women's studies Feminist theorists Elizabeth Anderson Karen Barad Simone de Beauvoir Wendy Brown Nancy Bauer Judith Butler Kimberlé Crenshaw Hélène Cixous Alice Crary Andrea Dworkin Cynthia Enloe Martha Fineman Nancy Fraser Germaine Greer Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Patricia Hill Collins bell hooks Luce Irigaray Julia Kristeva Catharine A. MacKinnon Martha Nussbaum Val Plumwood Diana E. H. Russell Dorothy E. Smith Marilyn Waring Lists Women's studies journals Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminist_post-structuralist_discourse_analysis&oldid=1225882302 " Categories : Discourse analysis Feminist theory Philosophical methodology Post-structuralism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 27 May 2024, at 08:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminist post-structuralist discourse analysis 3 languages Add topic

