Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Main activities 3 Foresight 4 Ethical responsibility 5 Dialogue between sciences and society 6 See also 7 Notes and references 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences 7 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Esperanto Français 한국어 Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Swiss organization This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Logo The Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences is a Swiss organization that supports and networks the sciences at a regional, national and international level. They are designated by the Federal Act to Promote Research and Innovation [ 1 ] to promote research together with the Swiss National Science Foundation .

[ 2 ] Its current president is Yves Flückiger .

[ 3 ] The Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences is an association of four distinct Swiss academies of different kinds: Swiss Academy of Natural Sciences (SCNAT); [ 4 ] Swiss Academy of Medical Sciences (SAMW); [ 5 ] Swiss Academy of Humanities and Social Sciences (SAGW); [ 6 ] Swiss Academy of Engineering Sciences (SATW).

[ 7 ] Overview [ edit ] The two Centres for Excellence TA-SWISS and Fondation Science et Cité are also member of the Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences.

[ 8 ] Forums and platforms allow the academy to adopt an interdisciplinary approach to various topics, and to strengthen the disciplinary national and international network. The academy also coordinates the sciences among the universities in Switzerland, while cooperating with institutions for the promotion of research, such as the Swiss National Science Foundation . At a regional level, too, scientific topics are brought to the attention of a large public. This task has been assumed by the cantonal and regional associations, which organise lecture series supported by the academy and produce publications.

Main activities [ edit ] Foresight of socially relevant topics Raising awareness of the ethical responsibility of the sciences Promoting a balanced dialogue between science and society.

Foresight [ edit ] The earlier, the better. This especially applies if topics are to be identified that are of major significance for the future of society and the environment. The academy's activities in this respect include operating scientific monitoring systems (glaciers, Permos, etc.) and providing platforms for socially relevant topics (forums). But also new technologies that are being developed, such as nanotechnology, biotechnology, synthetic biology, etc., represent challenges for the sciences. Here, it is crucial to scientifically determine the consequences so as to be able to take advantage of the opportunities and minimise the risks. Promoted by the academy, exchange within and among the sciences ensures a broad basis for the early detection of socially relevant problems.

Ethical responsibility [ edit ] Knowing that representatives of science adhere to ethical rules bolsters society's trust in science. And this is what makes future-oriented research possible in the first place. Therefore, it is important that scientists take ethical matters of concern seriously, because research always has an ethical dimension as well. Awareness of this can be raised among both researchers and society by providing ethical guidelines to be applied in research work. Such guidelines are drawn up by the academy, in conjunction with researchers.

The Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences produced brochures of guidelines and recommendations such as "Ethical principles and guidelines on animal testing", "Authorship in scientific publications – analysis and recommendations", "Scientific policy advice – recommendations" and "Scientific integrity - principles and procedural rules".

[ 9 ] Dialogue between sciences and society [ edit ] We encounter a great many applications of sciences in everyday life. We may want to know more about them but technical terminology often prevents a true dialogue. Therefore, it is important that scientific topics are carried into society and communicated in easy-to-understand language. It is equally important, however, for science to inquire about the needs of society and to take them up, either by responding to questions and concerns raised by politics or by providing the media with information. The dialogue between science and society is to allow for open, critical communication from both sides. Among other things, the academy encourages this dialogue by means of information and events highlighting new fields of research, by supporting regional projects and by awarding prizes for outstanding scientific communication or for exhibitions on nature and the sciences.

See also [ edit ] Research magazine Horizons Science and technology in Switzerland Swiss National Science Foundation Swiss Meteorological Society Life Sciences Switzerland Notes and references [ edit ] ^ In German FIFG.

^ Swiss national research promotion institutions https://www.sbfi.admin.ch/themen/01367/01676/index.html?lang=en .

^ "Yves Flückiger élu président des Académies suisses des sciences - - UNIGE" .

www.unige.ch (in French). 29 March 2023 . Retrieved 6 December 2024 .

^ Website of the SCNAT https://www.scnat.ch .

^ Website of the SAMW https://www.samw.ch .

^ Website of the SAGW https://www.sagw.ch .

^ Website of the SATW https://www.satw.ch .

^ Portrait of the Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences on their official website http://www.akademien-schweiz.ch/en/index/Portrait.html .

^ Guidelines and recommendations , Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences (page visited on 11 January 2016).

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e International Science Council (ISC) National members Albania Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Benin Bolivia Bosnia & Herzegovina Republika Srpska Botswana Brazil ANPOCS Bulgaria Burkina Faso Cameroon Canada SSHRC Chile China CASS Colombia Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Cuba Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Egypt El Salvador Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Finland France Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Honduras Hungary India ICSSR Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya North Korea South Korea KSSRC KAST Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Mauritius Mexico COMECSO Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nigeria North Macedonia Norway UB Oman Pakistan PAS PCSIR Panama Peru Philippines PSSC Poland Portugal Romania Russia Rwanda Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Singapore Slovak Republic Slovenia South Africa HSRC Spain Sri Lanka Sudan SNAS Sweden Switzerland Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tunisia Turkey Science Academy TÜBİTAK Uganda Ukraine United Kingdom British Academy ESRC United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Zambia Zimbabwe RCZ Transnational members ACSS AASSREC CASS CLACSO CODESRIA FLACSO UAI OSSREA USP Unions and associations 4S IALS IASSA IAU ICA IEA IFSM IGU IMU INQUA IPRA IPSA ISA ISEE ISPRS IUBMB IUBS IUCr IUFoST IUFRO IUGG IUGS IUHPST IUIS IUMRS IUMS IUNS IUPAB IUPAC IUPAP IUPESM IUPHAR IUPS IUPsyS IUSS IUSSP IUTAM IUTOX URSI WAPOR WAU Affiliated members AAS AASSA ACSS ASTC CIE EADI ECPR FIG GYA IAAP IAHR IASC ICA ICIAM ICLAS ICO ICSTI IFDO IFIP IFLA IFS IIASA ISA ISDE IUVSTA IWA PSA SSRC TNI TWAS UIS Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Norway Israel Other IdRef Portals : Science Biology Switzerland Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Swiss_Academies_of_Arts_and_Sciences&oldid=1303675017 " Categories : National academies of arts and humanities National academies of sciences Science and technology in Switzerland Scientific organisations based in Switzerland Members of the International Council for Science Members of the International Science Council Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2018 Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Switzerland articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Articles missing coordinates without coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 11:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences 7 languages Add topic

