Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Transhumanist literature Toggle Transhumanist literature subsection 1.1 History 1.2 Notable transhumanist authors 1.3 Transhumanist novels 2 In television and film 3 In comics or graphic novels 4 In musicals 5 In video games 6 In table-top games 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Transhumanism in fiction 3 languages Español Italiano Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of the role of transhumanism in fiction This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Transhumanism in fiction" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Transhumanism Issues Accelerating change Eradication of suffering Fourth Industrial Revolution Human enhancement Genetic Moral Neuro- Cognitive liberty New eugenics Eugenics Human nature Meliorism Post-politics Post-scarcity People Andrews Bostrom Church Cordeiro de Chardin Drexler Fahy FM-2030 Freitas Fyodorov Fuller de Garis Gasson Goertzel de Grey Haldane Hanson Harari Harbisson Harris Huxley Hughes Istvan Johnson Kurzweil Land Moen Moravec More Musk Pearce Rothblatt Sandberg Savulescu Sorgner Spencer Stock Stolyarov Thiel Vinge Vita-More Walker Warwick Wiener Yudkowsky Influential works Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) Thus Spoke Zarathustra (1883) Looking Backward (1888) The Will to Power (~1901) Daedalus (1924) La raza cósmica (1925) The Phenomenon of Man (1955) The Dialectic of Sex (1970) Metaman (1993) The Hedonistic Imperative (1995) Regeln für den Menschenpark (1997) The Age of Spiritual Machines (1999) Citizen Cyborg (2004) The Singularity Is Near (2005) Human Enhancement (2009) Fanged Noumena (2011) The Transhumanist Wager (2013) Sapiens (2014) Homo Deus (2015) The Transhumanist Bill of Rights (2015) The Age of Em (2016) The Precipice (2020) What We Owe the Future (2022) " Techno-Optimist Manifesto " (2023) Variants Accelerationism Effective Cypherpunk Dataism Extropianism Immortalism Longtermism Postgenderism Posthumanism Russian Cosmism Singularitarianism Technogaianism Technolibertarianism Technological utopianism Techno-progressivism Related topics Dyson sphere Technologies Emerging Disruptive Hypothetical v t e Many of the tropes of science fiction can be viewed as similar to the goals of transhumanism . Science fiction literature contains many positive depictions of technologically enhanced human life, occasionally set in utopian (especially techno-utopian ) societies. However, science fiction's depictions of technologically enhanced humans or other posthuman beings frequently come with a cautionary twist. The more pessimistic scenarios include many dystopian tales of human bioengineering gone wrong.

Examples of "transhumanist fiction" include novels by Linda Nagata , Greg Egan , and Hannu Rajaniemi . Transhuman novels are often philosophical in nature, exploring the impact such technologies might have on human life. Nagata's novels, for example, explore the relationship between the natural and artificial, and suggest that while transhuman modifications of nature may be beneficial, they may also be hazardous, so should not be lightly undertaken.

[ 1 ] Egan's Diaspora explores the nature of ideas such as reproduction and questions if they make sense in a post-human context. Rajaniemi's novel, while more action oriented, still explores themes such as death and finitude in post-human life.

Fictional depictions of transhumanist scenarios are also seen in other media, such as movies ( Transcendence ), television series (the Ancients of Stargate SG-1 ), manga and anime ( Ghost in the Shell ), role-playing games ( Rifts and Eclipse Phase ) and video games ( Deus Ex or BioShock ).

Transhumanist literature [ edit ] History [ edit ] Among the earliest works to portray transhumanism is the story of Frankenstein or The Modern Prometheus . Victor himself is an early transhumanist character, attempting to overcome death through chemistry. The moral of the story is that man should not try to play God, serving as a criticism of the values of the transhumanist ideology that science and technology can be used to overcome the human condition.

[ 2 ] Following Mary Shelley's work, several of the stories by H. G. Wells also address this theme.

The Invisible Man and The Island of Doctor Moreau both involve scientific men whose failed experiments in tampering with nature result in the story's conflict.

The cyberpunk genre is heavily influenced by transhumanism, generally criticizing the use of technology to improve human life by showing the consequences resulting in its misuse. Works such as Neuromancer , Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

, and the manga series Akira , all demonstrate worlds unbridled with technological advancement to improve the human race, used to reinforce divides among social classes. The idea of high-tech, low-life, results in rampant poverty frequently exploited by an upper-class made immortal through cybernetic enhancement.

[ 3 ] Author and academic Robert M. Geraci states that cyberpunk as a genre attempts to caution against transhumanism by exposing the problematic elements of the social economy that supports it.

[ 3 ] Notable transhumanist authors [ edit ] See also: Category:Transhumanists Neal Asher Margaret Atwood Iain M. Banks Kage Baker Stephen Baxter Greg Bear Greg Egan Gregory Benford Marshall Brain David Brin Octavia Butler Ted Chiang Arthur C. Clarke Philip K. Dick Cory Doctorow Jacek Dukaj Greg Egan Warren Ellis Peter F Hamilton Michel Houellebecq Aldous Huxley Stanisław Lem Ken MacLeod Richard K. Morgan Ramez Naam Yuri Nikitin Richard Powers Alastair Reynolds John Scalzi Dan Simmons Olaf Stapledon Neal Stephenson Bruce Sterling Charles Stross John C. Wright Transhumanist novels [ edit ] Main page: Category:Transhumanist books In television and film [ edit ] See also: Category:Transhumanism in television series and Category:Transhumanism in film The science fiction film genre has always had a hand in exploring transhumanism and the ethics and implications surrounding it. In the first two decades of the twenty-first century, however, there has been a surge of films and television shows focusing on the superhero genre. There are many superheroes whose stories are propelled or entirely result from dealings with transhumanism. From Iron Man to The Batman saga, there have been plenty of heroes who did not receive their powers naturally, and therefore represent the great leap human beings may take into improving their own condition.

Additionally, because these films represent the most popular trend in the medium today, they indeed represent a glimpse into the ideological shift of western culture as a whole. The fixation on normal men and women improving themselves artificially seems to have become a very widely accepted and celebrated idea.

[ 4 ] 2001: A Space Odyssey The 100 The 4400 2B Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.

Akira Alphas Altered Carbon Andromeda Avatar Battlestar Galactica Beneath the Planet of the Apes Bicentennial Man Bio Booster Armor Guyver Blade Runner Blade Runner 2049 Brainstorm Caprica Chappie Childhood's End Crest of the Stars Cyborg Dark Angel Dark City District 9 Doctor Who Elysium Ex Machina Fringe Galatea 2.2 Galaxy Express 999 Gattaca Ghost in the Shell Her Heroes H+ (a web series) Humans Interstellar Jupiter Ascending Kamen Rider Build The Lawnmower Man Limitless Lucy The Matrix franchise The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya Mobile Suit Gundam Mutant X Neon Genesis Evangelion Ninja Robots Orphan Black The Outer Limits episodes: " The Sixth Finger " Johnny Mnemonic Pacific Rim Powder Power Rangers Operation Overdrive Power Rangers RPM Prometheus RoboCop franchise Stargate SG-1 Star Trek: The Original Series : " Where No Man Has Gone Before " " Charlie X " " Miri " " What Are Little Girls Made Of?

" " Space Seed " " Metamorphosis " " Spock's Brain " " Is There in Truth No Beauty?

" " Plato's Stepchildren " Star Trek: The Next Generation " Hide and Q " " The Nth Degree " Q Who ", " The Best of Both Worlds " and " I, Borg " Star Trek: Picard Star Wars Strange Days Terminator Salvation Texhnolyze Transcendence Tron franchise Episodes of The X Files " Killswitch " Watchmen Westworld_(TV_series) X-Men Years and Years In comics or graphic novels [ edit ] See also: Category:Transhumanism in comics and Category:Transhumanism in anime and manga Akira Battle Angel Alita / Gunm The webcomic Dresden Codak stars a transhuman cyborg named Kimiko Ross who augments her body over the course of the strip's stories.

The comic Transmetropolitan is about a transhuman society several centuries in the future that includes many cyborgs, uploaded humans, and genetically modified mutants.

The dystopian graphic novels Upgrade and Monkey Room by Louis Rosenberg convey satirical views on the human march towards singularity.

In musicals [ edit ] Be More Chill In video games [ edit ] See also: Category:Transhumanism in video games and Category:Video games about cyborgs Ace Combat 3: Electrosphere BioShock series Call of Duty: Black Ops III Caves of Qud Crysis series Cyberpunk 2077 Detroit: Become Human Deus Ex series Half-Life Halo Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance Nier: Automata Punishing: Gray Raven Read Only Memories Shadowrun series SOMA System Shock series Wolfenstein series In table-top games [ edit ] The role playing game Eclipse Phase takes transhumanism to a post-apocalyptic horror setting in which Seed Artificial Intelligences have gone rogue, introducing itself with the slogan "Your mind is software. Program it. – Your body is a shell. Change it. – Death is a disease. Cure it. – Extinction is approaching. Fight it." The GURPS Supplement Transhuman Space deals with a closer transhumanist future of the Solar System , describing a role playing game setting "in the year 2100".

Another prominent example is the Warhammer 40,000 universe; Games Workshop 's longstanding tabletop strategy franchise, which includes several video games and dozens of novels. While usually focusing on concepts like the loss of technology and the death of knowledge, and nowhere near what could be called a "utopia", the Warhammer 40,000 universe does depict a setting where transhumanism and even posthumanism are both quite widespread. Cybernetic and genetic modifications, human-machine interfaces, self-aware computer "spirits" (advanced AIs), ubiquitous space travel and even true posthuman "gods" are all quite prominent and featured throughout. The main protagonists of many novels and campaigns, the Imperial Space Marines , are normal human men who have been so vastly augmented and changed by technology that they are no longer Homo sapiens but a different new species. One of major playable factions, the alien Necrons , have completely transformed their bodies into ageless robot bodies tens of millions of years before the setting's main events. A faction allied with the Imperium, the Cult of Mechanicus , is a religious organization of machine worshippers, who treat cybernetic augmentation as a form of ascension. Unlike many transhuman futures depicted by authors on the subject however, Warhammer 40,000 is bleak, violent and filled with war and even with the existence of posthuman "gods" (like the Emperor of Mankind or his Primarchs) humanity is still beset on all sides by threats—including those of actual , supernatural gods.

See also [ edit ] Novels portal Biopunk Cyborgs in fiction Genetic engineering in science fiction Postcyberpunk Superhumans in fiction Uplifting in science fiction Utopian and dystopian fiction References [ edit ] ^ Anders Sandberg .

"Review of The Bohr Maker, Tech Heaven and Deception Well by Linda Nagata" . Aleph.se . Retrieved 2012-05-09 .

^ Jougleux, Philippe.

"Frankenstein and the law: some reflexions on transhumanism" .

^ a b Geraci, Robert M. (2011-09-28).

"There and Back Again: Transhumanist Evangelism in Science Fiction and Popular Science" .

Implicit Religion .

14 (2).

doi : 10.1558/imre.v14i2.141 .

^ Elliott, Carl (2003). "Humanity 2.0".

The Wilson Quarterly .

27 (4): 13– 20.

JSTOR 40260800 .

Further reading [ edit ] Krüger, Oliver (2021-10-31).

Virtual Immortality - God, Evolution, and the Singularity in Post- and Transhumanism . transcript Verlag.

ISBN 978-3-8394-5059-8 .

External links [ edit ] List of transhumanist books v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐j4pgd
Cached time: 20250814220023
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.549 seconds
Real time usage: 0.729 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2186/1000000
Revision size: 14276/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 129503/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2754/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 43331/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.356/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23594047/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  576.839      1 -total
 36.78%  212.136      1 Template:Transhumanism
 36.41%  210.007      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.02%  103.956      1 Template:Reflist
 17.61%  101.581      1 Template:Lang
 13.74%   79.241      2 Template:Cite_web
 12.33%   71.129      1 Template:Short_description
 11.96%   69.010      6 Template:Navbox
 10.75%   62.002      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.45%   60.273      1 Template:Science_fiction Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3506481:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220023 and revision id 1305922712. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transhumanism_in_fiction&oldid=1305922712 " Categories : Fiction about transhumanism Biopunk Cyberpunk themes Postcyberpunk Science fiction themes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 22:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transhumanism in fiction 3 languages Add topic

