Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Dean of Harvard College 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Rakesh Khurana 3 languages Deutsch Español ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American educator (born 1967) Rakesh Khurana Khurana in 2015 Dean of Harvard College In office July 1, 2014 – July 1, 2025 Preceded by Evelynn Hammonds Donald Pfister (acting) Succeeded by David Deming Personal details Born ( 1967-11-22 ) November 22, 1967 (age 57) India Spouse Stephanie Khurana Children 3 Education Cornell University ( BS ) Harvard University ( MA , PhD ) Academic work Institutions Massachusetts Institute of Technology Harvard University Rakesh Khurana (born November 22, 1967) is an Indian-American academic and university administrator. He is a professor of sociology at Harvard University , a professor of leadership development at Harvard Business School , and the dean of Harvard College .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Khurana was born in India and was raised in Queens, New York .

[ 3 ] He received his bachelor's degree in industrial relations from Cornell , [ 1 ] his M.A.

in sociology from Harvard, and his PhD in organizational behavior through a joint program between the Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences and Harvard Business School in 1998.

[ 1 ] He is of Punjabi descent.

Career [ edit ] Khurana is a founding team member of Cambridge Technology Partners and from 1998 to 2000 he taught at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology .

[ 1 ] Khurana is the author of the book, Searching for a Corporate Savior: The Irrational Quest for Charismatic CEOs and related academic and managerial articles on the pitfalls of charismatic leadership .

[ citation needed ] In 2007 he published his second book From Higher Aims to Hired Hands: The Social Transformation of American Business Schools and the Unfulfilled Promise of Management as a Profession (Princeton University Press).

[ 4 ] The book received the Max Weber prize from the American Sociological Association's Organizations, Occupations, and Work Section and was the Winner of the 2009 Gold Medal Axiom Business Book Award in Career, Jenkins Group, Inc. and the Winner of the 2007 Best Professional/Scholarly Publishing Book in Business, Finance and Management, Association of American Publishers and the Finalist for the George R. Terry Award from the Academy of Management.

[ citation needed ] He is the co-editor of the Handbook of Leadership Theory and Practice (2010), published by Harvard Business School Press [ 5 ] and the Handbook for Teaching Leadership: Knowing, Doing and Being, (2012), published by SAGE Publications .

[ 6 ] In March 2010, Khurana and his wife, Stephanie Khurana, were named master and co-master (now known as faculty deans) of Cabot House .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Dean of Harvard College [ edit ] In July 2014, Khurana was appointed Dean of Harvard College.

[ 3 ] He remained dean of Cabot House until 2020.

[ 9 ] In May 2016, Harvard announced restrictions on undergraduates who belong to fraternities or gender-exclusive organizations not formally affiliated with the college, some of which are known as "final clubs." The restrictions on students belonging to these clubs include ineligibility for leadership positions in student organizations affiliated with Harvard, such as sports teams, and ineligibility for required Harvard endorsement for fellowships such as Rhodes and Marshall fellowships. Khurana worked with University President Drew Gilpin Faust to develop the new policy. At the time, Khurana said the exclusion of women practiced by the male-only clubs had no place in the 21st century.

[ 10 ] The restrictions were challenged in state and federal courts and the University ultimately abandoned enforcement of the sanctions in June 2020 following the Supreme Court ruling in Bostock v. Clayton County , on sex discrimination which would have likely resulted in a similar defeat for Harvard.

[ 11 ] In August 2024, Khurana announced that he would step down from his post as Dean of Harvard College at the end of the 2024-25 academic year.

[ 12 ] He was succeeded by economist David Deming.

[ 13 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Indo-American Rakesh Khurana is new Dean of Harvard College" .

IANS . Biharprabha News . Retrieved 23 January 2014 .

^ "Rakesh and Stephanie Khurana - Cabot House - People" . Cabot House at Harvard. Archived from the original on 2013-07-18.

^ a b "A dream, 'quietly imagined,' come true" .

Harvard Gazette . 11 July 2014.

^ Tsui, Anne S. (21 January 2022).

"From Traditional Research to Responsible Research: The Necessity of Scientific Freedom and Scientific Responsibility for Better Societies" .

Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior .

9 (1): 1– 32.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-orgpsych-062021-021303 .

ISSN 2327-0608 .

S2CID 244238570 .

^ "Handbook of Leadership Theory and Practice" . Harvard Business School Press.

^ "The Handbook for Teaching Leadership - SAGE Publications Inc" . SAGE Publications. 13 January 2022.

^ "College Announces New Faculty Deans in Five Houses | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved 2021-07-22 .

^ "New Masters Appointed for Cabot, Eliot, and Mather Houses" .

Harvard Magazine . 2010-03-26 . Retrieved 2021-07-22 .

^ "Cabot, Kirkland House Faculty Deans to Step Down | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved 2025-05-14 .

^ The Washington Post ^ Knieriem, Declan; Schumer, Ema.

"Harvard Drops Social Group Sanctions Following Supreme Court Sex Discrimination Decision" . The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 6 January 2021 .

^ "Harvard College Dean Rakesh Khurana to Step Down in June 2025 | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved 2024-09-02 .

^ "David Deming, Kennedy School Professor and Kirkland House Dean, Named Next Dean of Harvard College | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved 2025-05-14 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Rakesh Khurana .

Harvard College profile Archived 2019-06-12 at the Wayback Machine http://www.hbs.edu/Pages/search.aspx?q=Rakesh%20Khurana v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Croatia Poland Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rakesh_Khurana&oldid=1303312803 " Categories : 1967 births Living people American business theorists Harvard Business School alumni Cornell University School of Industrial and Labor Relations alumni Harvard Business School faculty MIT Sloan School of Management faculty American academics of Indian descent Indian emigrants to the United States Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences alumni American people of Punjabi descent Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 06:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rakesh Khurana 3 languages Add topic

