Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Title 2 Setting and dramatis personæ Toggle Setting and dramatis personæ subsection 2.1 Setting 2.2 Participants 3 Content 4 Style 5 History of the text 6 Quotes 7 Text, translations and commentaries Toggle Text, translations and commentaries subsection 7.1 Text 7.2 Translations 7.3 Commentaries 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents De re publica 18 languages Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano Latina Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dialogue on Roman politics by Cicero Bust of Cicero, author of De re publica Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e De re publica ( On the Republic ; see below ) is a dialogue on Roman politics by Cicero , written in six books between 54 and 51 BC. The work does not survive in a complete state, and large parts are missing. The surviving sections derive from excerpts preserved in later works and from an incomplete palimpsest uncovered in 1819. Cicero uses the work to explain Roman constitutional theory. Written in imitation of Plato's Republic , it takes the form of a Socratic dialogue in which Scipio Aemilianus takes the role of a wise old man.

The work examines the type of government that had been established in Rome since the kings. The development of the constitution is explained, and Cicero explores the different types of constitutions and the roles played by citizens in government. The work is also known for the Dream of Scipio , a fictional dream vision from the sixth book.

Title [ edit ] While already the Latin version of the title of this work is given in two versions ( De re publica and De Republica ), depending on source, the translation of the title of this work show even more variants, often based on the choice of the translator:  the expression " res publica " (which appears in the title of this work) is notoriously difficult to translate. Its modern English cognate, republic , (also similar terms in many other languages) has acquired quite different connotations from the original Latin meaning ( res publica = most literally "the public matter"), rendering the term here problematic if not outright anachronistic in its implications. Because of the difficulties the title affords, there is no general consensus on how best to retain the sense of the Latin in translating the title. It is helpful to note that Cicero almost certainly had in mind the title of Plato's celebrated dialogue Republic ( Greek : Πολιτεία, Politeia ) when naming his dialogue. While Plato's dialogue is often translated as Republic , politeia translates more literally as "constitution," "regime," or "set-up," and the long tradition of calling the dialogue The Republic can be attributed to Cicero's own treatise and treatment in Latin.

Setting and dramatis personæ [ edit ] De re publica is in the format of a Socratic dialogue in which Scipio Aemilianus (who had died over twenty years before Cicero was born, 270 years after Socrates ' death) takes the role of a wise old man — a typical feature of the genre. Cicero's treatise was politically controversial: by choosing the format of a philosophical dialogue he avoided naming his political adversaries directly. By employing various speakers to raise differing opinions, Cicero not only remained true to his favoured sceptical method of setting opposing arguments against one another (see, e.g., Carneades ), but also made it more difficult for his adversaries to take him to task for what he had written.

Setting [ edit ] The dialogue is portrayed as taking place in Scipio's estate, during three consecutive days. Each day is described in two books, with an introduction by Cicero preceding the dialogue of each book. A large part of the last book (the sixth) is taken by Scipio telling a dream he had: this passage is known as Somnium Scipionis , or "Scipio's dream".

Participants [ edit ] In alphabetical order: Fannius, Gaius : Consul in 122 BC. Follower of Stoicism , historian and orator . Son-in-law to Laelius.

Laelius, Gaius : Close friend and associate of Scipio, Consul in 140 BC, promoter of the study of literature and Philosophy .

Manilius, Manius : Consul in 149 BC. Historian and legal scholar .

Mucius Scaevola, Quintus : Legal scholar and patron of the young Cicero. Son-in-law to Laelius.

Mummius, Spurius : Satirist and extreme defender of optimate interests. Brother of Lucius Mummius .

Philus, Lucius Furius : Consul 136 BC, orator Rutilius Rufus, Publius : Politician admired for his honesty, dedicated to Stoicism.

Scipio Aemilianus Africanus, P. Cornelius : Famous military and political leader 149–129 BC. Captured and destroyed Carthage in 146 BC. Restored order after assassination of Tiberius Gracchus in 133 BC and mediated between the political factions. Died suddenly and mysteriously in 129 BC.

Tubero, Quintus Aelius : Scipio's nephew, tribune c. 129 BC. Legal scholar dedicated to Stoicism.

As a letter to his brother Quintus (dated to November 54 BC) shows, Cicero very nearly redrafted the entire work so as to replace these characters with himself and his friends.

[ 1 ] Cicero showed an early draft of the treatise to a friend named Sallustius. However, Sallustius immediately recommended that Cicero redesign the work in order to set it in his own day, and substitute Cicero himself for Scipio Aemilianus: 'for he pointed out that these matters could be treated with much more authority if I spoke of the Republic in my own person'.

[ 2 ] Cicero was convinced by Sallustius' arguments, and he makes clear in the letter to Quintus that he intended to carry out this redraft. However, he must have changed his mind soon after, as the treatise as it survives is still set in Scipio Aemilianus' time.

Content [ edit ] Apart from the Greek philosophers mentioned above, Polybius was also an important source of inspiration for Cicero's political views.

Since not all of the work survives, some of the content is surmised from references by other ancient authors.

Book One : Contains a discussion between the protagonists of the political situation of their time. The theme of the work is given and some comments are made about the theory of constitutions .

Book Two : An outline of Roman history and the development of the constitution .

Book Three : The role of justice in government is examined, as are the different types of constitutions .

Book Four : A discourse about education .

Book Five : The characters converse about the qualities of the ideal citizen in government .

Book Six : Little of this book survives except the Somnium Scipionis , which functions as the conclusion to the work.

Style [ edit ] Cicero carefully edited De re publica in order to achieve exalted style.

[ 3 ] Cicero used several archaic expressions in the treatise, even though he hadn't supported an archaistic movement in Latin literature.

[ 3 ] The causes were the setting of De re publica in the past and discussion of historical and legal matters. His later works contain fewer archaic words, but more neologisms.

[ 4 ] Archaistic words in De re publica are distributed irregularly. Among the surviving volumes, the frequency of outmoded words in Book II devoted to historical matters is two times higher compared to Book I where theoretical issues are discussed.

[ 5 ] Cicero tried to emulate speech of the dialogue's participants by reconstructing several aspects of spoken language of the Scipionic age.

[ 6 ] The treatise has other stylistic features: a large number of antitheses compared to other philosophical works and elements of archaic grammar, still in use in official language, but completely outmoded in public speeches.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] History of the text [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "De re publica" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Vatican palimpsest containing De re publica Cicero wrote the six books of De re publica , along with several other documents, between 54 and 51 BC.

[ 9 ] Large parts of the text are missing: especially from the fourth and the fifth books, only minor fragments have survived. All other books have some passages missing.

Scipio's dream , which is only a part from the sixth book, is nearly all that survives from that book. The Somnium Scipionis , as it is known, survives because it was the subject of a commentary by Macrobius , who excerpted large portions; both he and his readers in the Middle Ages and Renaissance were mainly interested in its discussion of astrology and astronomy, especially given the loss of the rest of the book. An enterprising copyist early in the textual tradition appended a copy of the Somnium to a copy of Macrobius's Commentary, but this copy appears to be inferior to the one Macrobius was reading. This text became so popular that its transmission was polluted by multiple copies; it has been impossible to establish a stemma for it.

The largest part of the surviving text was uncovered as a palimpsest in 1819 in a Vatican Library manuscript (Vat Lat 5757) of a work by Augustine and published in 1822. Before that date, Scipio's dream was the only larger excerpt of the text that was known to have survived the Middle Ages . The other fragments are mainly quotes found in the work of other authors (for example Augustine and Nonius Marcellus ). Through these other authors' discussion of Cicero's treatise, the main topics of each book can be surmised.

The discovery in 1819 by Cardinal Angelo Mai was one of the first major recoveries of an ancient text from a palimpsest, and although Mai's techniques were crude by comparison with later scholars', his discovery of De Republica heralded a new era of rediscovery and inspired him and other scholars of his time to seek more palimpsests.

A copy was published in the 19th century by the Vatican Library, and a transcript is available in the 1908 Supplementary Proceedings of the American School of Rome. Uncertainty continues over several corruptions in the text that affect key data, such as the structure and size of the Comitia Centuriata in early Rome as described by Scipio in Book II. Another key area of debate is the one corrective hand present in Vat Lat 5757; some scholars believe the corrective hand was a more skilled copyist, perhaps a supervisor, who had access to the same text as the copyist and was correcting the first work; others have concluded that the corrective hand had access to a different version of the text.

It is worth noting that in one letter to his friend Atticus, Cicero asks him to make a correction to the copy of De Republica Cicero has sent him. This correction is not present in the Vat Lat 5757 version of the text.

Quotes [ edit ] This excessive liberty soon brings the people, collectively and individually, to an excessive servitude. ( Latin : Nimiaque illa libertas et populis et privatis in nimiam servitutem cadit ) (I, 68) ... you will not any longer attend to the vulgar mob's gossip nor put your trust in human rewards for your deeds; virtue, through her own charms, should lead you to true glory. Let what others say about you be their concern; whatever it is, they will say it anyway. ( Latin : Neque sermonibus vulgi dederis te, nec in præmiis spem posueris rerum tuarum; suis te oportet illecebris ipsa virtus trahat ad verum decus. Quid de te alii loquantur, ipsi videant, sed loquentur tamen.

) (VI.23) Text, translations and commentaries [ edit ] Text [ edit ] Cicero: On Friendship and The Dream of Scipio by J. Powell (1990) Wiltshire: Aris & Phillips Ltd Cicero: De Re Publica ed. J. E. G. Zetzel (1995) Cambridge: Cambridge UP Cicero: On the Commonwealth and On the Laws ed. and trans. J. E. G. Zetzel (1999) Cambridge: Cambridge UP Cicero: The Republic and The Laws ed. and trans.

N. Rudd (1998) New York: Oxford UP Cicero: De re publica ed. and trans.

Gesine Manuwald (2024) Liverpool: Liverpool University Press Translations [ edit ] Republic - a translation neglecting the first word of the Latin title ( De ), which is the equivalent of On or Of ; other translations of the title include On the republic or Treatise on the republic .

Although "republic" can appear a neutral translation of "res publica", it is infected by the many interpretations given to the word republic afterwards, as mentioned above. So, the translation of "Res publica" (literally the "public thing" or the public cause ) has many variants: Sometimes "Res publica" is translated into Commonwealth , hence Treatise on the Commonwealth is a possible translation of the title (the major translation by G.H. Sabine & S.B. Smith, 1929, is, thus, On the Commonwealth ).

On Government or On the State – Cicero's intention was however probably more specific, the type of government that had been established in Rome since the kings, and that was challenged by amongst others Julius Caesar , by the time Cicero wrote his De re publica . (see: Roman Republic ) Commentaries [ edit ] Büchner, Karl (1984).

M. Tullius Cicero, De re publica (Wissenschaftliche Kommentare zu griechischen und lateinischen Schriftstellern). Heidelberg: Winter, ISBN 3-533-03032-6 .

Höffe, Otfried (ed.) (2017).

Ciceros Staatsphilosophie. Ein kooperativer Kommentar zu De re publica und De legibus [Cicero's philosophy of state. A co-operative commentary on De re publica and De legibus]. Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter, ISBN 978-3-11-053477-1 .

References [ edit ] ^ Cicero, Ad Quintum Fratrem III.5 (= SB 25) ^ Cicero, Ad Quintum Fratrem III.5.1 ^ a b Albrecht, M.

Cicero's Style: a synopsis , Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2003. P. 31.

^ Albrecht, M.

Cicero's Style: a synopsis , Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2003. P. 45.

^ Albrecht, M.

Cicero's Style: a synopsis , Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2003. P. 92.

^ Albrecht, M.

Cicero's Style: a synopsis , Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2003. P. 86-87.

^ Albrecht, M.

Cicero's Style: a synopsis , Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2003. P. 115.

^ Albrecht, M.

Cicero's Style: a synopsis , Leiden; Boston: Brill, 2003. P. 42.

^ Clayton, E., Cicero (106—43 B.C.E.) in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , accessed on 17 December 2024 Bibliography [ edit ] Fott, David, Marcus Tullius Cicero: On the Republic and On the Laws ( Agora Editions ), Cornell University Press (December 19, 2013).

How, W. W. (1930) "Cicero's Ideal in his De re publica ". Journal of Roman Studies, 20 : 24–42.

Keyes, C. W. (1921) "Original Elements in Cicero's Ideal Constitution". American Journal of Philology 42 : 309–323.

Powell, J. G. F. (1994) "The rector rei publicae of Cicero's De Republica ".

Scripta Classica Israelica 13 : 19–29.

Sharples, R. (1986). "Cicero's Republic and Greek Political Theory".

Polis .

5 (2): 30– 50.

doi : 10.1163/20512996-90000291 .

Wood, N.

Cicero's Social and Political Thought.

(1988) Berkeley; Los Angeles: University of California Press.

Hamza, G.

Il potere (lo Stato) nel pensiero di Cicerone e la sua attualità.

Revista Internacional de Derecho Romano (RIDROM) 10 (2013) 1-25.

http://www.ridrom.uclm.es External links [ edit ] Latin Wikisource has original text related to this article: De re publica Project Gutenberg : On the Commonwealth is contained in C. D. Yonge 's literal translation of three philosophical works by Cicero, with notes and some quotes in Latin On the Republic , translated by C.W.Keyes at attalus.org Latin original at The Latin Library v t e Marcus Tullius Cicero Personal life Political career Writings Treatises Rhetoric and politics De Inventione De Oratore Book III De Partitionibus Oratoriae De Optimo Genere Oratorum Brutus Orator De Legibus Philosophical Hortensius Academica Consolatio De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum Tusculanae Disputationes De Natura Deorum De Divinatione De Fato Cato Maior de Senectute Laelius de Amicitia De Officiis De Re Publica Somnium Scipionis Paradoxa Stoicorum Marcus Tullius Cicero Orations Political De Imperio Cn. Pompei In Catilinam I–IV In Toga Candida Pro Milone Pro Marcello Philippicae Judicial Pro Quinctio Pro Roscio Amerino Divinatio in Caecilium In Verrem Pro Tullio Pro Caecina Pro Cluentio Pro Archia Poeta Pro Caelio Letters Epistulae ad Atticum Epistulae ad Brutum Epistulae ad Familiares Epistulae ad Quintum Fratrem Portrayals Cicero at His Villa at Tusculum (1839 painting) Related Summum bonum Terentia (wife) Tullia (daughter) Cicero Minor (son) Quintus Tullius Cicero (brother) Cicero, Illinois Cicero, New York v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Poland Vatican 2 Israel Catalonia Other IdRef 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=De_re_publica&oldid=1302072468 " Categories : Books about political philosophy Philosophical works by Cicero Roman Republic Political thought in ancient Rome Manuscripts in the Vatican Library Rediscovered works Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 05:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents De re publica 18 languages Add topic

