Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of the domain and leading researchers 2 Globalization effects on the discipline 3 Criticisms 4 Universities with ecological anthropology programs 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Notes 6.2 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ecological anthropology 17 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Čeština فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Қазақша Lietuvių 日本語 پښتو Română Русский Српски / srpski தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of cultural adaptations to environments Part of a series on Anthropology of nature, science, and technology Basic concepts Ecogovernmentality Nature–culture divide Major theorists Tom Boellstorff Ray Brassier Benjamin H. Bratton Gabriella Coleman Roy Ellen Mark Fisher Donna Haraway Mizuko Ito Nick Land Bruno Latour Daniel Miller Ted Nelson Reza Negarestani Sadie Plant Paul Virilio Mike Wesch Leslie White Related articles Capitalist Realism (2009) Cultural ecology Cybernetic Culture Research Unit (CCRU) Cybertext Cyborg anthropology Digital anthropology Ecological anthropology Environmental anthropology Fanged Noumena (2011) Hari Kunzru Hypermedia Hypertext Hypertext fiction Literary Machines (1981) Political ecology Rave culture Science, technology and society Social and cultural anthropology v t e Part of a series on Anthropology Outline History Types Archaeological Biological Cultural Linguistic Social Archaeological Aerial Aviation Battlefield Biblical Bioarchaeological Environmental Ethnoarchaeological Experimental Feminist Forensic Maritime Paleoethnobotanical Zooarchaeological Biological Anthrozoological Biocultural Evolutionary Forensic Molecular Neurological Nutritional Paleoanthropological Primatological Social Cultural Applied Art Cognitive Cyborg Development Digital Ecological Environmental Economic Political economy Feminist Food Historical Institutional Kinship Legal Media Medical Museums Musical Political Psychological Public Religion Symbolic Transpersonal Urban Visual Linguistic Anthropological Descriptive Ethnological Ethnopoetical Historical Ideology Semiotic Sociological Research framework Anthropometry Ethnography cyber Ethnology Cross-cultural comparison Participant observation Holism Reflexivity Thick description Cultural relativism Ethnocentrism Emic and etic Key concepts Culture Development Ethnicity Evolution sociocultural Gender Kinship and descent Meme Prehistory Race Society Value Colonialism / Postcolonialism Key theories Actor–network theory Alliance theory Boasian anthropology Cross-cultural studies Cultural materialism Culture theory Diffusionism Feminism Functionalism Historical particularism Interpretive Performance studies Political economy Practice theory Structuralism Post-structuralism Systems theory Lists Anthropologists by nationality Anthropology by year Bibliography Journals List of indigenous peoples Organizations v t e Ecological anthropology is a sub-field of anthropology and is defined as the "study of cultural adaptations to environments".

[ 1 ] The sub-field is also defined as, "the study of relationships between a population of humans and their biophysical environment ".

[ 2 ] The focus of its research concerns "how cultural beliefs and practices helped human populations adapt to their environments, and how people used elements of their culture to maintain their ecosystems ".

[ 1 ] Ecological anthropology developed from the approach of cultural ecology , and it provided a conceptual framework more suitable for scientific inquiry than the cultural ecology approach.

[ 3 ] Research pursued under this approach aims to study a wide range of human responses to environmental problems .

[ 3 ] Ecological anthropologist, Conrad Kottak published arguing [ clarification needed ] there is an original older 'functionalist', apolitical style ecological anthropology and, as of the time of writing in 1999, a 'new ecological anthropology' was emerging and being recommended consisting of a more complex intersecting global, national, regional and local systems style or approach.

[ 4 ] History of the domain and leading researchers [ edit ] In the 1960s, ecological anthropology first appeared as a response to cultural ecology, a sub-field of anthropology led by Julian Steward .  Steward focused on studying different modes of subsistence as methods of energy transfer and then analyzed how they determine other aspects of culture.  Culture became the unit of analysis .  The first ecological anthropologists explored the idea that humans as ecological populations should be the unit of analysis, and culture became the means by which that population alters and adapts to the environment.  It was characterised by systems theory , functionalism and negative feedback analysis.

[ 5 ] Benjamin S. Orlove has noted that the development of ecological anthropology has occurred in stages. "Each stage is a reaction to the previous one rather than merely an addition to it".

[ 6 ] The first stage concerns the work of Julian Steward and Leslie White , the second stage is titled ' neofunctionalism ' and/or ' neoevolutionism ', and the third stage is termed 'processual ecological anthropology'.

[ 6 ] During the first stage, two different models were developed by both White and Steward.  "The distinction is not as rigid as some critics have made it out to be, White's models of cultural evolution were unilinear and monocausal, whereas Steward admitted a number of different lines of cultural development and a number of different causal factors.

[ 6 ] During the second stage, it was noted that the later group agreed with Steward and White, while the other disagreed. 'Neoevolutionists' borrowed from the work of Charles Darwin . The general approach suggested that "evolution is progressive and leads towards new and better forms in succeeding periods".

[ 6 ] 'Neofunctionalists' "see the social organization and culture of specific populations as functional adaptations which permit the populations to exploit their environments successfully without exceeding their carrying capacity ".

[ 6 ] 'Processual ecological anthropology' is noted to be new. Studies based on this approach "seek to overcome the split in the second stage of ecological anthropology between excessively short and long time scales".

[ 6 ] The approach more specifically, examines "shifts and changes in individual and group activities, and they focus on the mechanism by which behavior and external constraints influence each other".

[ 6 ] One of the leading practitioners within this sub-field of anthropology was Roy Rappaport . He delivered many outstanding works on the relationship between culture and the natural environment in which it grows, especially concerning the role of ritual in the processual relationship between the two. He conducted the majority, if not all, of his fieldwork amongst a group known as the Maring, who inhabit an area in the highlands of Papua New Guinea .

[ 2 ] Patricia K. Townsend's work highlights the difference between ecological anthropology and environmental anthropology . In her view, some anthropologists interchangeably use both terms.  She states that "Ecological anthropology will refer to one particular type of research in environmental anthropology – field studies that describe a single ecosystem including a human population".

[ 2 ] Studies conducted under this sub-field "frequently deal with a small population of only a few hundred people such as a village or neighbourhood ".

[ 2 ] Cultural Ecology influenced several anthropologists, including L. P. Vidyarthi and his concept of the Nature-Man-Spirit (NMS) complex.

Globalization effects on the discipline [ edit ] Studies under the discipline are concerned with the ethnoecologies of indigenous populations .

[ 1 ] Due to various factors associated with globalization , indigenous ethnoecologies are facing increasing challenges such as, "migration, media, and commerce spread people, institutions, information, and technology".

[ 1 ] "In the face of national and international incentives to exploit and degrade, ethnological systems that once preserved local and regional environments increasingly are ineffective or irrelevant".

[ 1 ] Threats also exist of "commercial logging, industrial pollution, and the imposition of external management systems" on their local ecosystems.

[ 1 ] These threats to indigenous ways of life are a familiar occurrence in the field of anthropology.  Conrad Phillip Kottak states that "Today's ecological anthropology, aka environmental anthropology, attempts not only to understand but also to find solutions to environmental problems".

[ 1 ] One of the disciplines' approaches for finding such solutions is contemplating which aspects of human nature lead to environmental degradations. Such aspects of human nature can include a desire for technological innovations, an aspiration for higher social status, and a preoccupied or biased inclination to social justice.

[ 7 ] Another approach to deal with the contemporary climate issue is applying a norm of traditional ecological knowledge. Long-term ecological knowledge of an indigenous group can provide valuable insight into adaptation strategies, community-based monitoring, and dynamics between culturally important species and humans.

[ 8 ] Criticisms [ edit ] From the beginning various scholars criticised the discipline, saying it inherently was too focused on static equilibrium which ignored change, that it used circular reasoning , and that it oversimplified systems.

[ 9 ] [ attribution needed ] One of the current criticisms [ by whom?

] is that, in its original form, ecological anthropology relies upon cultural relativism as the norm .

[ 5 ] However, in today's world, there are few cultures that are isolated enough to live in a true culturally relative state. Instead, cultures are being influenced and changed by media , governments , NGOs , businesses, etc.

[ 1 ] In response, the discipline has seen a shift towards applied ecological anthropology, political ecology and environmental anthropology .

[ 1 ] Universities with ecological anthropology programs [ edit ] Indiana University North Carolina State University Oregon State University Rutgers University Stanford University University of Arizona University of Florida University of Georgia University of Hawaii University of Kent University of London University of Maryland University of Texas at San Antonio University of Washington See also [ edit ] Agroecology Cultural ecology Environmental anthropology Environmental sociology Ethnoecology Human behavioural ecology Human ecology Medical anthropology Sociocultural system Systems theory in anthropology References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i Kottak, Conrad Phillip (2010).

Anthropology : appreciating human diversity (14th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. pp.

579 –584.

ISBN 978-0-07-811699-5 .

^ a b c d Townsend, Patricia K. (2009).

Environmental anthropology : from pigs to policies (2nd ed.). Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland Press. pp.

104 .

ISBN 978-1-57766-581-6 .

^ a b Moran, Emilio F. (2006).

People and nature : an introduction to human ecological relations (3. [repr.]. ed.). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. pp.

31 –32.

ISBN 978-1-4051-0572-9 .

^ Kottack, Conrad. (1999).

"The New Ecological Anthropology" (PDF) .

American Anthropologist .

1 : 23– 35.

doi : 10.1525/aa.1999.101.1.23 .

hdl : 2027.42/66329 .

^ a b Kottak, Conrad P. (March 1999).

"The New Ecological Anthropology" (PDF) .

American Anthropologist .

101 (1). Blackwell Publishing: 23– 35.

doi : 10.1525/aa.1999.101.1.23 .

hdl : 2027.42/66329 .

JSTOR 683339 .

^ a b c d e f g Orlove, Benjamin S. (1980). "Ecological Anthropology".

Annual Review of Anthropology .

9 : 235– 273.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.an.09.100180.001315 .

JSTOR 2155736 .

^ Kopnina, Helen (2013). "Environmental Problems and the Grand Old Theory of 'Human Nature'".

Journal of Ecological Anthropology , 16 (1): 61-68.

^ Kirsten Vinyeta & Kathy Lynn (2013).

Exploring the role of traditional ecological knowledge in climate change initiatives (General technical report PNW-GTR-879 ). Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station.

^ Andrew P. Vayda, and Bonnie J. McCay (October 1975), "New Directions in Ecology and Ecological Anthropology", Annual Review of Anthropology , 4 : 293– 306, doi : 10.1146/annurev.an.04.100175.001453 Further reading [ edit ] Ann McElroy & Patricia K. Townsend (1989), Medical Anthropology in Ecological Perspective (2nd ed.), Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press, ISBN 0-8133-0742-2 Nick Bingham, Andrew Blowers & Chris Belshaw, ed. (2003), Contested Environments (1st ed.), Milton Keynes, United Kingdom: John Wiley & Sons LTD., ISBN 0-470-85000-0 External links [ edit ] McGrath, Stacy (n.d) "Ecological Anthropology", M.D Murphy (Ed) Anthropological Theories. Department of Anthropology, University of Alabama webpage Accessed 8 August 2009 Online Journal of Ecological Anthropology, University of South Florida Accessed 9 August 2009 Open Access Journal entitled "Ecological and Environmental Anthropology" Accessed 9 August 2009 v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars v t e Ethnobiology Primary subdisciplines Ethnobotany Ethnomycology Ethnozoology Ethnoecology Other subdisciplines Ethnoentomology Ethnoherpetology Ethnoichthyology Ethnolichenology Ethnoornithology Ethnoprimatology Correlated fields Cultural ecology Ecological anthropology Ethnoarchaeology Ethnomedicine Ethnopsychopharmacology Historical ecology Human ecology Paleoethnobotany Traditional ecological knowledge Zooarchaeology Notable ethnobiologists William Balée Brent Berlin Harold C. Conklin Wade Davis Roy Ellen Robin Wall Kimmerer Gary Paul Nabhan Andrew Pawley Darrell A. Posey Richard Evans Schultes Constantino Manuel Torres Nancy Turner List of paleoethnobotanists Category Project Authority control databases National Czech Republic Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hl97l
Cached time: 20250817065813
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.452 seconds
Real time usage: 0.578 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2302/1000000
Revision size: 13396/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 108187/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3109/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 94077/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.258/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6837948/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  448.872      1 -total
 26.17%  117.452      1 Template:Reflist
 20.79%   93.336      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 17.87%   80.214      1 Template:Cyber_anthropology
 17.57%   78.858      3 Template:Cite_book
 11.73%   52.660      1 Template:Short_description
  9.15%   41.075      3 Template:Navbox
  9.10%   40.863      2 Template:Fix-span
  8.20%   36.830      1 Template:Clarify
  8.17%   36.665      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1781619:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817065813 and revision id 1305135164. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecological_anthropology&oldid=1305135164 " Categories : Anthropology Ecological experiments Ecological processes Environmental social science Environmental humanities Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2021 All Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed from June 2013 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2013 This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 07:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecological anthropology 17 languages Add topic

