Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and personal life 2 Writing career 3 Works 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Rana Kabbani 4 languages العربية Español فارسی مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British Syrian cultural historian, writer and broadcaster Rana Kabbani رنا قباني Born 1958 (age 66–67) Damascus , Syria Nationality British Syrian Notable work Imperial Fictions: Europe's Myths of the Orient Letter to Christendom Spouse(s) Mahmoud Darwish (divorced 1982) Patrick Seale Father Sabah Qabbani Rana Kabbani ( Arabic : رنا قباني ; born 1958) is a British Syrian cultural historian, writer and broadcaster who lives in London. Most famous for her works Imperial Fictions: Europe's Myths of the Orient (1994) and Letter to Christendom (1989), she has also edited and translated works in Arabic and English.

[ 1 ] She has written for Spare Rib , the International Herald Tribune , The New Statesman , The Guardian , British Vogue , The Independent , Al Quds al Arabi , and Islamica . She has made and contributed to many television and radio programmes for the BBC , on subjects such as literature, music, minority rights, Islamic culture, food, feminism, women's rights, painting, and British politics. She has spoken out against Islamophobia , defining its historic roots in colonialism. Her famous relatives include Abu Khalil Qabbani , her uncle Nizar Qabbani , her father Sabah Qabbani , and her daughter Yasmine Seale whose father is Patrick Seale .

Education and personal life [ edit ] Born in 1958 in Damascus , to Sabah Qabbani , Her paternal uncle was the renowned poet Nizar Qabbani . Her maternal family were also from a distinguished background: Kabbani's mother, Maha, was the niece of Said al-Ghazzi , former Prime Minister of Syria.

[ 2 ] In particular, Kabbani was influenced by her maternal grandmother Salwa Ghazzi, suffragette and pioneering feminist from a landowning liberal educated patrician family.

[ 3 ] Kabbani spent her childhood and young adulthood in New York City , Damascus , Jakarta and Washington DC , where her father held a career as a diplomat and Syrian ambassador. She received her BA degree from Georgetown University , her MA degree from the American University of Beirut , and her Ph.D. in English from Jesus College, Cambridge . Her teachers there were Raymond Williams , Frank Kermode , and Lisa Jardine .

[ 1 ] As the granddaughter of the Syrian Independence hero Tawfiq Kabbani , and the niece of the Syrian poet Nizar Kabbani , Rana Kabbani had both literature and activism in her blood from a young age. In the way that Nizar Kabbani's feminism was inspired by the life and death of his sister, Kabbani's role as a progressive voice against imperialism was inspired by her experiences with growing anti-Muslim sentiment, her historical research and her family's contribution. Her great uncle Fawzi Ghazzi wrote the first Syrian Constitution - taught as a document of pioneering liberalism - but was assassinated by agents of French colonialism for not accepting to mention their Mandate in Syria in it.

[ citation needed ] Kabbani married Palestinian poet Mahmoud Darwish twice - in 1976 and then again in 1978. They lived together in Beirut during the civil war; in Paris, and in Sidi Bou Said in Tunisia. They had no children together and divorced in 1982. In 1985, she married the British journalist Patrick Seale , and they had two children, Alexander and Yasmine Seale .

[ citation needed ] Writing career [ edit ] Kabbani began writing at an early age. She worked as an art critic in Paris, and later moved to London to work as a publisher's editor. Her first book, Europe's Myths of Orient: Devise and Rule , was published in 1985. In it, she evaluated orientalist perspectives and narratives, specifically focusing on erotic stereotypes and sexualization of the "exotic" in literature and painting.

[ 1 ] The work was translated into Arabic, Dutch, German, Turkish. It is taught at universities, and has never been out of print.

After the publication of Salman Rushdie 's The Satanic Verses , there was a rise in anti-Muslim sentiment, which prompted Kabbani to write Letter to Christendom in 1989.

[ 4 ] Kabbani's other works include her translations from the Arabic of Mahmoud Darweesh's 'Sand and Other Poems' (1985) and her editorship of The Passionate Nomad: Diaries of Isabelle Eberhardt (1987).

[ 1 ] Kabbani has written for The Independent, The International Herald Tribune, The New Statesman, British Vogue, The Guardian. In 2011, she wrote about Syria in articles such as "Can Syrians Dare to Hope?" [ 5 ] She is active on Twitter , which has led to controversy, as she is of a radical stance and uses brash language, in order to highlight political and social issues.

[ citation needed ] She has been a fund raiser and a spokesperson for British charities that raise money for Syrian refugees, as well as for autism and mental illness. She is trilingual in Arabic, French and English, and has travelled extensively in Southeast Asia, Eastern Europe, Central Asia, Russia, the United States, Canada, Western Europe and Latin America.

[ citation needed ] Works [ edit ] Europe's Myths of Orient: Devise and Rule , London: Pandora, 1986.

ISBN 9780863582295 , OCLC 70785782 Women in Muslim society ,  University College, Cork. Department of Sociology. 1992.

OCLC 877240672 Letter to Christendom , London: Virago, cop. 1989.

ISBN 9781853811197 , OCLC 491449858 References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Stringer, Jenny, ed. (1996). "Kabbani, Rana".

The Oxford Companion to Twentieth-century Literature in English . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780192122711 .

^ Moubayed, Sami; Steel & silk: men and women who shaped Syria 1900–2000, p. 417 ^ Kabbani, Rana (1995). "A Muslim Childhood in Damascus".

European Judaism: A Journal for the New Europe .

28 (2): 101– 103.

JSTOR 41444471 .

^ Brooks, Geraldine (2010).

Nine Parts of Desire: The Hidden World of Islamic Women . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 54.

ISBN 9780307434456 .

^ "Can Syrians dare to hope?" .

The Guardian . 9 August 2011.

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 3 June 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Rana Kabbani on Twitter Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Portugal Netherlands Norway Poland Israel Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rana_Kabbani&oldid=1303596345 " Categories : 1958 births Living people Writers from Damascus 20th-century Syrian women writers 20th-century Syrian writers American University of Beirut alumni Georgetown University alumni Alumni of Jesus College, Cambridge Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2021 Pages using infobox person with multiple spouses Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2018 This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 22:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rana Kabbani 4 languages Add topic

