Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Avoiding fictitious forces in calculations 2 Detection of a non-inertial frame: need for fictitious forces 3 Relativistic point of view Toggle Relativistic point of view subsection 3.1 Frames and flat spacetime 3.2 More advanced descriptions 4 See also 5 References and notes Toggle the table of contents Non-inertial reference frame 21 languages العربية Беларуская Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Non-inertial frame ) Reference frame that undergoes acceleration with respect to an inertial frame You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish .

(September 2022) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Spanish article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,127 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Spanish Wikipedia article at [[:es:Sistema de referencia no inercial]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|es|Sistema de referencia no inercial}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Part of a series on Classical mechanics F = d p d t {\displaystyle {\textbf {F}}={\frac {d\mathbf {p} }{dt}}} Second law of motion History Timeline Textbooks Branches Applied Celestial Continuum Dynamics Field theory Kinematics Kinetics Statics Statistical mechanics Fundamentals Acceleration Angular momentum Couple D'Alembert's principle Energy kinetic potential Force Frame of reference Inertial frame of reference Impulse Inertia / Moment of inertia Mass Mechanical power Mechanical work Moment Momentum Space Speed Time Torque Velocity Virtual work Formulations Newton's laws of motion Analytical mechanics Lagrangian mechanics Hamiltonian mechanics Routhian mechanics Hamilton–Jacobi equation Appell's equation of motion Koopman–von Neumann mechanics Core topics Damping Displacement Equations of motion Euler's laws of motion Fictitious force Friction Harmonic oscillator Inertial / Non-inertial reference frame Motion ( linear ) Newton's law of universal gravitation Newton's laws of motion Relative velocity Rigid body dynamics Euler's equations Simple harmonic motion Vibration Rotation Circular motion Rotating reference frame Centripetal force Centrifugal force reactive Coriolis force Pendulum Tangential speed Rotational frequency Angular acceleration / displacement / frequency / velocity Scientists Kepler Galileo Huygens Newton Horrocks Halley Maupertuis Daniel Bernoulli Johann Bernoulli Euler d'Alembert Clairaut Lagrange Laplace Poisson Hamilton Jacobi Cauchy Routh Liouville Appell Gibbs Koopman von Neumann Physics portal Category v t e A non-inertial reference frame (also known as an accelerated reference frame [ 1 ] ) is a frame of reference that undergoes acceleration with respect to an inertial frame .

[ 2 ] An accelerometer at rest in a non-inertial frame will, in general, detect a non-zero acceleration. While the laws of motion are the same in all inertial frames, in non-inertial frames, they vary from frame to frame, depending on the acceleration.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In classical mechanics it is often possible to explain the motion of bodies in non-inertial reference frames by introducing additional fictitious forces (also called inertial forces, pseudo-forces , [ 5 ] and d'Alembert forces ) to Newton's second law . Common examples of this include the Coriolis force and the centrifugal force . In general, the expression for any fictitious force can be derived from the acceleration of the non-inertial frame.

[ 6 ] As stated by Goodman and Warner, "One might say that F = m a holds in any coordinate system provided the term 'force' is redefined to include the so-called 'reversed effective forces' or 'inertia forces'." [ 7 ] In the theory of general relativity , the curvature of spacetime causes frames to be locally inertial, but globally non-inertial. Due to the non-Euclidean geometry of curved space-time , there are no global inertial reference frames in general relativity. More specifically, the fictitious force which appears in general relativity is the force of gravity .

Avoiding fictitious forces in calculations [ edit ] See also: Inertial frame of reference and Fictitious force In flat spacetime, the use of non-inertial frames can be avoided if desired.  Measurements with respect to non-inertial reference frames can always be transformed to an inertial frame, incorporating directly the acceleration of the non-inertial frame as that acceleration as seen from the inertial frame.

[ 8 ] This approach avoids the use of fictitious forces (it is based on an inertial frame, where fictitious forces are absent, by definition) but it may be less convenient from an intuitive, observational, and even a calculational viewpoint.

[ 9 ] As pointed out by Ryder for the case of rotating frames as used in meteorology: [ 10 ] A simple way of dealing with this problem is, of course, to transform all coordinates to an inertial system. This is, however, sometimes inconvenient. Suppose, for example, we wish to calculate the movement of air masses in the earth's atmosphere due to pressure gradients. We need the results relative to the rotating frame, the earth, so it is better to stay within this coordinate system if possible. This can be achieved by introducing fictitious (or "non-existent") forces which enable us to apply Newton's Laws of Motion in the same way as in an inertial frame.

— Peter Ryder, Classical Mechanics , pp. 78-79 Detection of a non-inertial frame: need for fictitious forces [ edit ] An example of a non-inertial reference frame- a rotating reference frame. The point feels a centrifugal force which needs to be compensated to keep rotating. Otherwise, it does not feel Euler force as the rotation rate is constant and it does not feel Coriolis force as it is not moving relative to the rotating frame.

That a given frame is non-inertial can be detected by its need for fictitious forces to explain observed motions.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] For example, the rotation of the Earth can be observed using a Foucault pendulum .

[ 16 ] The rotation of the Earth seemingly causes the pendulum to change its plane of oscillation because the surroundings of the pendulum move with the Earth. As seen from an Earth-bound (non-inertial) frame of reference, the explanation of this apparent change in orientation  requires the introduction of the fictitious Coriolis force .

Another famous example is that of the tension in the string between two spheres rotating about each other .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] In that case, the prediction of the measured tension in the string based on the motion of the spheres as observed from a rotating reference frame requires the rotating observers to introduce a fictitious centrifugal force.

In this connection, it may be noted that a change in coordinate system, for example, from Cartesian to polar, if implemented without any change in relative motion, does not cause the appearance of fictitious forces, although the form of the laws of motion varies from one type of curvilinear coordinate system to another.

Relativistic point of view [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Frames and flat spacetime [ edit ] Further information: Proper reference frame (flat spacetime) If a region of spacetime is declared to be Euclidean , and effectively free from obvious gravitational fields, then if an accelerated coordinate system is overlaid onto the same region, it can be said that a uniform fictitious field exists in the accelerated frame (we reserve the word gravitational for the case in which a mass is involved). An object accelerated to be stationary in the accelerated frame will "feel" the presence of the field, and they will also be able to see environmental matter with inertial states of motion (stars, galaxies, etc.) to be apparently falling "downwards" in the field along curved trajectories as if the field is real.

In frame-based descriptions, this supposed field can be made to appear or disappear by switching between "accelerated" and "inertial" coordinate systems.

More advanced descriptions [ edit ] As the situation is modeled in finer detail, using the general principle of relativity , the concept of a frame-dependent gravitational field becomes less realistic. In these Machian models, the accelerated body can agree that the apparent gravitational field is associated with the motion of the background matter, but can also claim that the motion of the material as if there is a gravitational field, causes the gravitational field - the accelerating background matter " drags light ". Similarly, a background observer can argue that the forced acceleration of the mass causes an apparent gravitational field in the region between it and the environmental material (the accelerated mass also "drags light").
This "mutual" effect, and the ability of an accelerated mass to warp lightbeam geometry and lightbeam-based coordinate systems, is referred to as frame-dragging .

Frame-dragging removes the usual distinction between accelerated frames (which show gravitational effects) and inertial frames (where the geometry is supposedly free from gravitational fields). When a forcibly-accelerated body physically "drags" a coordinate system, the problem becomes an exercise in warped spacetime for all observers.

See also [ edit ] Rotating reference frame Fictitious force Centrifugal force Coriolis effect Inertial frame of reference Free motion equation References and notes [ edit ] ^ "Accelerated Reference Frames" . Retrieved 2023-09-06 .

^ Emil Tocaci, Clive William Kilmister (1984).

Relativistic Mechanics, Time, and Inertia . Springer. p. 251.

ISBN 90-277-1769-9 .

^ Wolfgang Rindler (1977).

Essential Relativity .

Birkhäuser . p. 25.

ISBN 3-540-07970-X .

^ Ludwik Marian Celnikier (1993).

Basics of Space Flight . Atlantica Séguier Frontières. p. 286.

ISBN 2-86332-132-3 .

^ Harald Iro (2002).

A Modern Approach to Classical Mechanics .

World Scientific . p. 180.

ISBN 981-238-213-5 .

^ Albert Shadowitz (1988).

Special relativity (Reprint of 1968 ed.).

Courier Dover Publications . p.

4 .

ISBN 0-486-65743-4 .

^ Lawrence E. Goodman & William H. Warner (2001).

Dynamics (Reprint of 1963 ed.). Courier Dover Publications. p. 358.

ISBN 0-486-42006-X .

^ M. Alonso & E.J. Finn (1992).

Fundamental university physics . Addison-Wesley.

ISBN 0-201-56518-8 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "The inertial frame equations have to account for V Ω and this very large centripetal force explicitly, and yet our interest is almost always the small relative motion of the atmosphere and ocean, V' , since it is the relative
motion that transports heat and mass over the Earth. … To say it a little differently—it is the relative velocity that we measure when [we] observe from Earth’s surface, and it is the relative velocity that we seek for most any practical purposes." MIT essays by James F. Price, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (2006). See in particular §4.3, p. 34 in the Coriolis lecture ^ Peter Ryder (2007).

Classical Mechanics . Aachen Shaker. pp.

78– 79.

ISBN 978-3-8322-6003-3 .

^ Raymond A. Serway (1990).

Physics for scientists & engineers (3rd ed.). Saunders College Publishing. p. 135.

ISBN 0-03-031358-9 .

^ V. I. Arnol'd (1989).

Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics . Springer. p. 129.

ISBN 978-0-387-96890-2 .

^ Milton A. Rothman (1989).

Discovering the Natural Laws: The Experimental Basis of Physics . Courier Dover Publications. p.

23 .

ISBN 0-486-26178-6 .

reference laws of physics.

^ Sidney Borowitz & Lawrence A. Bornstein (1968).

A Contemporary View of Elementary Physics . McGraw-Hill. p. 138.

ASIN B000GQB02A .

^ Leonard Meirovitch (2004).

Methods of analytical Dynamics (Reprint of 1970 ed.). Courier Dover Publications. p. 4.

ISBN 0-486-43239-4 .

^ Giuliano Toraldo di Francia (1981).

The Investigation of the Physical World .

CUP Archive . p. 115.

ISBN 0-521-29925-X .

^ Louis N. Hand, Janet D. Finch (1998).

Analytical Mechanics .

Cambridge University Press . p. 324.

ISBN 0-521-57572-9 .

^ I. Bernard Cohen, George Edwin Smith (2002).

The Cambridge companion to Newton . Cambridge University Press. p. 43.

ISBN 0-521-65696-6 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Non-inertial_reference_frame&oldid=1294377880 " Categories : Frames of reference Classical mechanics Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing translation from Spanish Wikipedia Articles needing additional references from April 2017 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 11:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Non-inertial reference frame 21 languages Add topic

