Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Ecosystem services 3 Operation Toggle Operation subsection 3.1 Decomposition and nutrient cycling 3.2 Trophic dynamics 4 Applications and importance Toggle Applications and importance subsection 4.1 Lessons from two Central American cities 4.2 Climate change impacts 4.3 Relationship to One Health 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Ecosystem ecology 9 languages Afrikaans العربية Español فارسی Français Galego Македонски Slovenščina Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of living and non-living components of ecosystems and their interactions Figure 1. A riparian forest in the White Mountains , New Hampshire (USA).

Ecosystem ecology is the integrated study of living ( biotic ) and non-living ( abiotic ) components of ecosystems and their interactions within an ecosystem framework. This science examines how ecosystems work and relates this to their components such as chemicals , bedrock , soil , plants , and animals . Ecosystem ecologists study these relationships on large scales, linking biological diversity with ecosystem sustainability and function.

Ecosystem ecology examines physical and biological structures and examines how these ecosystem characteristics interact with each other. Ultimately, this helps us understand how to maintain high quality water and economically viable commodity production. A major focus of ecosystem ecology is on functional processes, ecological mechanisms that maintain the structure and services produced by ecosystems. These include primary productivity (production of biomass ), decomposition , and trophic interactions.

Studies of ecosystem function have greatly improved human understanding of sustainable production of forage , fiber , fuel , and provision of water .

[ 1 ] Functional processes are mediated by regional-to-local level climate , disturbance , and management. Thus ecosystem ecology provides a powerful framework for identifying ecological mechanisms that interact with global environmental problems, especially global warming and degradation of surface water.

This example demonstrates several important aspects of ecosystems: Ecosystem boundaries are often nebulous and may fluctuate in time Organisms within ecosystems are dependent on ecosystem level biological and physical processes Adjacent ecosystems closely interact and often are interdependent for maintenance of community structure and functional processes that maintain productivity and biodiversity These characteristics also introduce practical problems into natural resource management. Who will manage which ecosystem? Will timber cutting in the forest degrade recreational fishing in the stream? These questions are difficult for land managers to address while the boundary between ecosystems remains unclear; even though decisions in one ecosystem will affect the other. We need better understanding of the interactions and interdependencies of these ecosystems and the processes that maintain them before we can begin to address these questions.

Ecosystem ecology is an inherently interdisciplinary field of study. An individual ecosystem is composed of populations of organisms , interacting within communities, and contributing to the cycling of nutrients and the flow of energy . The ecosystem is the principal unit of study in ecosystem ecology.

Population, community, and physiological ecology provide many of the underlying biological mechanisms influencing ecosystems and the processes they maintain. Flowing of energy and cycling of matter at the ecosystem level are often examined in ecosystem ecology, but, as a whole, this science is defined more by subject matter than by scale. Ecosystem ecology approaches organisms and abiotic pools of energy and nutrients as an integrated system which distinguishes it from associated sciences such as biogeochemistry .

[ 2 ] Biogeochemistry and hydrology focus on several fundamental ecosystem processes such as biologically mediated chemical cycling of nutrients and physical-biological cycling of water. Ecosystem ecology forms the mechanistic basis for regional or global processes encompassed by landscape-to-regional hydrology, global biogeochemistry, and earth system science.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Ecosystem ecology is philosophically and historically rooted in terrestrial ecology. The ecosystem concept has evolved rapidly during the last 100 years with important ideas developed by Frederic Clements , a botanist who argued for specific definitions of ecosystems and that physiological processes were responsible for their development and persistence.

[ 3 ] Although most of Clements ecosystem definitions have been greatly revised, initially by Henry Gleason and Arthur Tansley , and later by contemporary ecologists, the idea that physiological processes are fundamental to ecosystem structure and function remains central to ecology.

Figure 3. Energy and matter flows through an ecosystem, adapted from the Silver Springs model.

[ 4 ] H are herbivores, C are carnivores, TC are top carnivores, and D are decomposers. Squares represent biotic pools and ovals are fluxes or energy or nutrients from the system.

Later work by Eugene Odum and Howard T. Odum quantified flows of energy and matter at the ecosystem level, thus documenting the general ideas proposed by Clements and his contemporary Charles Elton .

In this model, energy flows through the whole system were dependent on biotic and abiotic interactions of each individual component ( species , inorganic pools of nutrients, etc.). Later work demonstrated that these interactions and flows applied to nutrient cycles , changed over the course of succession , and held powerful controls over ecosystem productivity.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Transfers of energy and nutrients are innate to ecological systems regardless of whether they are aquatic or terrestrial. Thus, ecosystem ecology has emerged from important biological studies of plants, animals, terrestrial , aquatic , and marine ecosystems.

Ecosystem services [ edit ] Main article: Ecosystem services Ecosystem services are ecologically mediated functional processes essential to sustaining healthy human societies.

[ 7 ] Water provision and filtration, production of biomass in forestry , agriculture , and fisheries , and removal of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) from the atmosphere are examples of ecosystem services essential to public health and economic opportunity.

Nutrient cycling is a process fundamental to agricultural and forest production.

However, like most ecosystem processes, nutrient cycling is not an ecosystem characteristic which can be “dialed” to the most desirable level. Maximizing production in degraded systems is an overly simplistic solution to the complex problems of hunger and economic security. For instance, intensive fertilizer use in the midwestern United States has resulted in degraded fisheries in the Gulf of Mexico .

[ 8 ] Regrettably, a “ Green Revolution ” of intensive chemical fertilization has been recommended for agriculture in developed and developing countries .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] These strategies risk alteration of ecosystem processes that may be difficult to restore, especially when applied at broad scales without adequate assessment of impacts. Ecosystem processes may take many years to recover from significant disturbance.

[ 6 ] For instance, large-scale forest clearance in the northeastern United States during the 18th and 19th centuries has altered soil texture, dominant vegetation, and nutrient cycling in ways that impact forest productivity in the present day.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] An appreciation of the importance of ecosystem function in maintenance of productivity, whether in agriculture or forestry, is needed in conjunction with plans for restoration of essential processes. Improved knowledge of ecosystem function will help to achieve long-term sustainability and stability in the poorest parts of the world.

Operation [ edit ] Biomass productivity is one of the most apparent and economically important ecosystem functions. Biomass accumulation begins at the cellular level via photosynthesis. Photosynthesis requires water and consequently global patterns of annual biomass production are correlated with annual precipitation.

[ 13 ] Amounts of productivity are also dependent on the overall capacity of plants to capture sunlight which is directly correlated with plant leaf area and N content.

Net primary productivity (NPP) is the primary measure of biomass accumulation within an ecosystem. Net primary productivity can be calculated by a simple formula where the total amount of productivity is adjusted for total productivity losses through maintenance of biological processes: NPP = GPP – R producer Figure 4. Seasonal and annual changes in ambient carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) concentration at Mauna Loa Hawaii (Atmosphere) and above the canopy of a deciduous forest in Massachusetts (Forest). Data show clear seasonal trends associated with periods of high and low NPP and an overall annual increase of atmospheric CO 2 . Data approximates of those reported by Keeling and Whorf [ 14 ] and Barford.

[ 15 ] Where GPP is gross primary productivity and R producer is photosynthate ( Carbon ) lost via cellular respiration .

NPP is difficult to measure but a new technique known as eddy co-variance has shed light on how natural ecosystems influence the atmosphere. Figure 4 shows seasonal and annual changes in CO 2 concentration measured at Mauna Loa , Hawaii from 1987 to 1990. CO 2 concentration steadily increased, but within-year variation has been greater than the annual increase since measurements began in 1957.

These variations were thought to be due to seasonal uptake of CO 2 during summer months.  A newly developed technique for assessing ecosystem NPP has confirmed seasonal variation are driven by seasonal changes in CO 2 uptake by vegetation.

[ 16 ] [ 15 ] This has led many scientists and policy makers to speculate that ecosystems can be managed to ameliorate problems with global warming . This type of management may include reforesting or altering forest harvest schedules for many parts of the world.

Decomposition and nutrient cycling [ edit ] Decomposition and nutrient cycling are fundamental to ecosystem biomass production. Most natural ecosystems are nitrogen (N) limited and biomass production is closely correlated with N turnover.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Typically external input of nutrients is very low and efficient recycling of nutrients maintains productivity.

[ 6 ] Decomposition of plant litter accounts for the majority of nutrients recycled through ecosystems (Figure 3). Rates of plant litter decomposition are highly dependent on litter quality; high concentration of phenolic compounds, especially lignin , in plant litter has a retarding effect on litter decomposition.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] More complex C compounds are decomposed more slowly and may take many years to completely breakdown. Decomposition is typically described with exponential decay and has been related to the mineral concentrations, especially manganese, in the leaf litter .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Figure 5. Dynamics of decomposing plant litter (A) described with an exponential model (B) and a combined exponential-linear model (C).

Globally, rates of decomposition are mediated by litter quality and climate.

[ 23 ] Ecosystems dominated by plants with low-lignin concentration often have rapid rates of decomposition and nutrient cycling.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Simple carbon (C) containing compounds are preferentially metabolized by decomposer microorganisms which results in rapid initial rates of decomposition, see Figure 5A, [ 26 ] models that depend on constant rates of decay; so called “k” values, see Figure 5B.

[ 27 ] In addition to litter quality and climate, the activity of soil fauna is very important [ 28 ] However, these models do not reflect simultaneous linear and non-linear decay processes which likely occur during decomposition. For instance, proteins , sugars and lipids decompose exponentially, but lignin decays at a more linear rate [ 19 ] Thus, litter decay is inaccurately predicted by simplistic models.

[ 29 ] A simple alternative model presented in Figure 5C shows significantly more rapid decomposition that the standard model of figure 4B. Better understanding of decomposition models is an important research area of ecosystem ecology because this process is closely tied to nutrient supply and the overall capacity of ecosystems to sequester CO 2 from the atmosphere.

Trophic dynamics [ edit ] Trophic dynamics refers to process of energy and nutrient transfer between organisms. Trophic dynamics is an important part of the structure and function of ecosystems. Figure 3 shows energy transferred for an ecosystem at Silver Springs, Florida. Energy gained by primary producers (plants, P) is consumed by herbivores (H), which are consumed by carnivores (C), which are themselves consumed by “top- carnivores”(TC).

One of the most obvious patterns in Figure 3 is that as one moves up to higher trophic levels (i.e. from plants to top-carnivores) the total amount of energy decreases. Plants exert a “bottom-up” control on the energy structure of ecosystems by determining the total amount of energy that enters the system.

[ 30 ] However, predators can also influence the structure of lower trophic levels from the top-down. These influences can dramatically shift dominant species in terrestrial and marine systems [ 31 ] [ 32 ] The interplay and relative strength of top-down vs. bottom-up controls on ecosystem structure and function is an important area of research in the greater field of ecology.

Trophic dynamics can strongly influence rates of decomposition and nutrient cycling in time and in space. For example, herbivory can increase litter decomposition and nutrient cycling via direct changes in litter quality and altered dominant vegetation.

[ 33 ] Insect herbivory has been shown to increase rates of decomposition and nutrient turnover due to changes in litter quality and increased frass inputs.

[ 2 ] [ 34 ] However, insect outbreak does not always increase nutrient cycling. Stadler [ 35 ] showed that C rich honeydew produced during aphid outbreak can result in increased N immobilization by soil microbes thus slowing down nutrient cycling and potentially limiting biomass production. North Atlantic marine ecosystems have been greatly altered by overfishing of cod. Cod stocks crashed in the 1990s which resulted in increases in their prey such as shrimp and snow crab [ 32 ] Human intervention in ecosystems has resulted in dramatic changes to ecosystem structure and function. These changes are occurring rapidly and have unknown consequences for economic security and human well-being.

[ 36 ] Further research can help make the effects of biodiversity changes on ecosystem function more clear.

[ 37 ] Applications and importance [ edit ] Lessons from two Central American cities [ edit ] The biosphere has been greatly altered by the demands of human societies. Ecosystem ecology plays an important role in understanding and adapting to the most pressing current environmental problems. Restoration ecology and ecosystem management are closely associated with ecosystem ecology. Restoring highly degraded resources depends on integration of functional mechanisms of ecosystems.

[ 38 ] By using strategies that consider both social and ecological goals as joint goals, sustainable development can be achieved by considering ecosystem ecology through a joint lens, rather than two separate ones.

[ 39 ] Without these functions intact, economic value of ecosystems is greatly reduced and potentially dangerous conditions may develop in the field. For example, areas within the mountainous western highlands of Guatemala are more susceptible to catastrophic landslides and crippling seasonal water shortages due to loss of forest resources. In contrast, cities such as Totonicapán that have preserved forests through strong social institutions have greater local economic stability and overall greater human well-being.

[ 40 ] This situation is striking considering that these areas are close to each other, the majority of inhabitants are of Mayan descent, and the topography and overall resources are similar. This is a case of two groups of people managing resources in fundamentally different ways. Ecosystem ecology provides the basic science needed to avoid degradation and to restore ecosystem processes that provide for basic human needs.

Climate change impacts [ edit ] Climate change influences ecosystem ecology by altering the processes that drive global ecosystems. Many of these processes cause a decline in biodiversity which reduces ecosystem functioning.

[ 41 ] Anthropogenic influences like greenhouse gas emissions and land cover change create added pressures for ecosystems, such as habitat fragmentation and degradation.

[ 42 ] Additional stressors include shifts in species ranges and life cycle events. As the effects of climate change are exacerbated, these stressors will have a greater effect on ecosystems across the globe.

[ 43 ] Relationship to One Health [ edit ] One Health studies the intersection of human health, animal health, and biological health. Because of this, it is closely tied to ecosystem ecology. Healthy ecosystems can prevent the spread of diseases.

[ 44 ] One Health recognizes that healthy ecosystems are connected to the health of humans and animals, and thus considers ecosystem ecology. Extensive communication between communities and One Health researchers is essential for success within a broader ecosystem ecology framework.

[ 45 ] See also [ edit ] Environment portal Ecology portal Earth sciences portal Biogeochemistry Community ecology Earth system science Holon (philosophy) Landscape ecology Systems ecology MuSIASEM References [ edit ] ^ Rehman, Abdul; Farooq, Muhammad; Lee, Dong-Jin; Siddique, Kadambot H. M. (October 18, 2022).

"Sustainable agricultural practices for food security and ecosystem services" .

Environmental Science and Pollution Research .

29 (56): 84076– 84095.

Bibcode : 2022ESPR...2984076R .

doi : 10.1007/s11356-022-23635-z .

ISSN 0944-1344 .

PMID 36258111 .

^ a b c Chapman, S.K., Hart, S.C., Cobb, N.S., Whitham, T.G., and Koch, G.W.  (2003).  "Insect herbivory increases litter quality and decomposition: an extension of the acceleration hypothesis". in: Ecology 84:2867-2876.

^ Hagen, J.B. (1992).

An Entangled Bank: The origins of ecosystem ecology . Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, N.J.

^ Odum, H.T. (1971).

Environment, Power, and Society . Wiley-Interscience New York, N.Y.

^ Odum, E.P 1969. "The strategy of ecosystem development". in: Science 164:262-270.

^ a b c Likens, G. E., F. H. Bormann, N. M. Johnson, D. W. Fisher and R. S. Pierce. (1970). "Effects of forest cutting and herbicide treatment on nutrient budgets in the Hubbard Brook watershed-ecosystem". in: Ecological Monographs 40:23-47.

^ Chapin, F.S. III, B.H., Walker, R.J., Hobbs, D.U., Hooper, J.H., Lawton, O.E., Sala, and D., Tilman. (1997). "Biotic control over the functioning of ecosystems". in: Science 277:500-504.

^ Defries, R.S., J.A. Foley, and G.P. Asner. (2004). "Land-use choices: balancing human needs and ecosystem function". in: Frontiers in ecology and environmental science . 2:249-257.

^ Chrispeels, M.J. and Sadava, D. (1977).

Plants, food, and people . W. H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco.

^ Quinones, M.A., N.E. Borlaug, C.R. Dowswell. (1997). "A fertilizer-based green revolution for Africa". In: Replenishing soil fertility in Africa . Soil Science Society of America special publication number 51. Soil Science Society of America, Madison, WI.

^ Foster, D. R. (1992). "Land-use history (1730-1990) and vegetation dynamics in central New England, USA". In: Journal of Ecology 80: 753-772.

^ Motzkin, G., D. R. Foster, A. Allen, J. Harrod, and R. D. Boone. (1996). "Controlling site to evaluate history: vegetation patterns of a New England sand plain". In: Ecological Monographs 66: 345-365.

^ Huxman TE, ea.(2004). "Convergence across biomes to a common rain-use efficiency".

Nature . 429: 651-654 ^ Keeling, C.D. and T.P. Whorf. (2005). "Atmospheric CO 2 records from sites in the SIO air sampling network". In: Trends: A Compendium of Data on Global Change . Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy, Oak Ridge, Tenn., U.S.A.

^ a b Barford, C. C., ea. (2001). "Factors controlling long and short term sequestration of atmospheric CO 2 in a mid-latitude forest". In: Science 294: 1688-1691 ^ Goulden, M. L., J. W. Munger, S.-M. Fan, B. C. Daube, and S. C. Wofsy, (1996). "Effects of interannual climate variability on the carbon dioxide exchange of a temperate deciduous forest". In: Science 271:1576-1578 ^ Vitousek, P.M. and Howarth, R.W. (1991). "Nitrogen limitation on land and in the sea: how can it occur?" In: Biogeochemistry 13:87-115.

^ Reich, P.B., Grigal, D.F., Aber, J.D., Gower, S.T. (1997). "Nitrogen mineralization and productivity in 50 hardwood and conifer stands on diverse soils". In: Ecology 78:335-347.

^ a b Melillo, J.M., Aber, J.D., and Muratore, J.F. (1982).  "Nitrogen and lignin control of hardwood leaf litter decomposition dynamics". In: Ecology 63:621-626.

^ Hättenschwiler S. and P.M. Vitousek (2000). "The role of polyphenols in terrestrial ecosystem nutrient cycling". In: Trends in Ecology and Evolution 15: 238-243 ^ Davey MP, B Berg, P Rowland, BA Emmett. 2007. Decomposition of oak leaf litter is related to initial litter Mn concentrations. Canadian Journal of Botany. 85(1). 16-24.

^ Berg B, Davey MP, Emmett B, Faituri M, Hobbie S, Johansson MB, Liu C, De Marco A, McClaugherty C, Norell L, Rutigliano F, De Santo AV. 2010. Factors influencing limit values for pine needle litter decomposition - a synthesis for boreal and temperate pine forest systems. Biogeochemistry. 100: 57-73 ^ Meentemeyer, V.  1978  "Macroclimate and lignin control of litter decomposition rates". in: Ecology 59:465-472.

^ Talbot, Jennifer M.; Treseder, Kathleen K. (February 1, 2012).

"Interactions among lignin, cellulose, and nitrogen drive litter chemistry–decay relationships" .

Ecology .

93 (2): 345– 354.

Bibcode : 2012Ecol...93..345T .

doi : 10.1890/11-0843.1 .

ISSN 0012-9658 .

PMID 22624316 .

^ Flanagan, P. W.; Cleve, K. Van (1983-10-01).

"Nutrient cycling in relation to decomposition and organic-matter quality in taiga ecosystems" .

Canadian Journal of Forest Research .

13 (5): 795– 817.

Bibcode : 1983CaJFR..13..795F .

doi : 10.1139/x83-110 .

ISSN 0045-5067 .

^ Aber, J.D., and J.M., Melillo  (1982). "Nitrogen immobilization in decaying hardwood leaf litter as a function of initial nitrogen and lignin content". In: Canadian Journal of Botany 60:2263-2269.

^ Olson, J.S. (1963). "Energy storage and the balance of producers and decomposers in ecological systems". In: Ecology 44:322-331.

^ Castro-Huerta, R.; Falco, L.; Sandler, R.; Coviella, C. (2015).

"Differential contribution of soil biota groups to plant litter decomposition as mediated by soil use" .

PeerJ .

3 : e826.

doi : 10.7717/peerj.826 .

PMC 4359044 .

PMID 25780777 .

^ Carpenter, S.A. (1981). "Decay of heterogeneous detritus: a general model". In: Journal of theoretical biology 89:539-547.

^ Chapin F.S. III, Matson, P.A., and Mooney, H.A. (2003).

Principles of terrestrial ecosystem ecology . Springer-Verlag, New York, N.Y.

^ Belovsky, G.E. and J.B. Slade. (2000). "Insect herbivory accelerates nutrient cycling and increases plant production". In: Proceedings of the national academy of sciences (USA). 97:14412-14417.

^ a b Frank et al. 2005.

^ Hunter, M.D. (2001). "Insect population dynamics meets ecosystem ecology: effects of herbivory on soil nutrient dynamics". In: Agricultural and Forest Entomology 3:77-84.

^ Swank, W.T., Waide, J.B., Crossley, D.A., and Todd R.L. (1981). "Insect defoliation enhances nitrate export from forest ecosystems". In: Oecologia 51:297-299.

^ Stadler, B., Solinger, St., and Michalzik, B. (2001). "Insect herbivores and the nutrient flow from the canopy to the soil in coniferous and deciduous forests". In: Oecologia 126:104-113 ^ The intimate relation between ecosystem services and well-being was highlighted in the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment ^ Mori, Akira S.; Isbell, Forest; Cadotte, Marc W. (May 19, 2023).

"Assessing the importance of species and their assemblages for the biodiversity-ecosystem multifunctionality relationship" .

Ecology .

104 (8).

Bibcode : 2023Ecol..104E4104M .

doi : 10.1002/ecy.4104 – via Ecological Society of America.

^ Ehrenfeld, J.G. and Toth, L.A. (1997). "Restoration ecology and the ecosystem perspective". in: Restoration Ecology 5:307-317.

^ Reyers, Belinda; Selig, Elizabeth R. (2020-07-20).

"Global targets that reveal the social–ecological interdependencies of sustainable development" .

Nature Ecology & Evolution .

4 (8): 1011– 1019.

Bibcode : 2020NatEE...4.1011R .

doi : 10.1038/s41559-020-1230-6 .

hdl : 2263/78221 .

ISSN 2397-334X .

PMID 32690904 .

^ Conz, B.W. 2004. Continuity and Contestation: Conservation Landscapes in Totonicapán, Guatemala. University of Massachusetts Masters of Science thesis.

^ Gonzalez, Andrew; Germain, Rachel M.; Srivastava, Diane S.; Filotas, Elise; Dee, Laura E.; Gravel, Dominique; Thompson, Patrick L.; Isbell, Forest; Wang, Shaopeng; Kéfi, Sonia; Montoya, Jose; Zelnik, Yuval R.; Loreau, Michel (January 29, 2020). Brose, Ulrich (ed.).

"Scaling-up biodiversity-ecosystem functioning research" .

Ecology Letters .

23 (4): 757– 776.

Bibcode : 2020EcolL..23..757G .

doi : 10.1111/ele.13456 .

ISSN 1461-023X .

PMC 7497049 .

PMID 31997566 .

^ Malhi, Yadvinder; Franklin, Janet; Seddon, Nathalie; Solan, Martin; Turner, Monica G.; Field, Christopher B.; Knowlton, Nancy (2020-03-16).

"Climate change and ecosystems: threats, opportunities and solutions" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

375 (1794): 20190104.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2019.0104 .

ISSN 0962-8436 .

PMC 7017779 .

PMID 31983329 .

^ "Climate Impacts on Ecosystems | Climate Change Impacts | US EPA" .

climatechange.chicago.gov . Retrieved 2025-05-01 .

^ Everard, Mark; Johnston, Paul; Santillo, David; Staddon, Chad (September 2020).

"The role of ecosystems in mitigation and management of Covid-19 and other zoonoses" .

Environmental Science & Policy .

111 : 7– 17.

Bibcode : 2020ESPol.111....7E .

doi : 10.1016/j.envsci.2020.05.017 .

PMC 7247996 .

PMID 32501392 .

^ Gwakisa, Paul; George, Janeth; Sindato, Calvin; Ngonyoka, Anibariki; Nnko, Happiness; Assenga, Justine; Kimera, Sharadhuli; Nessele, Moses Ole (2023-08-30).

"Pillars for successful operationalization of one health as an ecosystem approach: experience from a human-animal interface in the Maasai steppe in Tanzania" .

One Health Outlook .

5 (1): 11.

doi : 10.1186/s42522-023-00087-0 .

ISSN 2524-4655 .

PMC 10469404 .

PMID 37649116 .

v t e Biology Introduction ( Genetics , Evolution ) Outline History Timeline Index Biology Overview Science Life Properties ( Adaptation , Energy processing , Growth , Order , Regulation , Reproduction ( Self-replication ), Response to environment ) Hierarchy of life ( Atom > Molecule > Organelle > Cell > Tissue > Organ > Organ system > Organism > Population > Community > Ecosystem > Biosphere ) Reductionistic Emergent property Mechanistic Scientific method Taxonomic rank Theory Law Peer review Biology journals Common name Chemical basis Atoms Amino acids Carbohydrates Chemical bond Chemical element Lipids Matter Quantum Molecules Monomer Nucleic acids Organic compounds pH Polymer Proteins Water Cells ATP Cell cycle Cell theory Cell signaling Cellular respiration Energy transformation Enzyme Eukaryote Fermentation Metabolism Meiosis Mitosis Photosynthesis Prokaryote Genetics DNA Epigenetics Evolutionary developmental biology Gene expression Gene regulation Genomes Mendelian inheritance Post-transcriptional modification Evolution Adaptation Earliest known life forms Function Genetic drift Gene flow History of life Macroevolution Microevolution Mutation Natural selection Phylogenetics Speciation Taxonomy Diversity Archaea Bacteria Eukaryote Alga Animal Fungus Plant Protist Virus Plant form and function Epidermis (botany) Flower Ground tissue Leaf Phloem Plant stem Root Shoot Vascular plant Vascular tissue Xylem Animal form and function Breathing Circulatory system Endocrine system Digestive system Homeostasis Immune system Internal environment Muscular system Nervous system Reproductive system Respiratory system Ecology Biogeochemical cycle Biological interaction Biomass Biomes Biosphere Climate Climate change Community Conservation Ecosystem Habitat niche Microbiome Population dynamics Resources Research methods Laboratory techniques Genetic engineering Transformation Gel electrophoresis Chromatography Centrifugation Cell culture DNA sequencing DNA microarray Green fluorescent protein vector Enzyme assay Protein purification Western blot Northern blot Southern blot Restriction enzyme Polymerase chain reaction Two-hybrid screening in vivo in vitro in silico Field techniques Belt transect mark and recapture species discovery curve Branches Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology Glossaries Biology Botanical terms Ecological terms Plant morphology terms Biology portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology v t e Systems science System types Art Biological Complex Coupled human–environment Ecological Economic Information Multi-agent Nervous Recommender Social Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Philosophy Psychology Theory ( Systems thinking ) Scientists Russell L. Ackoff Victor Aladjev William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Béla H. Bánáthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Alexander Bogdanov Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A. S. Hall Mike Jackson Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport John Seddon Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecosystem_ecology&oldid=1296422911 " Categories : Systems ecology Global natural environment Ecological processes Ecosystems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 22:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecosystem ecology 9 languages Add topic

