Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Averroism and scholasticism 2 Jewish Averroism 3 Reception of Averroes in Islam 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Averroism 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi தமிழ் Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia School of medieval philosophy Averroes depicted in a painting by Italian artist Andrea di Bonaiuto . Florence, 14th century.

Averroism , also known as Rushdism , was a school of medieval philosophy based on the  application of the works of 12th-century Andalusian philosopher Averroes , (Ibn Rushd in Arabic; 1126–1198) a commentator on Aristotle , in 13th-century Latin Christian scholasticism and Islamic Golden Age .

Latin translations of Averroes' work became widely available at the universities which were springing up in Western Europe in the 13th century, and were received by scholasticists such as Siger of Brabant and Boetius of Dacia , who examined Christian doctrines through reasoning and intellectual analysis.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The term Averroist was coined by Thomas Aquinas in the restricted sense of the Averroists' " unity of the intellect " doctrine in his book De unitate intellectus contra Averroistas .

[ 3 ] Based on this, Averroism came to be near-synonymous with atheism in late medieval usage.

[ 4 ] As a historiographical category, Averroism was first defined by Ernest Renan in Averroès et l'averroïsme (1852) in the sense of radical or heterodox Aristotelianism .

[ 5 ] The reception of Averroes in Jewish thought has  been termed "Jewish Averroism". Jewish Averroist thought flourished in the later 14th century, and gradually declined in the course of the 15th century. The last representative of Jewish Averroism was Elia del Medigo , writing in 1485.

Averroism and scholasticism [ edit ] The teachings of Averroism resulted in the Condemnations of 1210–1277 by Bishop Etienne Tempier of the Catholic Church . Tempier specified 219 unacceptable theses, some of which were clearly directed against the supposed "Averroists" at the University of Paris.

[ 6 ] It has been pointed out [ 7 ] that Tempier's main accusations were almost identical to those brought by al-Ghazali against philosophers in general in his The Incoherence of the Philosophers , which Averroës had tried to demonstrate to be unjustified in The Incoherence of the Incoherence .

In the preamble to the 1277 condemnations, Tempier accuses the philosophers of maintaining philosophical stances irreconcilable with Catholic dogmas while at the same time upholding their Catholic faith. Modern historians called this the "double truth" theory, the idea of the existence of two simultaneous yet contradictory truths: a factual or "hard" truth that is reached through science and philosophy, and a "religious" truth that is reached through religion. This idea differed from that of Averroes, who taught that there is only one truth, but reached in two different ways, not two truths. He did, however, believe that Scripture sometimes uses metaphorical language, but that those without the philosophical training to appreciate the true meaning of the passages in question were obliged to believe the literal meaning.

[ citation needed ] Modern scholarship has shown, however, that no Latin Christian medieval thinker ever upheld the "double truth" theory.

[ 8 ] Whether bishop Etienne Tempier accused them of doing so out of malice or ignorance remains unclear.

Giovanni di Paolo , "St. Thomas Aquinas Confounding Averroes".

The later philosophical concept of Averroism was the idea that the philosophical and religious worlds are separate entities. However, upon scrutinizing the 219 theses condemned by Tempier, it is obvious that not many of them originated in Averroes.

Radical Aristotelianism and heterodox Aristotelianism were the terms commonly used for a while to refer to the actual philosophical movement started by Siger of Brabant and Boetius of Dacia and differentiate it from Averroism; today most scholars just call it Averroism as well.

[ citation needed ] Thomas Aquinas specifically attacked the " unity of the intellect " doctrine held by the Averroists in his book De unitate intellectus contra Averroistas .

[ 3 ] Although condemned in 1277, many Averroistic theses survived to the sixteenth century, particularly in the University of Padua , and can be found in the philosophies of Giordano Bruno , Pico della Mirandola , and Cesare Cremonini . These theses talk about the superiority of philosophers to the common people and the relation between the intellect and human dignity.

Jewish Averroism [ edit ] In the centuries following Averroes' death there were many Jewish Averroist philosophers, notably Elijah Delmedigo ; Gersonides wrote a supercommentary on Averroes' Aristotelian commentaries.

[ 9 ] Some Averroist influence has been traced in Leone Ebreo 's Dialoghi d'Amore , and Baruch Spinoza was likely influenced by Averroes' commentaries on Aristotle.

[ 10 ] Reception of Averroes in Islam [ edit ] There was no formal school or movement of Rushdiyya ("Averroism") in the Islamic tradition. The decline of Kalam or "Islamic scholastic theology" [ citation needed ] and Muʿtazila or "Islamic rationalism" has precluded a reception of Averroes in Islamic thought that would parallel that in Christian or Jewish philosophy. Nevertheless, a revival of rationalist traditions in medieval Islamic philosophy has been called for in modern Arab nationalism .

[ 11 ] Averroes became something of a symbolic figure in the debate over the decline and proposed revitalization of Islamic thought and Islamic society in the later 20th century. A notable proponent of such a revival of Averroist thought in Islamic society was Mohammed Abed al-Jabri with his Critique of Arab Reason (1982).

[ 12 ] There is also an attempt to revive rationalist traditions by Jamal-Al Deen Al Afghani and his student Mohammad Abduh in Egypt.

References [ edit ] ^ Sonneborn, Liz (2006).

Averroes (Ibn Rushd): Muslim Scholar, Philosopher, and Physician of the Twelfth Century . The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 89.

ISBN 1-40-420514-4 . Retrieved November 3, 2012 .

^ More, Alexander (2010).

"Averroës" in Oxford Dictionary of the Middle Ages . Oxford University Press. pp.

211– 212.

ISBN 9780198662624 . Retrieved January 14, 2017 .

^ a b Hasse 2014 , Averroes' Unicity Thesis .

^ Averroes "was probably the most widely condemned thinker in the medieval Christian world... Averroism became virtually synonymous with atheism in the late Middle Ages and early Renaissance." Cantor, Paul A., "The Uncanonical Dante: The Divine Comedy and Islamic Philosophy" , Philosophy and Literature , 20.1 (1996), pp. 138-153.

^ He says that "the history of Averroism is the history of a misunderstanding" (referring to misleading Latin translations of the Arabic; for example, the word mutakallamin (literally "speakers"), which in Arabic was the normal term for theologians in general, was translated in the Latin versions of Averroes' works as loquentes , giving rise to the accusation that Averroes dismissed all theologians as "chatterboxes".

[ citation needed ] ^ Medico More, Alexander (2010).

"Averroismo" in Dizionario Storico Dell'Inquisizione . Pisa: Scuola Normale Superiore. p. 126.

ISBN 978-8876423239 . Retrieved January 14, 2017 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Alain de Libera, introduction to L'Islam et la raison .

^ Dales, Richard C. (1984). "The Origin of the Doctrine of the Double Truth".

Viator .

15 : 169– 179.

doi : 10.1484/J.VIATOR.2.301439 .

^ Klein-Braslavy, S. (2011). "Gersonides As Commentator On Averroes".

Without Any Doubt . Brill. pp.

181 –220.

ISBN 9789004206991 .

^ Scruton, Roger (2002).

Spinoza: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-280316-0 .

Through the works of Moses Maimonides and the commentaries of the Arab Averroës , Spinoza would have become acquainted with Aristotle ^ von Kügelgen, Anke (1994).

Averroes und die arabische Moderne: Ansätze zu einer Neubegründung des Rationalismus im Islam (in German). Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 9004099557 .

[ page needed ] ^ "Mohamed Abed Al-Jabri's new Averroism" .

Reset DOC . Retrieved 2024-02-18 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Hasse, Dag Nikolaus (2014).

"Influence of Arabic and Islamic Philosophy on the Latin West" . In Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

External links [ edit ] Vasoli, Cesare (1970).

"Averroismo" .

Enciclopedia Dantesca . Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana . Retrieved 1 January 2025 .

Avicenna and Averroes: Latin Averroism Averroism from the Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy Jewish Averroism , Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy Averroism from the Jewish Encyclopedia (1906) - Averroism and the philosophy of Judaism.

"The Eternal Conversation" , a personal account of Averroism in the Medieval and Modern Jewish intellectual tradition.

v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Authority control databases : National Spain Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Averroism&oldid=1290977579 " Categories : Averroes Aristotelianism Heresy in Christianity in the Middle Ages Scholasticism Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2016 CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2016 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 08:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Averroism 35 languages Add topic

