Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Details 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Trivial topology 19 languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia In topology , a topological space with the trivial topology is one where the only open sets are the empty set and the entire space. Such spaces are commonly called indiscrete , anti-discrete , concrete or codiscrete . Intuitively, this has the consequence that all points of the space are "lumped together" and cannot be distinguished by topological means. Every indiscrete space can be viewed as a pseudometric space in which the distance between any two points is zero.

Details [ edit ] The trivial topology is the topology with the least possible number of open sets , namely the empty set and the entire space, since the definition of a topology requires these two sets to be open. Despite its simplicity, a space X with more than one element and the trivial topology lacks a key desirable property: it is not a T 0 space .

Other properties of an indiscrete space X —many of which are quite unusual—include: The only closed sets are the empty set and X .

The only possible basis of X is { X }.

If X has more than one point, then since it is not T 0 , it does not satisfy any of the higher T axioms either. In particular, it is not a Hausdorff space . Not being Hausdorff, X is not an order topology , nor is it metrizable .

X is, however, regular , completely regular , normal , and completely normal ; all in a rather vacuous way though, since the only closed sets are ∅ and X .

X is compact and therefore paracompact , Lindelöf , and locally compact .

Every function whose domain is a topological space and codomain X is continuous .

X is path-connected and so connected .

X is second-countable , and therefore is first-countable , separable and Lindelöf .

All subspaces of X have the trivial topology.

All quotient spaces of X have the trivial topology Arbitrary products of trivial topological spaces, with either the product topology or box topology , have the trivial topology.

All sequences in X converge to every point of X . In particular, every sequence has a convergent subsequence (the whole sequence or any other subsequence), thus X is sequentially compact .

The interior of every set except X is empty.

The closure of every non-empty subset of X is X . Put another way: every non-empty subset of X is dense , a property that characterizes trivial topological spaces.

As a result of this, the closure of every open subset U of X is either ∅ (if U = ∅) or X (otherwise).  In particular, the closure of every open subset of X is again an open set, and therefore X is extremally disconnected .

If S is any subset of X with more than one element, then all elements of X are limit points of S . If S is a singleton , then every point of X \ S is still a limit point of S .

X is a Baire space .

Two topological spaces carrying the trivial topology are homeomorphic iff they have the same cardinality .

In some sense the opposite of the trivial topology is the discrete topology , in which every subset is open.

The trivial topology belongs to a uniform space in which the whole cartesian product X × X is the only entourage .

Let Top be the category of topological spaces with continuous maps and Set be the category of sets with functions. If G : Top → Set is the functor that assigns to each topological space its underlying set (the so-called forgetful functor ), and H : Set → Top is the functor that puts the trivial topology on  a given set, then H (the so-called cofree functor ) is right adjoint to G . (The so-called free functor F : Set → Top that puts the discrete topology on a given set is left adjoint to G .) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] See also [ edit ] List of topologies Triviality (mathematics) Notes [ edit ] ^ Keegan Smith, "Adjoint Functors in Algebra, Topology and Mathematical Logic" , August 8, 2008, p. 13.

^ free functor in nLab References [ edit ] Steen, Lynn Arthur ; Seebach, J. Arthur Jr.

(1995) [1978], Counterexamples in Topology ( Dover reprint of 1978 ed.), Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag , ISBN 978-0-486-68735-3 , MR 0507446 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trivial_topology&oldid=1280964299 " Categories : Topology General topology Topological spaces This page was last edited on 17 March 2025, at 13:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trivial topology 19 languages Add topic

