Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Tactics 2 Comparison to other forms of socialism 3 Political parties 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Footnotes 5.2 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents De Leonism 11 languages Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 日本語 Polski Português Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marxist ideology This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "De Leonism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of the Politics series on De Leonism Concepts Anti-Leninism Class conflict Communist revolution Decentralization Dual unionism Federal republic General union Impossibilism Industrial democracy Industrial unionism Libertarian socialism Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary socialism Syndicalism People Daniel De Leon Tom Bell Solon De Leon Eric Hass Olive M. Johnson Arthur MacManus Arnold Petersen Lucien Sanial George Yates Organizations American Labor Party Industrial Union Party Industrial Workers of Great Britain New Union Party Socialist Labor Party Australia Canada United Kingdom United States Socialist Trade and Labor Alliance Workers' International Industrial Union Newspapers The People The People and the Collectivist The Socialist Related topics Anarcho-syndicalism Industrial Workers of the World History Philosophy and tactics Lassallism Left communism One Big Union Passive revolution Workplace democracy Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Syndicalism Precursors Guild socialism Orthodox Marxism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Variants Anarchist Council communism De Leonism Fascist Green Nationalist Sorelianism Economics Co-operative economics Labour economics General strike Labour rights Labour unionisation Workers' self-management Mutual aid Organisations International Workingmen's Association (1864–1876) IWA–AIT and affiliates Argentine Regional Workers' Federation (FORA) Brazilian Workers Confederation (COB) Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT–AIT, Spain) Confederation of Revolutionary Anarcho-Syndicalists (CRAS, Russia) Free Workers' Union (FAU, Germany) Norsk Syndikalistisk Forbund (NSF–IAA, Norway) Solidarity Federation (SF–IWA, Britain) Confédération Générale du Travail (CGT, France) General Confederation of Labour (CGT, Spain) Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) IWW-Chile IWW-South Africa Irish Transport and General Workers' Union (ITGWU) Fagoppositionens Sammenslutning (FS, Denmark) National Workers' Union (UON, Portugal) Sveriges Arbetares Centralorganisation (SAC, Sweden) People Bain Berth De Ambris De Leon Delesalle Fitzgerald Griffuelhes Haywood Janvion Jouhaux Lagardelle Larkin Monatte García Panunzio Pelloutier Rocker Sorel Valois Related subjects Communism Copyleft Corporatism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of copyright Critique of work Fascism Labour power Libertarian socialism Post-capitalism Revisionism Socialism Organized Labour portal Politics portal v t e De Leonism , also known as Marxism–De Leonism , [ 1 ] is a Marxist tendency developed by Curaçaoan-American trade union organizer and Marxist theoretician Daniel De Leon . De Leon was an early leader of the first American socialist political party , the Socialist Labor Party of America (SLP). De Leon introduced the concept of socialist industrial unionism.

According to De Leonist theory, militant industrial unions are the vehicle of class struggle . Industrial unions serving the interests of the proletariat would be the needed federal republican structure used to establish a socialist system .

De Leonism shares characteristics with syndicalism . While the Socialist Labor Party of America is a member of the predominantly anarcho-syndicalist Industrial Workers of the World , De Leonism differs in that it emphasizes the necessity of a political party, advocating a constitutional amendment making the union the government of industry. A general union would coordinate production and resource allocation between industries. The party would cease to exist, as would the state, as its goal. No vanguard is prescribed to manage the federal republic .

[ 2 ] Tactics [ edit ] According to the De Leonist theory, workers would simultaneously form socialist industrial unions in the workplaces and a socialist political party that would organize in the political realm. Upon achieving sufficient support for a victory at the polls, the political party would be voted into office, giving the De Leonist program a mandate from the people. It is assumed that at that point, the socialist industrial unions will have attained sufficient strength in the workplaces for workers to take control of the means of production .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The De Leonist victory at the polls would be accompanied by a transfer of control of the factories, mines, farms, and other means of production to workers councils organized within the industrial unions. De Leonists distinguish this event from the general strike to take control of the workplaces advocated by anarcho-syndicalists and refer to it instead as a "general lockout of the ruling class".

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The existing government would then be replaced with a government elected from within the socialist industrial unions, and the newly elected socialist government would quickly enact whatever constitutional amendments or other changes in the structure of government needed to bring this about, adjourning sine die . Workers on the shop floor would elect local shop floor committees needed to continue production and representatives to local and national councils representing their particular industry.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] Workers would also elect representatives to a congress , called an All-Industrial Congress, which would effectively function as the government . These representatives would be subject to a recall vote at any time. De Leonism would thus reorganize the national government along industrial lines with representatives elected by industry.

Comparison to other forms of socialism [ edit ] De Leonism lies outside the Leninist tradition of communism . It predates Leninism as De Leonism's principles developed in the early 1890s, with De Leon assuming SLP leadership. Leninism and its idea of a vanguard party took shape after the 1902 publication of Lenin's What Is to Be Done?

De Leonism is generally opposed to the policies of the former Soviet Union , China, and other socialist states and does not consider them socialist but rather state capitalist or following "bureaucratic state despotism". The decentralized nature of the proposed De Leonist government contrasts  the democratic centralism of Marxism–Leninism and what they see as the dictatorial nature of the Soviet Union.

[ 7 ] The success of the De Leonist plan depends on achieving majority support among the people both in the workplace and at the polls, in contrast to the Leninist notion that a small vanguard party should lead the working class to carry out the revolution. De Leonism's stance against reformism [ 8 ] means that it is referred to by the label " impossibilist ", along with the Socialist Party of Great Britain .

[ citation needed ] De Leonist political parties have also been criticized for being allegedly overly dogmatic and sectarian . Despite their rejection of Leninism and vanguardism, De Leonism also lies outside the " democratic socialist " and " social democratic " traditions. De Leon and other De Leonist writers have issued frequent polemics against democratic socialist movements, especially the Socialist Party of America , and consider them reformist or " bourgeois socialist". De Leonists have traditionally refrained from any activity or alliances viewed by them as trying to reform capitalism , such as social justice movements, preferring instead to concentrate solely on the twin tasks of building support for a De Leonist political party and organizing socialist industrial unions. However, the Socialist Labor Party in De Leon's time was active during strikes and such.

[ citation needed ] Daniel De Leon proved hugely influential to other socialists outside the US. De Leon's approach has been described as a strategy that seeks to achieve a relatively "peaceful" or bloodless revolution.

[ 9 ] Political parties [ edit ] American Labor Party (1932) Industrial Union Party League for Socialist Reconstruction New Union Party Socialist Labor Party (Australia) Socialist Labour Party (Canada) Socialist Labour Party (UK, 1903) Socialist Labor Party of America Socialist Union Party See also [ edit ] Impossibilism References [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Epps, Henry (2012).

Ethics Vol II: Universal Ethics and Morality . pp.

84– 85.

^ "How the Socialist Labor Party Differs from the Industrial Workers of the World" .

^ "De Leonism" .

Marx 200 . 22 February 2017.

Archived from the original on 29 September 2020 . Retrieved 17 April 2019 .

^ a b "Daniel De Leon: American socialist newspaper editor" .

www.deleonism.org .

Archived from the original on 22 February 2020 . Retrieved 17 April 2019 .

^ "De Leonism" .

en.internationalism.org .

International Communist Current .

Archived from the original on 28 November 2020 . Retrieved 17 April 2019 .

^ a b De Leon, Daniel (1909).

" "Syndicalism" " .

Daily People .

^ "De Leonism" .

MARX 200 . 22 February 2017 . Retrieved 17 April 2019 .

^ "Daniel De Leon, Reform or Revolution" .

www.deleonism.org . Retrieved 17 April 2019 .

^ Jakopovich, Dan (November 2008).

"Revolution and the party in Gramsci's thought" .

IV Online magazine . No. IV406.

, See section: "The dialectics of consent and coercion." Bibliography [ edit ] Darlington, Ralph (2008).

Syndicalism and the Transition to Communism . Ashgate.

ISBN 978-0-7546-3617-5 .

External links [ edit ] DeLeonism.org https://en.internationalism.org/tag/political-currents-and-reference/de-leonism v t e Socialist Labor Party of America National Secretaries Van Patten - Schneider - Vogt - Rosenberg - Gretsch - Kuhn - Bohn - Augustine - Petersen - Karp - Bills Presidential tickets 1892 , Wing / Matchett 1896 , Matchett / Maguire 1900 , Malloney / Remmel 1904 , Corregan / Cox 1908 , Gillhaus / Munro 1912 , Reimer / Gillhaus 1916 , Reimer / Harrison 1920 , Cox / Gillhaus 1924 , Johns / Reynolds 1928 , Reynolds / Crowley 1932 , Reynolds / Aiken 1936 , Aiken / Emil Teichert 1940 , Aiken / Orange 1944 , Edward Teichert / Albaugh 1948 , Edward Teichert / Emery 1952 , Hass / Emery 1956 , Hass / Cozzini 1960 , Hass / Cozzini 1964 , Hass / Blomen 1968 , Blomen / Taylor 1972 , Fisher / Gunderson 1976 , Levin / Blomen Related topics Daniel De Leon De Leonism History of the socialist movement in the United States New Yorker Volkszeitung Socialist Trade and Labor Alliance The People newspaper Workingmen's Party of the United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=De_Leonism&oldid=1291454388 " Categories : Eponymous political ideologies Syndicalism De Leonist organizations Daniel De Leon Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 10:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents De Leonism 11 languages Add topic

