Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Variations 2 Relation to Borel measure 3 Examples 4 References Toggle the table of contents Baire measure 2 languages Español Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Measure for Baire sets in mathematics In mathematics, a Baire measure is a measure on the σ-algebra of Baire sets of a topological space whose value on every compact Baire set is finite. In compact metric spaces the Borel sets and the Baire sets are the same, so Baire measures are the same as Borel measures that are finite on compact sets . In general Baire sets and Borel sets need not be the same. In spaces with non-Baire Borel sets, Baire measures are used because they connect to the properties of continuous functions more directly.

Variations [ edit ] There are several inequivalent definitions of Baire sets , so correspondingly there are several inequivalent concepts of Baire measure on a topological space. These all coincide on spaces that are locally compact σ-compact Hausdorff spaces .

Relation to Borel measure [ edit ] In practice Baire measures can be replaced by regular Borel measures . The relation between Baire measures and regular Borel measures is as follows: The restriction of a finite Borel measure to the Baire sets is a Baire measure.

A finite Baire measure on a compact space is always regular.

A finite Baire measure on a compact space is the restriction of a unique regular Borel measure.

On compact (or σ-compact) metric spaces, Borel sets are the same as Baire sets and Borel measures are the same as Baire measures.

Examples [ edit ] Counting measure on the unit interval is a measure on the Baire sets that is not regular (or σ-finite).

The (left or right) Haar measure on a locally compact group is a Baire measure invariant under the left (right) action of the group on itself. In particular, if the group is an abelian group , the left and right Haar measures coincide and we say the Haar measure is translation invariant . See also Pontryagin duality .

References [ edit ] Leonard Gillman and Meyer Jerison , Rings of Continuous Functions , Springer Verlag #43, 1960 v t e Measure theory Basic concepts Absolute continuity of measures Lebesgue integration L p spaces Measure Measure space Probability space Measurable space / function Sets Almost everywhere Atom Baire set Borel set equivalence relation Borel space Carathéodory's criterion Cylindrical σ-algebra Cylinder set 𝜆-system Essential range infimum/supremum Locally measurable π -system σ-algebra Non-measurable set Vitali set Null set Support Transverse measure Universally measurable Types of measures Atomic Baire Banach Besov Borel Brown Complex Complete Content ( Logarithmically ) Convex Decomposable Discrete Equivalent Finite Inner ( Quasi- ) Invariant Locally finite Maximising Metric outer Outer Perfect Pre-measure ( Sub- ) Probability Projection-valued Radon Random Regular Borel regular Inner regular Outer regular Saturated Set function σ-finite s-finite Signed Singular Spectral Strictly positive Tight Vector Particular measures Counting Dirac Euler Gaussian Haar Harmonic Hausdorff Intensity Lebesgue Infinite-dimensional Logarithmic Product Projections Pushforward Spherical measure Tangent Trivial Young Maps Measurable function Bochner Strongly Weakly Convergence: almost everywhere of measures in measure of random variables in distribution in probability Cylinder set measure Random: compact set element measure process variable vector Projection-valued measure Main results Carathéodory's extension theorem Convergence theorems Dominated Monotone Vitali Decomposition theorems Hahn Jordan Maharam's Egorov's Fatou's lemma Fubini's Fubini–Tonelli Hölder's inequality Minkowski inequality Radon–Nikodym Riesz–Markov–Kakutani representation theorem Other results Disintegration theorem Lifting theory Lebesgue's density theorem Lebesgue differentiation theorem Sard's theorem Vitali–Hahn–Saks theorem For Lebesgue measure Isoperimetric inequality Brunn–Minkowski theorem Milman's reverse Minkowski–Steiner formula Prékopa–Leindler inequality Vitale's random Brunn–Minkowski inequality Applications & related Convex analysis Descriptive set theory Probability theory Real analysis Spectral theory Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Baire_measure&oldid=1181027049 " Category : Measures (measure theory) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 October 2023, at 11:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Baire measure 2 languages Add topic

