Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Route selection Toggle Route selection subsection 1.1 Physical factors 1.2 Other uses of the seabed 2 Submarine pipeline characteristics 3 Pipeline construction Toggle Pipeline construction subsection 3.1 The pull/tow system 3.2 The S-lay system 3.3 The J-lay system 3.4 The Reel-lay system 4 Stabilisation Toggle Stabilisation subsection 4.1 Trenching and burial 4.2 Mattresses 4.3 Ground anchors 4.4 Saddle blocks 4.5 Sandbags and groutbags 4.6 Gravel dumps 5 Environmental and legal issues 6 Protection of submarine pipelines Toggle Protection of submarine pipelines subsection 6.1 Significance of submarine pipelines 6.2 Threats: intentional human activity 6.3 Increased attention 6.4 Protection of submarine pipelines 6.5 Responses to the Nord Stream sabotage 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Submarine pipeline 5 languages Deutsch Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pipeline that is laid on the seabed or below it inside a trench A submarine pipeline (also known as marine , subsea or offshore pipeline) is a pipeline that is laid on the seabed or below it inside a trench.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In some cases, the pipeline is mostly on-land but in places it crosses water expanses, such as small seas, straits and rivers.

[ 3 ] Submarine pipelines are used primarily to carry oil or gas, but transportation of water is also important.

[ 3 ] A distinction is sometimes made between a flowline and a pipeline.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The former is an intrafield pipeline, in the sense that it is used to connect subsea wellheads , manifolds and the platform within a particular development field. The latter, sometimes referred to as an export pipeline , is used to bring the resource to shore.

[ 1 ] Sizeable pipeline construction projects need to take into account many factors, such as the offshore ecology, geohazards and environmental loading – they are often undertaken by multidisciplinary, international teams.

[ 1 ] Example of a submarine pipeline route: the Langeled pipeline.

Route selection [ edit ] One of the earliest and most critical tasks in a submarine pipeline planning exercise is the route selection.

[ 5 ] This selection has to consider a variety of issues, some of a political nature, but most others dealing with geohazards , physical factors along the prospective route, and other uses of the seabed in the area considered.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] This task begins with a fact-finding exercise, which is a standard desk study that includes a survey of geological maps , bathymetry , fishing charts, aerial and satellite photography, as well as information from navigation authorities.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Physical factors [ edit ] Interaction between a submarine pipeline and the seabed onto which it rests (four possible scenarios).

The primary physical factor to be considered in submarine pipeline construction is the state of the seabed – whether it is smooth ( i.e.

, relatively flat) or uneven (corrugated, with high points and low points). If it is uneven, the pipeline will include free spans when it connects two high points, leaving the section in between unsupported.

[ 2 ] [ 7 ] If an unsupported section is too long, the bending stress exerted onto it (due to its weight) may be excessive. Vibration from current-induced vortexes may also become an issue.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Corrective measures for unsupported pipeline spans include seabed leveling and post-installation support, such as berm or sand infilling below the pipeline. The strength of the seabed is another significant parameter. If the soil is not strong enough, the pipeline may sink into it to an extent where inspection, maintenance procedures and prospective tie-ins become difficult to carry out. At the other extreme, a rocky seabed is expensive to trench and, at high points, abrasion and damage of the pipeline's external coating may occur.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Ideally, the soil should be such as to allow the pipe to settle into it to some extent, thereby providing it with some lateral stability.

[ 7 ] One of a number of reasons why submarine pipelines are buried below the seabed: to protect them against the gouging action of drifting ice features , such as icebergs .

Other physical factors to be taken into account prior to building a pipeline include the following: [ 2 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Seabed mobility : Sand waves and megaripples are features that move with time, such that a pipeline that was supported by the crest of one such feature during construction may find itself in a trough later during the pipeline's operational lifespan. The evolution of these features is difficult to predict so it is preferable to avoid the areas where they are known to exist.

Submarine landslides : They result from high sedimentation rates and occur on steeper slopes. They can be triggered by earthquakes . When the soil around the pipe is subjected to a slide, especially if the resulting displacement is at high angle to the line, the pipe within it can incur severe bending and consequent tensile failure .

Currents : High currents are objectionable in that they hinder pipe laying operations. For instance, in shallow seas tidal currents may be quite strong in a strait between two islands. Under these circumstances, it may be preferable to bring the pipe elsewhere, even if this alternative route ends up being longer.

Waves : In shallow waters, waves can also be problematic for pipeline laying operations (in severe wave regimes) and, subsequently, to its stability, because of the water's scouring action . This is one of a number of reasons why landfalls (where the pipeline reaches the shoreline) are particularly delicate areas to plan.

Ice-related issues : In freezing waters, floating ice features often drift into shallower waters, and their keel comes into contact with the seabed. As they continue to drift, they gouge the seabed and can hit the pipeline.

[ 12 ] Stamukhi can also damage this structure, either by exerting high local stresses on it or by causing to soil around it to fail, thereby inducing excessive bending.

Strudel are another pipeline hazard in cold waters – water gushing through them can remove the soil from below the structure, making it vulnerable to overstress (due to self-weight) or vortex-induced oscillations. Pipeline route planning for areas where these risks are known to exist has to consider laying the pipeline in a back-filled trench.

Other uses of the seabed [ edit ] Proper planning of a pipeline route has to factor in a wide range of human activities that make use of the seabed along the proposed route, or that are likely to do so in the future. They include the following: [ 2 ] [ 8 ] [ 13 ] Other pipelines : If and where the proposed pipeline intersects an existing one, which is not uncommon, a bridging structure may be required at that juncture in order to cross it. This has to be done at a right angle. The juncture should be carefully designed so as to avoid interferences between the two structures either by direct physical contact or due to hydrodynamic effects.

Fishing vessels : Commercial fishing makes use of heavy fishing nets dragged on the seabed and extending several kilometers behind the trawler. This net could snag the pipeline, with potential damage to both pipeline and vessel.

Ship anchors : Ship anchors are a potential threat to pipelines, especially near harbors.

Military activities : Some areas still have mines originating from former conflicts but that are still operational. Other areas, used for bombing or gunning practices, may also conceal live ammunition . Moreover, at some locations, various types of instrumentation are laid on the seafloor for submarine detection. These areas have to be avoided.

Submarine pipeline characteristics [ edit ] Submarine pipelines generally vary in diameter from 3 inches (76 mm) for gas lines, to 72 inches (1,800 mm) for high capacity lines.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Wall thicknesses typically range from 10 to 75 millimetres (0.39 to 2.95 in). The pipe can be designed for fluids at high temperature and pressure. The walls are made from high-yield strength steel, 350-500 MPa (50,000-70,000 psi), weldability being one of the main selection criteria.

[ 2 ] The structure is often shielded against external corrosion by coatings such as bitumastic or epoxy , supplemented by cathodic protection with sacrificial anodes .

[ 2 ] [ 14 ] Concrete or fiberglass wrapping provides further protection against abrasion. The addition of a concrete coating is also useful to compensate for the pipeline's positive buoyancy when it carries lower density substances.

[ 2 ] [ 15 ] The pipeline's inside wall is not coated for petroleum service. But when it carries seawater or corrosive substances, it can be coated with epoxy , polyurethane or polyethylene ; it can also be cement-lined.

[ 2 ] [ 14 ] In the petroleum industry, where leaks are unacceptable and the pipelines are subject to internal pressures typically in the order of 10 MPa (1500 psi), the segments are joined by full penetration welds.

[ 2 ] [ 14 ] Mechanical joints are also used. A pig is a standard device in pipeline transport , be it on-land or offshore. It is used to test for hydrostatic pressure , to check for dents and crimps on the sidewalls inside the pipe, and to conduct periodic cleaning and minor repairs.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Pipeline construction [ edit ] Pipeline construction involves two procedures: assembling many pipe segments into a full line, and installing that line along the desired route. Several systems can be used – for a submarine pipeline, the choice in favor of any one of them is based on the following factors: physical and environmental conditions ( e.g.

currents, wave regime), availability of equipment and costs, water depth, pipeline length and diameter, constraints tied to the presence of other lines and structures along the route.

[ 2 ] These systems are generally divided into four broad categories: pull/tow , S-lay , J-lay and reel-lay .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Simplified drawings showing three configurations used to tow subsea pipelines offshore to the planned installation site (not to scale).

The pull/tow system [ edit ] In the pull/tow system, the submarine pipeline is assembled onshore and then towed to location. Assembly is done either parallel or perpendicular to the shoreline – in the former case, the full line can be built prior to tow out and installation.

[ 20 ] A significant advantage with the pull/tow system is that pre-testing and inspection of the line are done onshore, not at sea.

[ 20 ] It allows to handle lines of any size and complexity.

[ 18 ] [ 21 ] As for the towing procedures, a number of configurations can be used, which may be categorized as follows: surface tow, near-surface tow, mid-depth tow and off-bottom tow.

[ 22 ] Surface tow : In this configuration, the pipeline remains at the surface of the water during tow, and is then sunk into position at lay site. The line has to be buoyant – this can be done with individual buoyancy units attached to it.

[ 20 ] Surface tows are not appropriate for rough seas and are vulnerable to lateral currents.

Near-surface tow : The pipeline remains below the water surface but close to it – this mitigates wave action. But the spar buoys used to maintain the line at that level are affected by rough seas, which in itself may represent a challenge for the towing operation.

Mid-depth tow : The pipeline is not buoyant – either because it is heavy or it is weighted down by hanging chains. In this configuration, the line is suspended in a catenary between two towing vessels. The shape of that catenary (the sag ) is a balance between the line's weight, the tension applied to it by the vessels and hydrodynamic lift on the chains.

[ 23 ] The amount of allowable sag is limited by how far down the seabed is.

Off-bottom tow : This configuration is similar to the mid-depth tow, but here the line is maintained within 1 to 2 m (several feet) away from the bottom, using chains dragging on the seabed.

Bottom tow : In this case, the pipeline is dragged onto the bottom – the line is not affected by waves and currents, and if the sea gets too rough for the tow vessel, the line can simply be abandoned and recovered later. Challenges with this type of system include: requirement for an abrasion-resistant coating, interaction with other submarine pipelines and potential obstructions (reef, boulders, etc.). Bottom tow is commonly used for river crossings and crossings between shores.

[ 24 ] Simplified drawings of three common systems used for the construction and installation of subsea pipelines (not to scale): S-lay, J-lay and reel.

The Solitaire , one of the largest pipe-laying ships in the world.

The DCV Aegir , a pipelay vessel designed for J-lay and reel-lay.

The Saipem 7000 , a semi-submersible crane vessel equipped with a J-lay pipe-laying system.

The S-lay system [ edit ] In the S-lay system, the pipeline assembly is done at the installation site, on board a vessel that has all the equipment required for joining the pipe segments: pipe handling conveyors, welding stations, X-ray equipment, joint-coating module, etc.

[ 25 ] The S notation refers to the shape of the pipeline as it is laid onto the seabed. The pipeline leaves the vessel at the stern or bow from a supporting structure called a stinger that guides the pipe's downward motion and controls the convex-upward curve (the overbend ). As it continues toward the seabed, the pipe has a convex-downward curve (the sagbend ) before coming into contact with the seabed ( touch down point ). The sagbend is controlled by a tension applied from the vessel (via tensioners ) in response to the pipeline's submerged weight. The pipeline configuration is monitored so that it will not get damaged by excessive bending.

[ 25 ] This on-site pipeline assembly approach, referred to as lay-barge construction, is known for its versatility and self-contained nature – despite the high costs associated with this vessel's deployment, it is efficient and requires relatively little external support.

[ 26 ] But it may have to contend with severe sea states – these adversely affect operations such as pipe transfer from supply boats, anchor-handling and pipe welding.

[ 25 ] Recent developments in lay-barge design include dynamic positioning and the J-lay system.

[ 25 ] [ 27 ] The J-lay system [ edit ] In areas where the water is very deep, the S-lay system may not be appropriate because the pipeline leaves the stinger to go almost straight down. To avoid sharp bending at the end of it and to mitigate excessive sag bending, the tension in the pipeline would have to be high.

[ 28 ] Doing so would interfere with the vessel's positioning, and the tensioner could damage the pipeline. A particularly long stinger could be used, but this is also objectionable since that structure would be adversely affected by winds and currents.

[ 28 ] The J-lay system, one of the latest generations of lay-barge, is better suited for deep water environments. In this system, the pipeline leaves the vessel on a nearly vertical ramp (or tower). There is no overbend – only a sagbend of catenary nature (hence the J notation), such that the tension can be reduced. The pipeline is also less exposed to wave action as it enters the water.

[ 29 ] However, unlike for the S-lay system, where pipe welding can be done simultaneously at several locations along the vessel deck's length, the J-lay system can only accommodate one welding station. Advanced methods of automatic welding are used to compensate for this drawback.

[ 30 ] The Reel-lay system [ edit ] In the reel-lay system, the pipeline is assembled onshore and is spooled onto a large drum typically about 20 by 6 metres (66 ft × 20 ft) in size, [ 31 ] mounted on board a purpose-built vessel. The vessel then goes out to location to lay the pipeline. Onshore facilities to assemble the pipeline have inherent advantages: they are not affected by the weather or the sea state and are less expensive than seaborne operations.

[ 21 ] Pipeline supply can be coordinated: while one line is being laid at sea, another one can be spooled onshore.

[ 32 ] A single reel can have enough capacity for a full-length flow line.

[ 32 ] The reel-lay system, however, can only handle lower diameter pipelines – up to about 400 mm (16 in).

[ 33 ] Also, the kind of steel making up the pipes must be able to undergo the required amount of plastic deformation as it is bent to proper curvature (by a spiral J-tube) when reeled around the drum, and straightened back (by a straightener) during the layout operations at the installation site.

[ 34 ] Stabilisation [ edit ] Several methods are used to stabilise and protect submarine pipelines and their components. These may be used alone or in combinations.

[ 35 ] Trenching and burial [ edit ] Simplified drawing showing a typical jetting system for trenching below a submarine pipeline that is lying on the seafloor.

A submarine pipeline may be laid inside a trench as a means of safeguarding it against fishing gear ( e.g.

anchors ) and trawling activity .

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] This may also be required in shore approaches to protect the pipeline against currents and wave action (as it crosses the surf zone ). Trenching can be done prior to pipeline lay ( pre-lay trenching ), or afterward by seabed removal from below the pipeline ( post-lay trenching ). In the latter case, the trenching device rides on top of, or straddles, the pipeline.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Several systems are used to dig trenches in the seabed for submarine pipelines: Jetting: This is a post-lay trenching procedure whereby the soil is removed from beneath the pipeline by using powerful pumps to blow water on each side of it.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Mechanical cutting: This system uses chains or cutter disks to dig through and remove harder soils, including boulders , [ 40 ] from below the pipeline.

Plowing: The plowing principle, which was initially used for pre-lay trenching, has evolved into sophisticated systems that are lighter in size for faster and safer operation.

Dredging/excavation: In shallower water, the soil can be removed with a dredger or an excavator prior to laying the pipeline. This can be done in a number of ways, notably with a ′′cutter-suction′′ system, with the use of buckets or with a backhoe .

[ 36 ] ″A buried pipe is far better protected than a pipe in an open trench.″ [ 41 ] This is commonly done either by covering the structure with rocks quarried from a nearby shoreline. Alternatively, the soil excavated from the seabed during trenching can be used as backfill. A significant drawback to burial is the difficulty in locating a leak should it arise, and for the ensuing repairing operations.

[ 42 ] Mattresses [ edit ] Concrete mattresses on barge Mattresses may be laid over the pipeline, or both under and over it depending on the substrate.

[ 35 ] Frond mattresses have an effect similar to seaweed and tend to cause sand to accumulate. They must be anchored to the bottom to prevent being washed away.

[ 35 ] Concrete mattresses are used to help hold part of the pipeline in place by their weight and reduce scour. They are usually heavy enough to be held in place by their own weight, as they are made from concrete blocks linked together by rope.

[ 35 ] Combination mattresses of concrete mattress with overlaid frond mattress are also used.

[ 35 ] Ground anchors [ edit ] Clamps holding the pipeline to piles may be used to prevent lateral movement.

[ 35 ] Saddle blocks [ edit ] Precast concrete saddle blocks may be used to provide lateral support and hold the pipeline down more firmly.

[ 35 ] Sandbags and groutbags [ edit ] These may be packed at the sides or under a pipeline to provide vertical and/or lateral support.

[ 35 ] Gravel dumps [ edit ] Gravel may be dumped over parts of a pipeline to reduce scour and help stabilise against lateral movement.

[ 35 ] Environmental and legal issues [ edit ] The Espoo Convention created certain requirements for notification and consultation where a project is likely to have transboundary environmental effects. Scholars are divided on how effective Espoo is at mitigating environmental harm.

Law of the Sea concepts involved in the construction of transboundary pipelines concern territorial waters, continental shelves , exclusive economic zones , freedom of the high seas and protection of the environment. Under international law the high seas are open to all states to lay underwater pipelines and for various other types of construction.

[ 43 ] Underwater pipelines pose environmental risk because pipelines themselves may become damaged by ship's anchors, corrosion, tectonic activity, or as a result of defective construction and materials.

Stanislav Patin has said that study on the effects of natural gas on underwater ecosystems, fish and other marine organisms has been limited. Researchers found a cause-effect relationship between mass fish mortality and natural gas leaks after drilling accidents in the Sea of Azov in 1982 and 1985.

[ 43 ] Concerns about the environmental risks of underwater pipelines have been raised on numerous occasions. There have been at least two serious incidents involving oil pipelines on the UK's continental shelf . There have also been several "minor spills and gas leaks" involving other North Sea pipelines . In 1980 a pipeline was damaged by a ship's anchor and in 1986 a pipeline valve failed due to pressure changed. Both incidents resulted in oil spills. Several Baltic countries expressed concerns about the Nord Stream pipeline . The route of the 1,200 km underwater pipeline would travel through fishing areas of the Baltic Sea , as well as area where chemical weapons from World War II had been discarded.

[ 43 ] Protection of submarine pipelines [ edit ] Significance of submarine pipelines [ edit ] Submarine pipelines are crucial to the global energy infrastructure and supply.

[ 44 ] This infrastructure contributes to global energy security, as its function is to transport oil, natural gas and other resources over vast distances.

[ 45 ] In December 2020, operational oil pipelines worldwide had a daily capacity of almost 100 million barrels of oil equivalent.

[ 46 ] The regions with the longest operational oil pipeline network in 2024 in kilometres are North America with 111,353 km, Asia with 86,717 km and Europe in third place with 74,077 km.

[ 47 ] Pipelines have been of geopolitical and national security priority since the beginning of their construction.

[ 45 ] Disruptions to pipeline operations can cause significant economic losses, environmental hazards, and energy shortages for the affected parties, reflecting the need for their sufficient protection to be of high priority.

[ 48 ] Key challenges related to critical maritime infrastructure protection are human activity, geographical accessibility, natural hazards, sabotage, maintenance and monitoring and lack of international cooperation.

[ 45 ] Threats: intentional human activity [ edit ] Earlier debates about critical maritime infrastructure have shifted from emphasis on terrorism and cyber threats toward the increasing frequency and efficacy of hybrid tactics.

[ 49 ] The Nord Stream sabotage demonstrates hybrid attacks, which aim to induce significant damage to an adversary while operating in a way that makes detection, attribution and response difficult to enact, blurring the conceptual lines between conflict and peace.

[ 49 ] Increased attention [ edit ] Despite underwater pipelines being categorized as critical infrastructure they only recently became a prominent issue in debates about maritime security. Previously, pipelines had been overlooked and neglected in geopolitical security debates.

[ 50 ] One reason for the increased attention is the growing threat to critical infrastructure on the seabed and the resulting risk to national security.

[ 51 ] The shift in attention changed especially after the sabotage of the Nord Stream pipelines in the Baltic Sea in September 2022. The explosion highlighted the need for prioritization of critical maritime infrastructure protection, including vulnerabilities of marine infrastructure and the inadequacy of the current protection and response mechanisms.

[ 50 ] The perpetrators of the sabotage of the Nord Stream pipeline are still not caught, despite observers' accounts stating that the incident had a high level of sophistication implying either state sponsorship or another form of governmental backing.

[ 52 ] Protection of submarine pipelines [ edit ] NATO working to enhance the security of underwater infrastructure to prevent and respond to threats such as organized crime and hybrid attacks like the explosion of the Nord Stream Pipeline.

[ 49 ] In 2023, at the Vilnius summit, NATO launched a new centre for the protection of underwater pipelines following the to-date unsolved case of sabotage on the Nord Stream pipelines and growing concern that Russia is mapping infrastructure in waters around Europe.

[ 53 ] The centre is dedicated to the security of the vast network of underwater energy pipelines demonstrated to be vulnerable to attacks to disrupt energy supply and economic activity.

[ 54 ] The European Union has also updated its maritime security strategy involving the protection of underwater pipelines.

[ 51 ] The strategy promotes rules-based governance at sea and boosts international cooperation The objective of the strategy is to increase the resilience and protection of critical maritime infrastructure such as gas pipelines and underwater cables.

[ 55 ] The strategy comprises six strategic objectives.

[ 55 ] The first is to escalate activities at sea such as security exercises and the second is to cooperate with partners such as regional and international organisations. The third objective is to lead maritime domain awareness such as information collection and exchange among authorities, to manage risks and threats involving improving the collective resilience of the EU and its member states, to enhance civilian and military capabilities and lastly, to educate and train to ensure a high level of specialised education and skills which is largely focused on skills needed to tackle hybrid threats.

Responses to the Nord Stream sabotage [ edit ] After the Nord Stream sabotage in 2022, NATO and the European Union intensified their attention towards the protection of maritime infrastructure. This resulted in increased policy activity and new protection strategies and plans, including the procurement of additional naval vessels to be used for seabed infrastructure protection.

[ 50 ] The sabotage of the Nord Stream pipeline in 2022 triggered a substantial response, especially among North Sea coastal states.

[ 45 ] In 2023, the UK added a new surveillance ship, the RFA Proteus, to its fleet. The vessel's purpose is to monitor the seabed and ensure infrastructure safety.

[ 45 ] Norway increased its security measures around the country's oil and gas infrastructure, involving an increased presence of the Navy, Coast Guard and Air Force covering all domains including subsea and cyber.

[ 56 ] Highlighting the need for cooperation in response to the threat against critical maritime infrastructure, Norway also accepted assistance from the UK, France and Germany offering their naval resources to restore and increase the security surrounding the oil and gas infrastructure in the North Sea.

[ 56 ] See also [ edit ] Geohazard – Geological state that may lead to widespread damage or risk Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Ocean – Body of salt water covering most of Earth Offshore construction – Installation of structures and facilities in a marine environment Offshore drilling – Mechanical process where a wellbore is drilled below the seabed Offshore geotechnical engineering – Sub-field of engineering concerned with human-made structures in the sea Offshore (hydrocarbons) Oil platform – Offshore ocean structure with oil drilling and related facilities Pipe-laying ship – Ship type used to lay subsea pipelines Seabed – Bottom of the ocean Seabed gouging by ice – Outcome of the interaction between drifting ice and the seabed Subsea (technology) – Technology of submerged operations in the sea Subsea valves – Valve used to control undersea material flow References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Dean, p. 338-340 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Gerwick, p. 583-585 ^ a b c Palmer & King, p. 2-3 ^ Bai & Bai, p. 22 ^ a b c Palmer & King, p. 11-13 ^ a b Dean, p. 342-343 ^ a b c d e Palmer &King, p. 13–16 ^ a b c d Dean, Sect. 7.2.2 ^ Palmer & Been, p. 182–187 ^ Croasdale et al. 2013 ^ Cardenas, I.C.; et al. (2022).

"Marine geohazards exposed: Uncertainties involved" .

Marine Georesources and Geotechnology .

41 (6): 1– 31.

doi : 10.1080/1064119X.2022.2078252 .

hdl : 11250/3058338 .

^ Barrette 2011 ^ Palmer & King, p. 16-18 ^ a b c Ramakrishnan, p. 185 ^ Ramakrishnan, p. 186 ^ Dean, p.347-350 ^ Palmer & King, Chap.12 ^ a b Bai & Bai, p. 910-912 ^ Wilson, Chap.1 ^ a b c Brown, p. 1 ^ a b Palmer & King, p. 412 ^ Palmer & King, 12.4 ^ Palmer & King, p. 415 ^ Palmer & King, p. 417 ^ a b c d Gerwick,15.2 ^ Palmer & King, p. 395 ^ Palmer & King, p. 397 ^ a b Palmer & King, p. 401 ^ Palmer & King, p. 402 ^ Gerwick, p. 615 ^ Bai & Bai, p. 145 ^ a b Gerwick, p. 611 ^ Bai & Bai, p. 144 ^ Gerwick, p. 610 ^ a b c d e f g h i Bevan, John, ed. (2005). "Section 1.7".

The Professional Divers's Handbook (second ed.). Alverstoke, GOSPORT, Hampshire: Submex Ltd. p. 34.

ISBN 978-0950824260 .

^ a b c Palmer & King, sect. 12.5.1 ^ a b Ramakrishnan, p. 212 ^ Palmer & King, p. 420 ^ Ramakrishnan, p. 214 ^ Palmer & King, p. 421 ^ Palmer & King, p. 424 ^ Palmer & King, p. 425 ^ a b c Karm, Ellen (June 2008). "Environment and Energy: The Baltic Sea Gas Pipeline".

Journal of Baltic Studies .

39 (2): 99– 121.

doi : 10.1080/01629770802031200 .

S2CID 144484018 .

^ Nasiri, 2024 ^ a b c d e Bueger & Edmunds, 2024 ^ Statista, 2024a ^ Statista, 2024b ^ Bueger & Liebetrau, 2023; Shapiro & McNeish, 2021 ^ a b c Monaghan et al., 2023 ^ a b c Bueger & Liebetrau, 2023 ^ a b Brooke-Holland, 2023 ^ Bueger & Edmunds, 2024; Bueger & Liebetrau, 2023 ^ Cook, 2023; Monaghan et al., 2023 ^ MARCOM, 2024 ^ a b Council of the EU, 2023 ^ a b Häggblom, 2022 Bibliography [ edit ] Bai Y. & Bai Q. (2010) Subsea Engineering Handbook . Gulf Professional Publishing, New York, 919 p.

Barrette, P (2011).

"Offshore pipeline protection against seabed gouging by ice: An overview" .

Cold Regions Science and Technology .

69 (1): 3– 20.

Bibcode : 2011CRST...69....3B .

doi : 10.1016/j.coldregions.2011.06.007 .

Bisht, I. S. (2022, October 3).

UK to Procure Seabed Surveillance Vessels for Infrastructure Safety.

The Defense Post.

https://thedefensepost.com/2022/10/03/uk-seabed-surveillance-vessels/ Brooke-Holland, L. (2023).

Seabed warfare: Protecting the UK’s undersea infrastructure.

https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/seabed-warfare-protecting-the-uks-undersea-infrastructure/ Brown R.J. (2006) Past, present, and future towing of pipelines and risers .

In : Proceedings of the 38th Offshore Technology Conference (OTC). Houston, U.S.A.

Bueger, C., & Edmunds, T. (2024).

Understanding Maritime Security . Oxford University Press.

Bueger, C., & Liebetrau, T. (2023).

Critical maritime infrastructure protection: What’s the trouble?

Marine Policy, 155, 105772.

Cook, L. (2023, June 16).

NATO moves to protect undersea pipelines, cables as concern mounts over Russian sabotage threat.

AP News.

https://apnews.com/article/nato-russia-sabotage-pipelines-cables-infrastructure-507929033b05b5651475c8738179ba5c Council of the EU. (2023, October 24).

Maritime security: Council approves revised EU strategy and action plan.

Consilium.

https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2023/10/24/maritime-security-council-approves-revised-eu-strategy-and-action-plan/ Croasdale K., Been K., Crocker G., Peek R. & Verlaan P. (2013) Stamukha loading cases for pipelines in the Caspian Sea . Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Port and Ocean Engineering under Arctic Conditions (POAC), Espoo, Finland.

Dean E.T.R. (2010) Offshore Geotechnical Engineering - Principles and Practice , Thomas Telford, Reston, VA, U.S.A., 520 p.

Gerwick B.C. (2007) Construction of marine and offshore structures . CRC Press, New York, 795 p.

Häggblom, R. (2022, October 4).

Nordic Countries’ Response to Nord Stream Sabotage.

Naval News.

https://www.navalnews.com/naval-news/2022/10/nordic-countries-response-to-nord-stream-sabotage/ MARCOM, P. A. O. (2024).

NATO officially launches new Maritime Centre for Security of Critical Undersea Infrastructure.

Mc.Nato.Int.

https://mc.nato.int/media-centre/news/2024/nato-officially-launches-new-nmcscui.aspx Monaghan, S., Svendsen, O., Darrah, M., & Arnold, E. (2023).

NATO’s Role in Protecting Critical Undersea Infrastructure.

Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS); JSTOR.

http://www.jstor.org.ep.fjernadgang.kb.dk/stable/resrep55403 Nasiri, H. (2024, May 4).

Managing Undersea Pipeline Damage: Strategies for Prevention, Response, and Recovery.

9th International Conference on Civil, Structural and Seismic Engineering.

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380343395_Managing_Undersea_Pipeline_Damage_Strategies_for_Prevention_Response_and_Recovery Palmer, A.C.

& Been K. (2011) Pipeline geohazards for Arctic conditions.

In : W.O. McCarron (Editor), Deepwater Foundations and Pipeline Geomechanics , J. Ross Publishing, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, pp. 171–188.

Palmer, A. C.

& King R. A. (2008).

Subsea Pipeline Engineering (2nd ed.). Tulsa, USA: Pennwell, 624 p.

Ramakrishnan T.V. (2008) Offshore engineering . Gene-Tech Books, New Delhi, 347 p.

Shapiro, J., & McNeish, J.-A. (Eds.). (2021).

Our Extractive Age: Expressions of Violence and Resistance.

Routledge.

https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003127611 Statista. (2024a).

Daily capacity of oil pipelines worldwide as of December 2020, by status.

Statista Research Department.

Statista. (2024b).

Global oil pipeline length 2024, by region.

Statista Research Department.

https://www.statista.com/statistics/1491014/length-of-oil-pipelines-by-region/ Wilson J.F. (2003) Structures in the offshore environment.

In : J.F. Wilson (Editor), Dynamics of Offshore Structures . John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, U.S.A., pp. 1–16.

v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Submarine_pipeline&oldid=1295614308 " Categories : Submarine pipelines Geotechnical structures Oceanography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 21:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Submarine pipeline 5 languages Add topic

