Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In US law 2 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 2.1 Chicken tax 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Tariff engineering 1 language Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Design decisions made to avoid tariffs Part of a series on Taxation An aspect of fiscal policy Policies Economic justice Government revenue Property tax equalization Tax revenue Non-tax revenue Tax law Tax bracket Flat tax Tax threshold Taxation as theft Tax shift Tax cut Tax advantage Tax incentive Tax reform Double taxation Tax harmonization Tax competition Voluntary taxation Representation Economics General Theory Price effect Excess burden Tax efficiency Tax incidence Laffer curve Optimal tax Fiscal illusion Theories Optimal capital income taxation Distribution of Tax Tax rate Flat Progressive Regressive Proportional Collection Economic nexus in the United States Revenue service Revenue stamp Tax assessment Taxable income Tax lien Tax refund Tax shield Tax residence Tax preparation Tax protester Tax investigation Tax collector Tax withholding Private tax collection Noncompliance Legal tax avoidance Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) Double Irish Single Malt CAIA Dutch Sandwich Estate planning Fuel dye Repatriation tax avoidance Share repurchase Tariff engineering Tax credit Tax deduction Tax exemption Taxpayer groups Tax holiday Tax inversion Tax farming Tax patent Tax shelter Illegal tax evasion Tax amnesty Black market Debtors' prison Tax exile Smuggling Tax resistance Transfer mispricing Unreported employment Locations Tax havens Corporate havens Offshore financial centres (OFCs) Offshore magic circle Conduit and sink OFCs Financial centres Financial Secrecy Index Major examples Ireland as a tax haven Ireland v. Commission Leprechaun economics Liechtenstein tax affair Luxembourg Leaks Offshore Leaks Paradise Papers Panama Papers Swiss Leaks United States as a tax haven Panama as a tax haven Types Direct Indirect Per unit Ad valorem Aviation Airport improvement Landing Solidarity Capital gains Expatriation Consumption Departure Hotel Sales Stamp Television Tourist Value-added Digital goods Dividend Environmental tax Carbon Eco-tariff Landfill Natural resources consumption Severance Steering Stumpage Excise Alcohol Cigarette Fat Meat Sin Sugary drink Tobacco General Georgist Gift Gross receipts Hidden Hypothecated Income Inheritance (estate) Land value Luxury On childlessness Payroll Pigouvian Property Resource rent Single Stealth Surtax Turnover Use User charge / fee Congestion Fuel Road / GNSS Toll Vehicle miles traveled Corporate profit Excess profits Windfall Negative (income) Wealth International Financial transaction tax ATTAC Currency transaction tax European Union Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base (CCCTB) Global minimum corporate tax rate Robin Hood tax Tobin tax Spahn tax Tax equalization Tax treaty Exchange of Information Permanent establishment Transfer pricing European Union FTT Foreign revenue rule Trade Custom Duty Tariff Import Export Tariff war Free trade Free-trade zone Trade agreement ATA Carnet Research Academic Mihir A. Desai Dhammika Dharmapala James R. Hines Jr.

Ronen Palan Joel Slemrod Gabriel Zucman Advocacy groups Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy (ITEP) Oxfam (UK) Tax Foundation (US) Tax Justice Network (TJN) Tax Policy Center (US) Religious Church tax Eight per thousand Teind Tithe Fiscus Judaicus Leibzoll Temple tax Tolerance tax Jizya Kharaj Khums Nisab Zakat By country All Countries List of countries by tax rates Tax revenue to GDP ratio Tax rates in Europe Individual Countries Albania Algeria Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brazil Bulgaria BVI Canada China Colombia Croatia Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Lithuania Malta Morocco Namibia Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Palestine Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Russia South Africa Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tanzania United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Business portal Money portal v t e Tariff engineering refers to design and manufacturing decisions made primarily so that the manufactured good is classified at a lower rate for tariffs than it would have been absent those decisions.

[ 1 ] Tariff avoidance is a loophole whereby an importer pays a lower tariff by changing the intended import such that the importer has a lesser tariff burden.

[ 2 ] In contrast to illegal tariff evasion , legal tariff engineering configures the design, material, or construction to legally achieve the desired classification rather than illegally misclassifying the product or good.

[ 1 ] For tariff engineering to be legal, the good being imported must be a "commercial reality", which means any tariff engineering must be a "genuine step in the manufacturing process" or have a commercial use or identity as imported.

[ 3 ] The rule of commercial reality limits manufacturers in the ways that they attempt to use tariff engineering, by requiring that the features used for tariff engineering purposes must not be removed shortly after importing but must be sold with those features or be used as part of a legitimate manufacturing process.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] In US law [ edit ] Tariff engineering was validated following the 1881 United States Supreme Court case of Merritt v. Welsh , which dealt with the classification of imported sugar.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In this case, the importer added molasses to highly refined sugar which darkened the sugar's color. At that time, the tariff classification for sugar was based on the Dutch standard color, which generally corresponded to actual sugar quality. The Port of New York performed a chemical analysis and determined if molasses had been intentionally added to the sugar for the purpose of reclassification on the tariff schedule. After having found that molasses had been added, the Port of New York applied the higher rate of tariff.

[ 6 ] The United States Supreme Court found that even though the molasses was added, Congress had clearly stated that the test to be used was the Dutch standard test, and not any other chemical analysis. Thus, the Port of New York was obligated to classify the sugar based solely on the Dutch standard color and must only charge the lower rate of tariff.

[ 6 ] In explaining his position, Justice Matthews wrote for the majority, "Great stress is laid on the charge that sugars are manufactured in dark colors on purpose to evade our duties. Suppose this is true; has not a manufacturer a right to make his goods as he pleases? If they are less marketable, it is his loss; if they are not less marketable, who has a right to complain? If the duties are affected, there is a plain remedy. Congress can always adopt such laws and regulations as it may deem expedient for protecting the interests of the government." [ 6 ] Examples [ edit ] Columbia Sportswear uses so called “nurse’s pockets”, or small pockets near the waist line, on many of its women's shirts, including the PFG Tamiami, because women's shirts with pockets below the waistline are levied a lower import tariff than shirts without such pockets.

[ 7 ] Converse Chuck Taylor All-Stars sneakers have soles partially covered in a thin layer of felt when new, in order to be classified as slippers and thus pay a lower import tax duty than similar shoes. The layer usually rubs off within a month of having been worn.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Chicken tax [ edit ] Ford Motor Company imported the Ford Transit from Spain as complete passenger vehicles, including rear seat, rear seat belts, and rear glass windows, in order to avoid a 25% tariff on cargo-duty vehicles, known as the Chicken tax , and instead pay the lower tariff of 2.5%.

[ 11 ] Once the vehicles arrived in the United States, Ford converted the Transit into its cargo van by removing the rear seats, rear seat belts, and sometimes replacing the rear glass with metal panels.

[ 11 ] In 2013 the U.S. Customs and Border Protection ruled that the Transit was a cargo-duty vehicle for importing purposes to the United States, despite the addition of the seat, belts, and windows.

[ 12 ] Ford appealed to the United States Court of International Trade , which ruled in Ford's favor in 2017 but was overturned on appeal by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in 2019.

[ 12 ] On June 29, 2020, the Supreme Court of the United States denied certiorari thus ending litigation in favor of the United States.

[ 12 ] On June 1, 2021, Ford announced it would likely be charged $1.3 billion in penalties and interest in addition to $192 million it had already paid.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Both Ford and Daimler , manufacturers of the Mercedes Sprinter van, have made plans to manufacture their respective cargo vans inside the United States to avoid paying the Chicken Tax .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The Subaru BRAT was manufactured with rear-facing “ jump seats ” inside its truck bed in order to avoid paying the Chicken Tax .

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Repatriation tax avoidance Base erosion and profit shifting References [ edit ] ^ a b c Brigstock, Phillip (2017).

"Problems of Interpretation and Application in Tariff Classification" (PDF) .

^ "When's a van a van and when's it a car?" .

BBC News . 17 October 2018.

^ a b Friedman, Larry (August 7, 2017).

"Tariff Engineering: Value-Added Classification" (PDF) . Retrieved June 9, 2021 .

^ "TARIFF ENGINEERING - IS IT STILL VIABLE?" .

joc.com . 25 September 2001.

^ Tariff Engineering: Value-Added Compliance (PDF) . barnesrichardson.com.

^ a b c "Merritt v. Welsh, 104 U.S. 694 (1881)" .

Justia Law . Retrieved 2021-06-09 .

^ "Fashion design with tariffs in mind" .

Marketplace . 2019-05-29 . Retrieved 2021-06-07 .

^ Green, Dennis.

"The surprising reason why Converse sneakers have fuzzy bottoms" .

Business Insider . Retrieved 2023-07-02 .

^ Ortiz, Gerald; Malachosky, Evan (2022-12-14).

"Ever Notice That Converse Chuck Taylors Have Fuzzy Soles? Here's Why" .

Gear Patrol . Retrieved 2023-07-02 .

^ "Sneaking through U.S. Customs with Converse All-Star invention - GazEtc" . 2015-11-04. Archived from the original on 2015-11-04 . Retrieved 2023-07-02 .

^ a b c d Frankel, Todd (July 6, 2018).

"The strange case of Ford's attempt to avoid the 'chicken tax' " .

Washington Post . Retrieved June 7, 2021 .

^ a b c d e Wall Howard, Phoebe (June 3, 2021).

"Ford could face $1B federal penalty after years-long dispute over Transit Connect vans" .

Detroit Free Press . Retrieved June 7, 2021 .

^ "Before Outback, Before Baja, There Was the Subaru BRAT" .

MotorTrend . 2021-03-31 . Retrieved 2021-06-07 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tariff_engineering&oldid=1287749952 " Categories : Circumvention Trade disputes Protectionism in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 April 2025, at 06:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tariff engineering 1 language Add topic

