Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Brown bear Toggle Brown bear subsection 1.1 Regional variations 2 Uses Toggle Uses subsection 2.1 Pelts 2.2 Meat 2.3 Fat 2.4 Traditional Chinese medicine 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 North America 4 Methods Toggle Methods subsection 4.1 Firearms 4.2 Bear spear 4.3 Baiting 4.4 Snaring 4.5 Calling 4.6 Hunting dogs 4.7 Poison 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Bear hunting 7 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français Suomi Svenska Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Practices in Europe and North America Hunter with a bear's head strapped to his back on the Kodiak Archipelago Bears have been hunted since prehistoric times for their meat and fur . In addition to being a source of food, in modern times they have been favored by big game hunters due to their size and ferocity. Bear hunting has a vast history throughout Europe and North America , and hunting practices have varied based on location and type of bear.

Bear are large mammals in the order Carnivora . Although there are only eight living species of bear, they are widespread, appearing in a wide variety of habitats throughout the Northern Hemisphere and partially in the Southern Hemisphere . The IUCN lists six bear species as vulnerable or endangered , and even " least concern " species such as the brown bear are at risk of extirpation in certain countries.

Poaching and illegal international trade of threatened populations continues.

In the case of the American black bear , hunting is encouraged by some authorities to ameliorate past management issues. Historically protected, by 2016 and 2023, higher-than-projected reproduction rates have resulted in over-population and public safety concerns in some areas. Certain populations of black bear remain at risk of extirpation .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Brown bear [ edit ] The Bear Hunt by Louis Sparre (1894) The brown bear ( Ursus arctos ) is a large species of bear distributed throughout the Northern Hemisphere.

Brown bear tracks have much deeper claw indentations than those made by black bear.

[ 3 ] Regional variations [ edit ] The grizzly bear ( Ursus arctos horribilis ) is a North American subspecies. Grizzly bear are brown in color although not all brown bear inhabiting the interior of Alaska , British Columbia , Alberta , the Yukon , and Northwest Territories are grizzlies. Inland grizzlies tend to be much smaller than their coastal relatives.
Grizzly bear seasons open in the spring or autumn depending on local regulations and jurisdictions. In most of the lower 48 US states, grizzlies are considered a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act. Grizzly bear are legally hunted in the Northwest Territories, Yukon, and Alaska.

[ 4 ] The government of British Columbia banned the hunting of Grizzly Bears in 2017, as it did not align with their values.

[ 5 ] The Syrian brown bear ( Ursus arctos syriacus ) is a small and pale-furred bear subspecies found in Turkey , Syria , Iran , and the Caucasus mountains of Russia, Georgia and Azerbaijan .
These bear are hunted mostly in the Caucasus, by stalking, where the harsh terrain offers a greater challenge to the hunter.

[ 6 ] The Eurasian brown bear ( Ursus arctos arctos ) is most widespread subspecies of brown bear in the old world . It is mainly found today in Russia, Romania, Turkey and the former Yugoslavia, with smaller numbers being found in Norway, Sweden, Finland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland, Hungary, Albania, Bulgaria and Greece, and remnant populations are found in Spain, France and Italy.
The non-endangered European population of Eurasian bear is hunted mostly in the north-western part of Russia, while the Asian population is hunted in the Ural mountains and in eastern Siberia. Eurasian browns are usually hunted by baiting during the spring or autumn or by chance encounter while hunting other species.

[ 6 ] The Amur brown bear ( Ursus arctos lasiotus ) is smaller and darker than the Kamchatka brown bear, with a differently shaped skull and much larger teeth. Its range encompasses far eastern Russia, Northeastern Heilongjiang and Hokkaidō .
It is usually hunted in the Khabarovsk and Primorsk regions by stalking.

[ 6 ] The Kamchatka brown bear ( Ursus arctos beringianus ) is a large subspecies found in far eastern Siberia . It is similar to the Kodiak bear , though darker in colour. These bear are usually hunted in the Shantar Islands ( Okhotsk ) and Magadan . In the spring, bear are hunted in coastal areas where they gather for food. During the autumn, bear are hunted while feeding on salmon or wild berries in the surrounding tundra. The average size of the bear taken is around 7.5–8.0 ft (2.3–2.4 m) in Magadan and Okhotsk and 8.0–8.5 ft (2.4–2.6 m) in Kamchatka.

[ 6 ] The Siberian brown bear ( Ursus arctos collaris ) is larger than the Eurasian brown bear, with denser bones and a slightly larger and heavier skull.  Its fur is considered to be among the most luxuriant.   It is smaller than the Kamchatka brown bear, though it is also said to be equal in aggression to an American grizzly. It lives east of the Yenisey River in most of Siberia (though absent in the habitats of the Kamchatka and Amur brown bear.) It is also found in northern Mongolia, far northern Xinjiang, and extreme eastern Kazakhstan. They are usually hunted in the Krasnoyarsk Region , Irkutsk Region and Yakutia in late August and early June. These hunts usually take place in rugged and heavily forested terrain, in the foothills of the mountains, or along the shorelines, where the forest is less dense.

[ 6 ] The American black bear ( Ursus americanus ) is the most common bear species native to North America . The largest black bear are usually taken beginning in late May and continuing on through most of June during the breeding season. Springtime is the preferred choice of black bear hunters, when their coats are at their thickest. Heavily timbered forests near agricultural lands often sustain large densities of black bear. They can also be found in proximity to cereal crops such as oats.

[ 7 ] Uses [ edit ] Pelts [ edit ] American black bear skin, Alaska, 2012 A bear's fur consists of two types of hair: the underfur and the outer guard hairs.  The underfur, which is soft and dense, serves primarily as an insulator. The outer guard hairs are much thicker, longer and coarser, and while they also insulate, they primarily serve to protect the body from dirt, debris and insects, as well as to repel water.

[ 8 ] Black bear fur was considered more valuable in the American West than that of grizzly.

[ 9 ] Bear furs are used to fabricate bearskins , which are tall fur caps worn as part of the full dress uniform for several military units. The Inuit of Greenland use polar bear fur for clothing in areas where reindeer (caribou) and seals are scarce. Polar bear hide is wiry and bulky, making it difficult to turn into comfortable winter garments.

[ 10 ] Meat [ edit ] Canned bear meat from Russia Canned bear meat from Finland In Medieval Europe , the eating of bear meat was considered more a symbolic than culinary act. The paws and thigh of the bear were considered the best parts.

[ 11 ] It was consumed in traditional Russian , Native Siberian , and Ainu cultures.

[ 12 ] Polar bear are a primary source of food for Inuit .

[ citation needed ] Polar bear meat is usually baked or boiled in a soup or stew. It is never eaten raw. Polar bear liver is inedible, as it contains large amounts of vitamin A and is highly toxic.

[ 10 ] Bear meat should be thoroughly cooked as it can carry a parasitic infection known as Trichinella and is potentially lethal to humans.

[ 7 ] It is the single biggest vector of trichinosis in North America.

[ 12 ] The taste of bear is extremely variable [ 12 ] and dependent on the age and diet of the animal. Bears fed on fish will have the most disagreeable, rancid flavor, which has led to a poor reputation of the meat as a whole, however more omnivorous or plant-based diets introduce a highly desirable, venison -like sweetness and depth to the meat.

[ 13 ] The best meat apparently comes from two-year-old bear which eat more berries than fish.

[ 14 ] Bear features notably in Indigenous North American cuisine . Cree writer Joshua Whitehead wrote of the spiritual dimensions of eating bear meat in an autobiographical essay.

[ 15 ] Fat [ edit ] Bear fat has been used historically in Europe to treat baldness, being mentioned in the writings of numerous physicians such as Nicholas Culpepper. The logo of perfume brand Atkinsons of London is a bear, in reference to their popular 'bears grease' product.

It has historically been used as cooking oil and medicine by both American settlers and Native Americans.

[ 16 ] Bear fat can also be used as lamp fuel, with 40–50 grams being sufficient to last up to an hour.

[ 11 ] Traditional Chinese medicine [ edit ] Traditional Chinese medicine makes use of bear bile and bear paws. Many bear are hunted or poached just to harvest their paws and gall bladders.

History [ edit ] Bear hunt by the foot of Magura In Europe of the late Middle Ages , the eating of bear meat was an aristocratic activity. In Tyrol and Piedmont , the village communities had to hand in a set number of bear paws to the local lord every year.

[ 11 ] In the 1890s, nobles from Germany and Partitioned Poland could import and hunt bears from the Russian Empire for 100-150 rubles per bear.

[ 17 ] North America [ edit ] Traditionally, Kodiak Natives (Alutiiqs) hunted bear for food, clothing and tools. Arrows and spears were required hunting implements. Bear heads were usually left in the field as a sign of respect to the spirit of the bear. Kodiak bear were commercially hunted throughout the 1800s with the price paid for a bear hide being comparable to that paid for a beaver or river otter pelt (about US$10).

[ 18 ] In 1702, bear pelts were considered equal in worth to those of American beavers . 16,512 furs were sent to the French port of Rochelle in 1743, while 8,340 were exported from the east coast of the United States in 1763.

[ 14 ] In the 19th century, as the settlers began increasingly moving west in pursuit of more land for ranching , bear were becoming increasingly more hunted as threats to livestock. In 1818, a “War of Extermination” against wolves and bear was declared in Ohio .

[ 19 ] Bear pelts were usually sold for 2–20 dollars in the 1860s.

[ 14 ] Grizzly bear hunting in Northern California in 1882 Between 1850 and 1920 grizzly bear were eliminated from 95% of their original range, with extirpation occurring earliest on the Great Plains and later in remote mountainous areas. Unregulated killing of bear continued in most places through the 1950s and resulted in a further 52% decline in their range between 1920 and 1970. Grizzly bear managed to survive this last period of hunting only in remote wilderness areas larger than 26,000 km 2 (10,000 mi 2 ). Overall, grizzly bear were eliminated from 98% of their original range in the contiguous United States during a 100-year period.

[ 20 ] Prior to Anglo-American colonization in 1820, black bear were widely distributed throughout all major eco-regions in Texas. The supply of both meat and fat lasted about a century after the first Anglo-American settlers arrived. However, after their value for grease and food had decreased, black bear continued to be pursued and killed for their trophy value . Black bear in East Texas were seriously reduced to scattered remnant populations or eliminated altogether in many areas largely as a result of indiscriminate and unregulated hunting by the time the first organized survey of mammals took place from 1890 to 1904.

[ 16 ] The last native East Texas black bear is believed to have been killed in the 1950s.

[ 21 ] Methods [ edit ] Bear are hard to hunt, as they generally live in dense forests or thick brush. They are, however, easy to trap.

[ 22 ] Where they are hunted frequently, bear become purely nocturnal.

[ 9 ] Once a general area is identified, a bear hunt usually begins by looking for claw marks on trees.

[ 7 ] Scores in bear hunts are based on the width and length of the skull.

[ 14 ] Firearms [ edit ] Bear hunt in Dalarna , Sweden, early 20th century Hunters carrying firearms tend to favour calibres large enough to inflict as much tissue and bone damage as possible, as grizzly and brown bear can generally withstand a number of direct shots to the limbs or torso without ceasing their attack. Bears have the ability to dramatically lower their heart rate when hibernating and will readily do so if injured, as a defense mechanism against blood loss. Hunters pursuing the animal deliberately might use a caliber larger than they would for the deer, elk and caribou that commonly co-inhabit the same area.  If they intend to keep the hide, and to ensure a quick and humane kill, they may prefer to use a large bullet that will break the bear's shoulder and continue through the vital organs, ideally leaving an exit wound large enough to leave a blood trail to assist locating the downed animal. It isn’t uncommon to see bear being hunted from helicopters or in the air.

Bear spear [ edit ] Main article: Bear spear The bear spear was a medieval type of spear used in hunting for bear and other large animals. The sharpened head of a bear spear was enlarged and usually had a form of a bay leaf . Right under the head there was a short crosspiece that helped fixing the spear in the body of an animal. Often it was placed against the ground on its rear point, which made it easier to hold the weight of an attacking beast.

Baiting [ edit ] Not to be confused with Bear-baiting .

Often, bear will be attracted through the use of baits such as a rotting carcass, bakery by-products, sweets, or even jellies.  A hunter will then watch one or more baits from a stand, armed with a rifle, bow or shotgun. Many states within the US have changed their hunting regulations and banned baiting as a form of bear hunting.

[ 23 ] Snaring [ edit ] In the Russian Far East , a lasso-like rope loop is hung across a path which bear are known to frequent; its end is tied to a tree. The bear passes through the rope as it walks by and the lasso tightens around its body as it continues to move. Eventually the bear becomes so entangled within the rope that it can no longer move. After a few days, the hunter arrives to finish off the immobilised animal.

[ 24 ] Calling [ edit ] It is possible to attract bear by calling, imitating the sound of injured prey.
Bear seem to have very short attention spans and if they are responding to a call and the sound stops, generally the bear will cease following the sound. Two callers are often better than one when calling bear as they can keep up continuous calling for longer periods of time. Bear can hear a call for distances up to a mile and often will take their time in responding.

[ 25 ] Hunting dogs [ edit ] A medieval bear hunt with dogs In his book Hunting the Grisly and Other Sketches , Theodore Roosevelt wrote that though small terriers could be used against bear, they usually only worked against bear which had never had the experience of being hunted before. The terriers would irritate and distract the bear with their yapping as the hunter creeped unnoticed. However, once the bear would notice the hunter, it would immediately ignore the dogs and retreat.

[ 9 ] He did however mention big half-breed hounds sometimes used in the Alleghanies of West Virginia, which were trained not merely to nip a bear, but to grip the grizzly by the hock as it ran. A pack of such dogs, trained to dash straight at the head and hold
on like a vice, though unable to kill the bear, would hold it in place long enough for the hunter to finish it.

[ 9 ] Bear were dangerous quarry for the dogs to tackle, and pack losses were not uncommon. Though a large number of dogs could kill sick or very young bear, they could not do so with healthy adults.

[ 9 ] These big dogs can only overcome such foes by rushing in a body and grappling all together; if they hang back, lunging and snapping, a cougar or bear will destroy them one by one. With a quarry so huge and redoubtable as the grisly, no number of dogs, however large and fierce, could overcome him unless they all rushed on him in a mass, the first in the charge seizing by the head or throat. If the dogs hung back, or if there were only a few of them, or if they did not seize around the head, they would be destroyed without an effort. It is murder to slip merely one or two close-quarter dogs at a grisly.

— Hunting the Grisly and Other Sketches , Chapter III: Old Ephraim the Grisly bear Today, it is more common for hunters to use dogs to track a bear.  Often riding in the back of a truck to catch a scent, the dog will start to bark when there is a track.  Dogs will then follow the track showing the way for the hunters.

[ 26 ] Modern bear hunters use hounds of mixed breeding to tree bear.

[ 27 ] Bear dogs used to track and tree American black bears in Michigan are typically cross-bred hounds, often with GPS tracking collars on one or more dogs to help locate the pack in the dense forest.

[ 28 ] Poison [ edit ] In the expansion era of the American west, poison was usually only practiced by the owners of cattle or sheep who had suffered losses from bear, though this was rarely put into practice seeing as bear were harder to poison than most other carnivores such as wolves.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Bear attack Bear danger Pedals (bear) Polar bear hunting We're Going on a Bear Hunt , children's story and game References [ edit ] ^ "A State Plagued by Bear Encounters Turns to an Old Solution: Guns" .

The New York Times . August 24, 2023 . Retrieved August 24, 2023 .

^ Ursus americanus: Garshelis, D.L., Scheick, B.K., Doan-Crider, D.L., Beecham, J.J. & Obbard, M.E.

, IUCN, March 18, 2016, doi : 10.2305/iucn.uk.2016-3.rlts.t41687a45034604.en ^ "To Hunt the Grizzled Bear" . Biggamehunt net. Archived from the original on July 6, 2007 . Retrieved September 27, 2007 .

^ Grizzly Bear Hunting [ usurped ] ^ "B.C. Government ends grizzly bear hunt" (Press release). BC Government News. December 18, 2017.

^ a b c d e "Brown Bear Hunting in Russia" . Russian Hunting Agency. Archived from the original on March 20, 2007 . Retrieved September 27, 2007 .

^ a b c "25 Things Every Black Bear Hunter Should Know" . Biggamehunt.net. Archived from the original on June 9, 2007 . Retrieved September 27, 2007 .

^ "The American Bear Association Home Page (Web Pages2/index)" . Archived from the original on July 29, 2013 . Retrieved February 25, 2013 .

^ a b c d e f Roosevelt, Theodore (1902).

Hunting the grisly and other sketches . G. P. Putnam's Sons.

^ a b "Polar bear (Nanuq)" . Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami. Archived from the original on September 26, 2007 . Retrieved January 6, 2008 .

^ a b c Pastoureau, Michel (2007).

L'ours; Histoire d'un roi dechu . Éd. France loisirs. p. 419.

ISBN 978-2-02-021542-8 .

^ a b c Shaw, Hank (November 29, 2010).

"Bear: A Meat Worth Trying" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved December 15, 2016 .

^ Gruenefeld, David.

"Dining on Black Bear" , Outdoor Canada , 8 October 2012.

^ a b c d Brown, Gary (1996).

Great Bear Almanac . Lyons & Burford. pp.

340 .

ISBN 1-55821-474-7 .

^ Whitehead, Joshua . "My Body is a Hinterland", Making Love with the Land , Penguin, 2024. pp. 13-15.

^ a b "East Texas Black Bear Conservation and Management Plan_ 2005 - 2015" . Texas Parks and Wildlife . Retrieved September 27, 2007 .

^ de Champdoce, Comtesse (August 19, 1897). "Features: A Fin-de-Siecle Russian Bear Hunt".

Vogue . Vol. 10, no. 8. pp. C3.

ISSN 0042-8000 .

^ Van Daele, L.J., 2003, The History of Bear on the Kodiak Archipelago. Alaska Natural History Association, Anchorage, Alaska, USA.

^ Wolf Nation: From the Brink of Oblivion and Back Again? – Articles from Animals in the Wild: Wildlife Photography by Jim Robertson ^ Grizzly bears in the USA Archived 2008-01-08 at the Wayback Machine ^ TPWD: Conservation Status ^ "Black Bear Hunting Primer" . Biggamehunt net. Archived from the original on April 6, 2007 . Retrieved September 27, 2007 .

^ Bear Hunting via Bear Hunting Laws 2010 - Educational Bear Hunting Site for Hunters ^ "Kamchatka Brown Bear" . Archived from the original on August 17, 2000 . Retrieved January 2, 2008 .

^ "Fall Black Bear Basics" . Biggamehunt.net. Archived from the original on August 31, 2007 . Retrieved September 27, 2007 .

^ "Wisconsin Bear Hunters Association" .

wbha.us.com . Retrieved September 1, 2023 .

^ Brian'sHounds (March 27, 2009).

"YouTube Video of Bear Dogs At Work" . YouTube.

Archived from the original on December 21, 2021 . Retrieved December 28, 2013 .

^ Michigan Out of Doors (August 7, 2013).

"YouTube Video of Bear Dog Training" .

Michigan United Conservation Club . YouTube.

Archived from the original on December 21, 2021 . Retrieved December 28, 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bear hunting .

Hunting the grisly and other sketches by Theodore Roosevelt v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming v t e Mammals in culture Topics Animal husbandry Draft animal Fur farming Hunting Animals in sport Laboratory animal Livestock Pack animal Pet Equestrianism Service animal Animal-assisted therapy Working animal Types Bats Bears Bear-baiting Bear hunting Teddy bear Cats Coyotes Dogs Deer Elephants Foxes Donkeys Onolatry Horses Horses in art Horse worship Horse sacrifice Ashvamedha Jaguars ( Maya jaguar gods ) Kangaroos Koalas Lions Pigs Simians Gorillas Monkeys in Chinese culture Orangutans Seal hunting Spotted hyenas Tigers Weasels Whales Whaling Whale watching Whale worship Orcas Wolves Werewolf v t e Game animals and shooting in North America Game birds Bobwhite quail Chukar Hungarian partridge Greater prairie-chicken Mourning dove Ring-necked pheasant Ptarmigan Ruffed grouse Sharp-tailed grouse Snipe (common snipe) Spruce grouse Turkey Woodcock Waterfowl hunters Waterfowl Black duck Canada goose Canvasback Gadwall Greater scaup Lesser scaup Mallard Northern pintail Redhead Ross's goose Snow goose Wood duck Big game Bighorn sheep Black bear Razorback Brown bear Bison (buffalo) Caribou Cougar (mountain lion) Elk Moose White-tailed deer Wolf Mountain goat Mule deer Pronghorn Muskox Dall sheep Polar bear Whales Other quarry American alligator Badger Bobcat Coyote Fox squirrel Gray fox Gray squirrel Opossum Rabbit Raccoon Red fox Snowshoe hare See also Bear hunting Big-game hunting Bison hunting Deer hunting Fox hunting Waterfowl hunting Whaling Fishing Wolf hunting Upland hunting NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐5rr4c
Cached time: 20250812012354
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.484 seconds
Real time usage: 0.671 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2419/1000000
Revision size: 26324/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 87460/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3081/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 104588/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.273/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8698345/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  479.302      1 -total
 43.94%  210.611      1 Template:Reflist
 15.61%   74.798      3 Template:Cite_news
 14.44%   69.202      3 Template:Navbox
 13.07%   62.632      1 Template:Hunting_topics
 12.93%   61.988     12 Template:Cite_web
 10.71%   51.328      1 Template:Short_description
  7.02%   33.654      2 Template:Fix
  6.93%   33.193      1 Template:Commons_category
  6.51%   31.204      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14823194:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812012354 and revision id 1303053887. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bear_hunting&oldid=1303053887 " Categories : Hunting by game Bears Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from June 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 21:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bear hunting 7 languages Add topic

