Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Gustav Radbruch 24 languages Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German legal scholar and politician (1878–1949) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Gustav Radbruch Reich Minister of Justice In office 13 August 1923 – 23 November 1923 Chancellor Gustav Stresemann Preceded by Rudolf Heinze Succeeded by Erich Emminger In office 26 October 1921 – 22 November 1922 Chancellor Joseph Wirth Preceded by Eugen Schiffer Succeeded by Rudolf Heinze Member of the Reichstag In office 24 June 1920 – 13 March 1924 Constituency National list Personal details Born ( 1878-11-21 ) 21 November 1878 Free City of Lübeck , German Empire Died 23 November 1949 (1949-11-23) (aged 71) Heidelberg , Württemberg-Baden , West Germany Political party Social Democratic Party Alma mater University of Berlin University of Heidelberg Profession Lawyer, legal philosopher Gustav Radbruch ( German: [ˈʁaːtbʁʊx] ; 21 November 1878 – 23 November 1949) was a German legal scholar and politician. He served as Minister of Justice of Germany during the early Weimar period . Radbruch is also regarded as one of the most influential legal philosophers of the 20th century.

Life [ edit ] Born in Lübeck , Radbruch studied law in Munich , Leipzig and Berlin . He passed his first bar exam (" Staatsexamen ") in Berlin in 1901, and the following year he received his doctorate with a dissertation on "The Theory of Adequate Causation". This was followed in 1903 by his qualification to teach criminal law in Heidelberg . In 1904, he was appointed Professor of criminal and trial law and legal philosophy at Heidelberg. In 1914 he accepted a call to a professorship in Königsberg , and later that year assumed a professorship at Kiel .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Radbruch was a member of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD), and held a seat in the Reichstag from 1920 to 1924. In 1921–22 and throughout 1923, he was minister of justice in the cabinets of Joseph Wirth and Gustav Stresemann . During his time in office, a number of important laws were implemented, such as those giving women access to the justice system, and, after the assassination of Foreign Minister Walther Rathenau , the Law for the Protection of the Republic , which increased the punishments for politically motivated acts of violence and banned organizations that opposed the "constitutional republican form of government" along with their printed matter and meetings.

[ 3 ] In 1926, Radbruch accepted a renewed call to lecture at Heidelberg where he delivered his inaugural lecture entitled " Der Mensch im Recht (Law's Image of the Human)" as the newly appointed Professor of Criminal Law on 13 November 1926.

[ 4 ] After the Nazi seizure of power in January 1933, Radbruch, as a former Social Democratic politician , was dismissed from his university post under the terms of the so-called "Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service" ("Gesetz zur Wiederherstellung des Berufsbeamtentums" , as universities, similar to public bodies, were subject to civil service laws and regulations. Despite the employment ban in Nazi Germany , during 1935/36 he was able to spend a year in England, at University College, Oxford . An important practical outcome of this was his book, Der Geist des englischen Rechts (The Spirit of English Law), although this could be published only in 1945.

[ 5 ] During the Nazi period, he devoted himself primarily to cultural-historical work.

Immediately after the end of the Second World War in 1945, he resumed his teaching activities, but died in Heidelberg in 1949 without being able to complete his planned updated edition of his textbook on legal philosophy.

In September 1945, Radbruch published a short paper "Fünf Minuten Rechtsphilosophie" (Five Minutes of Legal Philosophy), which was influential in shaping the jurisprudence of values ( Wertungsjurisprudenz ), prevalent in the aftermath of World War II as a reaction against legal positivism .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Work [ edit ] Title page of Rechtsphilosophie (1932) Radbruch's legal philosophy derived from neo-Kantianism , which assumes that a categorical cleavage exists between "is" ( sein ) and "ought" ( sollen ). According to this view, "should" can never be derived from "Being." Indicative of the Heidelberg school of neo-Kantianism to which Radbruch subscribed was that it interpolated the value-related cultural studies between the explanatory sciences (being) and philosophical teachings of values (should).

Radbruch's grave in Heidelberg In relation to the law, this triadism shows itself in the subfields of legal sociology, legal philosophy and legal dogma. Legal dogma assumes a place in between. It posits itself in opposition to positive law, as the latter depicts itself in social reality and methodologically in the objective "should-have" sense of law, which reveals itself through value-related interpretation.

The core of Radbruch's legal philosophy consists of his tenets the concept of law and the idea of law. The idea of law is defined through a triad of justice, utility and certainty. Radbruch thereby had the idea of utility or usefulness spring forth from an analysis of the idea of justice. Upon this notion was based the Radbruch formula , which is still vigorously debated today. The concept of law, for Radbruch, is "nothing other than the given fact, which has the sense to serve the idea of law".

[ citation needed ] Hotly disputed is the question whether Radbruch was a legal positivist before 1933 and executed an about-face in his thinking due to the advent of Nazism, or whether he continued to develop, under the impression of Nazi crimes, the relativistic values-teaching he had already been advocating before 1933.

[ citation needed ] The problem of the controversy between the spirit and the letter of the law, in Germany, has been brought back to public attention due to the trials of former East German soldiers who guarded the Berlin Wall—the so-called necessity of following orders.

[ citation needed ] In sum, Radbruch's formula argues that where statutory law is incompatible with the requirements of justice "to an intolerable degree", or where statutory law was obviously designed in a way that deliberately negates "the equality that is the core of all justice", statutory law must be disregarded by a judge in favour of the justice principle. Since its first publication in 1946 the principle has been accepted by Germany's Federal Constitutional Court in a variety of cases. Many people partially blame the older German legal tradition of legal positivism for the ease with which Hitler obtained power in an outwardly "legal" manner, rather than by means of a coup. Arguably, the shift to a concept of natural law ought to act as a safeguard against dictatorship, an untrammeled State power and the abrogation of civil rights.

References [ edit ] ^ "Biografie Gustav Radbruch (German)" . Deutsches Historisches Museum . Retrieved 24 October 2014 .

^ "Biografie Gustav Radbruch(German)" . Bayerische Staatsbibliothek . Retrieved 24 October 2014 .

^ "Vor 100 Jahren: Reichstag verabschiedet Gesetz zum Schutz der Republik" [100 Years Ago: The Reichstag Adopts the Law for the Protection of the Republic].

Deutscher Bundestag, Online-Dienste (in German). 2022 . Retrieved 14 September 2023 .

^ Radbruch, Gustav (2020).

"Law's Image of the Human" .

Oxford Journal of Legal Studies .

40 (4). Translated by Jeutner, Valentin: 667– 681.

doi : 10.1093/ojls/gqaa026 .

PMC 7839934 .

PMID 33536836 .

^ Alexy, Robert .

"Gustav Radbruch" .

Kiel University:History of the University:Famous scholars from Kiel . Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel . Retrieved 16 September 2021 .

^ Radbruch, Gustav (2006). "Five Minutes of Legal Philosophy (1945)".

Oxford Journal of Legal Studies .

26 . Translated by Litschewski Paulson, Bonnie; Paulson, Stanley L.: 13– 15.

doi : 10.1093/ojls/gqi042 .

^ See also Radbruch, Gustav (2006). "Statutory Lawlessness and Supra-Statutory Law (1946)".

Oxford Journal of Legal Studies .

26 . Translated by Litschewski Paulson, Bonnie; Paulson, Stanley L.: 1– 11.

doi : 10.1093/ojls/gqi041 .

^ Paulson, Stanley L. (2006). "On the Background and Significance of Gustav Radbruch's Post-War Papers".

Oxford Journal of Legal Studies .

26 : 17– 40.

doi : 10.1093/ojls/gqi043 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Gustav Radbruch .

Kaufmann, Arthur (1987).

Gustav Radbruch – Rechtsdenker, Philosoph, Sozialdemokrat (in German). Munich: Piper Verlag.

von Hippel, Fritz (1951).

Gustav Radbruch als rechtsphilosophischer Denker (in German). Heidelberg: Schneider Verlag.

Van Niekerk, Barend (1973).

The Warning Voice from Heidelberg: The Life and Thought of Gustav Radbruch . Kenwyn: Juta.

Taekema, Sanne (2003).

The Concept of Ideals in Legal Theory . Den Haag: Kluwer.

chs 3 & 4.

External links [ edit ] "Radbruch, Gustav Lambert von: Rechtsphilosoph, Strafrechtler, Reichsjustizminister, * 21.11.1878 Lübeck, † 23.11.1949 Heidelberg, ⚰ Heidelberg, Bergfriedhof. (evangelisch)" (in German). Deutsche Biographie . Retrieved 31 December 2023 .

Newspaper clippings about Gustav Radbruch in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW Works by or about Gustav Radbruch at the Internet Archive v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes v t e Secretaries and ministers of justice of Germany German Reich (1871–1945) Secretaries : Heinrich Friedberg Hermann von Schelling [ de ] Otto von Oehlschläger Robert Bosse [ de ] Eduard Hanauer [ de ] Rudolf Arnold Nieberding Hermann Lisco Paul von Krause Ministers : Otto Landsberg Eugen Schiffer Andreas Blunck Eugen Schiffer Gustav Radbruch Rudolf Heinze Gustav Radbruch Erich Emminger Curt Joël Josef Frenken Hans Luther Wilhelm Marx Johannes Bell Oskar Hergt Erich Koch-Weser Theodor von Guérard Johann Viktor Bredt Curt Joël Franz Gürtner Franz Schlegelberger Otto Georg Thierack German Democratic Republic (1949–1990) Max Fechner Hilde Benjamin Kurt Wünsche Hans-Joachim Heusinger Kurt Wünsche Manfred Walther [ de ] Federal Republic of Germany (1949–) Thomas Dehler Fritz Neumayer Hans-Joachim von Merkatz Fritz Schäffer Wolfgang Stammberger Ewald Bucher Karl Weber Richard Jaeger Gustav Heinemann Horst Ehmke Gerhard Jahn Hans-Jochen Vogel Jürgen Schmude Hans A. Engelhard Klaus Kinkel Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger Edzard Schmidt-Jortzig Herta Däubler-Gmelin Brigitte Zypries Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger Heiko Maas Katarina Barley Christine Lambrecht Marco Buschmann v t e Second Wirth cabinet – 26 October 1921 to 14 November 1922 Joseph Wirth ( Reichskanzler , Zentrum ) Gustav Bauer (Deputy, SPD ) Walther Rathenau (( DDP ) Adolf Köster (SPD) Andreas Hermes (Zentrum) Robert Schmidt (SPD) Heinrich Brauns (Zentrum) Gustav Radbruch (SPD) Otto Gessler (DDP) Johannes Giesberts (Zentrum) Wilhelm Groener (-) Anton Fehr ( BB ) v t e First Stresemann cabinet – 13 August 1923 to 3 October 1923 Gustav Stresemann ( Reichskanzler , DVP ) Robert Schmidt (Deputy, SPD ) Heinrich Brauns ( Zentrum ) Johannes Fuchs [ de ] (-) Otto Gessler ( DDP ) Rudolf Hilferding (SPD) Anton Höfle [ de ] (Zentrum) Hans Luther (-) Rudolf Oeser (DDP) Gustav Radbruch (SPD) Hans von Raumer (DVP) Wilhelm Sollmann (SPD) v t e Second Stresemann cabinet – 6 October 1923 to 23 November 1923 Gustav Stresemann ( Reichskanzler , DVP ) Heinrich Brauns ( Zentrum ) Johannes Fuchs [ de ] (-) Otto Gessler ( DDP ) Anton Höfle [ de ] (Zentrum) Karl Jarres (DVP) Gerhard von Kanitz (-) Joseph Koeth (-) Hans Luther (-) Rudolf Oeser (DDP) Gustav Radbruch ( SPD ) Robert Schmidt (SPD) Wilhelm Sollmann (SPD) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Latvia Korea Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gustav_Radbruch&oldid=1305084302 " Categories : 1878 births 1949 deaths Politicians from Lübeck Jurists from Schleswig-Holstein Justice ministers of Germany Social Democratic Party of Germany politicians German Protestants Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich alumni Leipzig University alumni Humboldt University of Berlin alumni Academic staff of the University of Königsberg Academic staff of the University of Kiel Academic staff of Heidelberg University Members of the Reichstag of the Weimar Republic Members of the Reichstag 1920–1924 Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2008 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from March 2020 Pages with German IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 23:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gustav Radbruch 24 languages Add topic

