Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Fifth Estate (periodical) 2 languages Esperanto Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American periodical Fifth Estate Cover of issue 385, Fall 2011 Categories Post-left anarchism Frequency Three issues per year First issue 1965 ; 60 years ago ( 1965 ) Company Fifth Estate Newspaper Country United States Language English Website fifthestate.org ISSN 0015-0800 This article is part of a series on Anarchism in the United States Ideologies Anarcho-capitalism Anarcho-pacifism Autarchism Chicago idea Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Philosophical anarchism History Cincinnati Time Store Most–Grottkau debate Haymarket affair Homestead strike Assassination of William McKinley Immigration Act of 1903 Ferrer Center and Colony Immigration Act of 1918 Galleanisti First Red Scare 1919 bombings Palmer Raids Sacco and Vanzetti Libertarian Book Club and League Counterculture of the 1960s Protests of 1968 Battle of Seattle Occupy Wall Street Qilombo Capitol Hill Occupied Protest People Abbott Alston Andrews Appleton Austin Balagoon Bari Berkman Best Biehl Bookchin Bushnell Carson Chomsky Cleyre Cornell Czologsz Day Dixon Dolgoff Duffy Turner Emerson Ervin Esteve Fielden Fischer Galleani Goldman Goodman Grace Graeber Greene Hahnel Haldeman-Julius Hammond Harman Heywood (Angela) Heywood (Ezra) Hill Hoffman Holmes Ingalls Kaczynski Konkin Labadie Lingg Lloyd Lum Magón Milstein Most Parsons Perlman Sale Schwab (Justus) Schwab (Michael) Solanas Spies Spooner Thoreau Tucker Waisbrooker Walker Warren Wilson Winn Wolff Zerzan Zinn Active Organizations ABC No Rio Anarcho-Syndicalist Review Anti-Racist Action Beehive Design Collective Catholic Worker Movement Common Ground Collective CrimethInc.

Earth Liberation Front Indecline Industrial Workers of the World Institute for Anarchist Studies Institute for Social Ecology Kate Sharpley Library Labadie Collection Metropolitan Anarchist Coordinating Council MOVE Profane Existence Red Emma's Ruckus Society Zizians Defunct Organizations Cincinnati Time Store Curious George Brigade Diggers Don't Just Vote, Get Active Ferrer Center and Colony George Jackson Brigade Institute for Applied Autonomy International Working People's Association Libertarian Book Club and League Love and Rage New England Non-Resistance Society New York Social Revolutionary Club Portland Anarchist Road Care Qilombo Right to Existence Group Spanish Camp Tenacious Unicorn Ranch Union of Russian Workers Up Against the Wall Motherfucker Vanguard Group Why? Group Youth International Party Media Publications AK Press Autonomedia The Blast Catholic Worker Cronaca Sovversiva Fifth Estate Free Society Freiheit Golos Truda Liberty Loompanics Mother Earth PM Press Regeneración Vanguard The Word Works " Resistance to Civil Government " (1849) " To the Workingmen of America " (1883) Anarchism and Other Essays (1910) Now and After (1929) In Defense of Anarchism (1970) Post-Scarcity Anarchism (1971) " The Abolition of Work " (1986) Industrial Society and Its Future (1995) From Bakunin to Lacan (2001) Understanding Power (2002) Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology (2004) Direct Action: An Ethnography (2009) Related topics American Left Anarchism in Puerto Rico Libertarianism in the U.S.

Labor history of the United States Minarchism Socialism in the U.S.

Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e Fifth Estate is a U.S.

anarchist - libertarian periodical , based in Detroit, Michigan , begun in 1965.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Fifth Estate was started by Harvey Ovshinsky , a seventeen-year-old youth from Detroit.

[ 2 ] He was inspired by a 1965 summer trip to California where he worked on the Los Angeles Free Press , the first underground paper in the United States; Harvey's father, inventor Stan Ovshinsky , knew the editor of the Free Press , Art Kunkin , from their years as comrades in the Socialist Party.

[ 3 ] The first issue was published on November 19, 1965.

[ 2 ] The spirit of the paper during the first ten years of its existence was summed up in a Feb. 1, 1969, staff editorial: We believe that people who are serious in their criticism of this society and their desire to change it must involve themselves in serious revolutionary struggle. We do not believe that music is revolution. We do not believe that dope is revolution. We do not believe that poetry is revolution. We see these as part of a burgeoning revolutionary culture. They cannot replace political struggle as the main means by which the capitalist system will be destroyed. The Man will not allow his social and economic order to be taken from him by Marshall amps and clashing cymbals. Ask the Cubans, the Vietnamese or urban American blacks what lengths the system is willing to go to, to preserve itself.

[ 4 ] By 1972 the optimism of the sixties had worn off and the tone of the paper became more concerned with struggle than fun. Ovshinsky had left in 1969, [ 5 ] leaving a group of young people (teenagers or people in their early twenties) to run the paper.

Peter Werbe , a 29-year-old Michigan State University dropout who had been with the paper since March 1966, took over as editor.

[ 6 ] The staff sent delegations to Vietnam, Cambodia and Cuba . The massive defeat of George McGovern and the election of Richard Nixon for a second term with an increased vote damaged the movement — many underground papers ceased publication and alternative news agencies such as the Liberation News Service , and the Underground Press Syndicate were beginning to collapse. The Fifth Estate was mentioned in the national press when one of its reporters, Pat Halley, threw a shaving cream pie at Guru Maharaj Ji in 1973. Though the guru forgave him publicly, two of his followers attacked Halley a week later and fractured his skull.

[ 7 ] In 2002, the center of the magazine shifted from Detroit, Michigan to Liberty, Tennessee when long-time contributor Andrew Smith (who wrote under the name Andy Sunfrog) took over the main editorial duties of the magazine, although long-time Detroit staffers like Peter Werbe remained involved.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] List of underground newspapers of the 1960s counterculture References [ edit ] ^ "Fifth Estate Records, 1967-2016, (Majority of material found within 1982-1999)" .

University of Michigan Special Collections Research Center - University of Michigan Finding Aids . Retrieved June 11, 2023 .

^ a b Friess, Steve.

"The Founder and Editor of ‘The Fifth Estate’ on the Paper’s Original Purpose: Peter Werbe and Harvey Ovshinsky, who both recently released their first books, spar amiably," Hour Detroit (May 3, 2021).

^ Proceedings. 1960 National Convention, Socialist Party - Social Democratic Federation.

^ Wachsberger, Ken (2012).

Insider Histories of the Vietnam Era Underground Press, Part 2 . MSU Press.

ISBN 9781628951677 .

^ Glessing, Robert J.

The Underground Press in America (Indiana Univ. Press, 1970), p. 23.

^ Burks, John. "The underground press in America: A special report," Rolling Stone (Oct. 4, 1969), p. 11-33.

^ Moritz, Charles, ed. (1974).

Current Biography Yearbook . New York: H.W. Wilson Company.

^ McGraw, Bill (September 5, 2002).

"Underground paper leaves city, not roots" .

Detroit Free Press . Archived from the original on February 17, 2005.

Further reading [ edit ] Millett, Steve (2005). "Technology Is Capital: Fifth Estate 's Critique of the Megamachine". In Purkis, Jonathan; Bowen, James (eds.).

Changing Anarchism: Anarchist Theory and Practice in a Global Age . Manchester: Manchester University Press . pp.

73– 98.

ISBN 978-0-7190-6694-8 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Fifth Estate Issue 368-369, Spring-Summer, 2005, includes several articles relating to the publication's history Metro Times story on Fifth Estate' s 40th anniversary Labadie Collection Finding Aid for Fifth Estate Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fifth_Estate_(periodical)&oldid=1304454081 " Categories : Anarchist periodicals published in the United States Magazines established in 1965 Post-left anarchism Anti-consumerist groups Triannual magazines published in the United States Magazines published in Detroit Political magazines published in the United States Anarchist periodicals Socialism in Michigan Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2025 This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 04:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fifth Estate (periodical) 2 languages Add topic

