Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Trapped null surface Toggle Trapped null surface subsection 2.1 Definition 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Trapped surface 1 language Català Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Trapped null surface ) Concept used in black hole solutions Closed trapped surfaces are a concept used in black hole solutions of general relativity [ 1 ] which describe the inner region of an event horizon .

Roger Penrose defined the notion of closed trapped surfaces in 1965.

[ 2 ] A trapped surface is one where light is not moving away from the black hole. The boundary of the union of all trapped surfaces around a black hole is called an apparent horizon .

A related term trapped null surface is often used interchangeably. However, when discussing causal horizons , trapped null surfaces are defined as only null vector fields giving rise to null surfaces. But marginally trapped surfaces may be spacelike, timelike or null.

[ 3 ] Definition [ edit ] They are spacelike surfaces (topological spheres, tubes, etc.) with restricted bounds, their area tending to decrease locally along any possible future direction and with a dual definition with respect to the past. The trapped surface is a spacelike surface of co-dimension 2, in a Lorentzian spacetime . It follows [ 4 ] that any normal vector can be expressed as a linear combination of two future directed null vectors, normalised by: k + · k − = −2 The k + vector is directed "outwards" and k − "inwards". The set of all such vectors engenders one outgoing and one ingoing null congruence. The surface is designated trapped if the cross sections of both congruences decrease in area as they exit the surface; and this is apparent in the mean curvature vector, which is: H ɑ = −θ + k − ɑ − θ − k + ɑ The surface is trapped if both the null expansions θ ± are negative, signifying that the mean curvature vector is timelike and future directed. The surface is marginally trapped if the outer expansion θ + = 0 and the inner expansion θ − ≤ 0.

Trapped null surface [ edit ] A trapped null surface is a set of points defined in the context of general relativity as a closed surface on which outward-pointing light rays are actually converging (moving inwards).

Trapped null surfaces are used in the definition of the apparent horizon which typically surrounds a black hole .

Definition [ edit ] We take a ( compact , orientable , spacelike ) surface, and find its outward pointing normal vectors.  The basic picture to think of here is a ball with pins sticking out of it; the pins are the normal vectors.

Now we look at light rays that are directed outward, along these normal vectors.  The rays will either be diverging (the usual case one would expect) or converging.  Intuitively, if the light rays are converging, this means that the light is moving backwards inside of the ball.  If all the rays around the entire surface are converging, we say that there is a trapped null surface .

More formally, if every null congruence orthogonal to a spacelike two-surface has negative expansion, then such surface is said to be trapped.

See also [ edit ] Null hypersurface Raychaudhuri equation References [ edit ] ^ Senovilla, Jose M. M. (September 15, 2011). "Trapped Surfaces".

International Journal of Modern Physics D .

20 (11): 2139– 2168.

arXiv : 1107.1344 .

Bibcode : 2011IJMPD..20.2139S .

doi : 10.1142/S0218271811020354 .

S2CID 119249809 .

^ Penrose, Roger (January 1965).

"Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities" .

Phys. Rev. Lett .

14 (3): 57– 59.

Bibcode : 1965PhRvL..14...57P .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57 .

^ Nielsen, Alex B. (February 10, 2014).

"Revisiting Vaidya Horizons" .

Galaxies .

2 (1): 62– 71.

Bibcode : 2014Galax...2...62N .

doi : 10.3390/galaxies2010062 .

^ Bengtsson, Ingemar (December 22, 2011). "Some Examples of Trapped Surfaces".

arXiv : 1112.5318 [ gr-qc ].

S. W. Hawking & G. F. R. Ellis (1975).

The large scale structure of space-time .

Cambridge University Press .

This is the gold standard in black holes because of its place in history.  It is also quite thorough.

Robert M. Wald (1984).

General Relativity .

University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 9780226870335 .

This book is somewhat more up-to-date.

v t e Roger Penrose Books The Emperor's New Mind (1989) Shadows of the Mind (1994) The Road to Reality (2004) Cycles of Time (2010) Fashion, Faith, and Fantasy in the New Physics of the Universe (2016) Coauthored books The Nature of Space and Time (with Stephen Hawking ) (1996) The Large, the Small and the Human Mind (with Abner Shimony , Nancy Cartwright and Stephen Hawking) (1997) White Mars or, The Mind Set Free (with Brian W. Aldiss ) (1999) Concepts Twistor theory Spin network Abstract index notation Black hole bomb Geometry of spacetime Cosmic censorship Weyl curvature hypothesis Penrose inequalities Penrose interpretation of quantum mechanics Moore–Penrose inverse Newman–Penrose formalism Penrose diagram Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems Riemannian Penrose inequality Penrose process Penrose tiling Penrose triangle Penrose stairs Penrose graphical notation Penrose transform Penrose–Terrell effect Orchestrated objective reduction / Penrose–Lucas argument FELIX experiment Trapped surface Andromeda paradox Conformal cyclic cosmology Related Lionel Penrose (father) Oliver Penrose (brother) Jonathan Penrose (brother) Shirley Hodgson (sister) John Beresford Leathes (grandfather) Illumination problem Quantum mind Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trapped_surface&oldid=1290086697 " Categories : Mathematical methods in general relativity Black holes Roger Penrose Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 18:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trapped surface 1 language Add topic

