Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Notable books 3 Digitisation programme 4 Visiting 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Wren Library 5 languages العربية Deutsch Español Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′25.56″N 0°6′53.64″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2071000°N 0.1149000°E ﻿ / 52.2071000; 0.1149000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Library in Trinity College, Cambridge, England This article is about the Wren Library in Cambridge. For the Wren Library in Lincoln, see Lincoln Cathedral Library .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Wren Library" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Wren Library seen from Nevile's Court The library's rear facade as seen from the River Cam The interior of the library, showing the limewood carvings by Grinling Gibbons Stained glass window and Lord Byron statue at Wren Library's south end Cloisters beneath Wren Library's main room The Wren Library (foreground) and University Library (background) viewed from the chapel tower at St John's College The Wren Library is the library of Trinity College in Cambridge . It was designed by Christopher Wren in 1676 and completed in 1695.

Description [ edit ] The library is a single large room built over an open colonnade on the ground floor of Nevile's Court .  The floor of the library proper within the upper storey lies several feet below the external division between the two storeys, reconciling the demands of use with the harmony of architectural proportion. It is credited as being one of the first libraries to be built with large windows to give comfortable light levels to aid readers.

The book stacks are arranged in rows perpendicular to the walls under the intervals between the windows. At the end of each stack is a fine limewood carving by Grinling Gibbons , and above these are plaster cast busts of notable writers through the ages. Other marble busts standing on plinths depict notable members of the college and are mostly carved by Louis-François Roubiliac . A later addition is a full size statue of Lord Byron carved by Bertel Thorvaldsen , originally offered to Westminster Abbey for inclusion in Poets' Corner , but refused due to the poet's reputation for immorality.

[ 1 ] Giovanni Battista Cipriani was commissioned to design the stained-glass window at the south end, and William Peckitt completed it in 1775. The 5.03 m (16.5 ft) × 2.44 m (8 ft 0 in) window shows Fame or the muse of the college in yellow robes presenting Isaac Newton to King George III , seated by an allegory of Britannia , while Francis Bacon records the proceedings, and two cherubim and a bare-breasted woman with a trumpet herald the occasion. Considered a distraction to the scholars, thick curtains covered the window in the 19th century.

[ 2 ] On the east balustrade of the library's roof are four statues by Gabriel Cibber representing Divinity, Law, Physic (medicine), and Mathematics.

[ 3 ] As part of the complex of buildings surrounding Nevile's Court, Great Court and New Court, the library is a Grade I listed building.

[ 4 ] The other library designed by Wren is Lincoln Cathedral Library .

Notable books [ edit ] The library contains many notable rare books and manuscripts, many bequeathed by past members of the college.

Included in the collection are Isaac Newton 's first edition copy of Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica with handwritten notes for the second edition.

[ 5 ] Isaac Newton 's (1659–61) Notebook [ 6 ] An eighth-century copy of the Epistles of St Paul [ 7 ] About 1250 medieval manuscripts including the great 12th-century Eadwine Psalter from Christ Church, Canterbury , the 13th-century Anglo-Norman Trinity Apocalypse and the 15th-century Trinity Carol Roll .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] A. A. Milne 's manuscript of Winnie-the-Pooh and The House at Pooh Corner .

[ 10 ] The Capell collection of early Shakespeare editions A collection of autograph poems by John Milton [ 11 ] A 14th-century manuscript of The Vision of Piers Plowman [ 12 ] Several works printed by William Caxton , including the first book printed in English and the first dated printed book produced in England Several notebooks written by Ludwig Wittgenstein Handwritten notes by Robert Oppenheimer describing the "Trinity" atomic bomb test in New Mexico , U.S.

Ramanujan 's " lost notebook " 1620 edition of William Morgan's translation of the bible into Welsh Digitisation programme [ edit ] In early 2014 the library began a major programme of digitisation. To date, over 1100 of the 1250 medieval manuscripts owned by the college have been digitised and are freely available to read online.

[ 13 ] A link to the list of digitised manuscripts can be found in the external links below.

Visiting [ edit ] The library is open to the public, [ 14 ] [ 15 ] but opening times  are limited.

[ 16 ] There is no admission charge for the Wren Library.

Historical photograph of the exterior, circa 1870 Historical photograph of the interior, circa 1870 References [ edit ] ^ The Making of the Wren Library: Trinity College, Cambridge ^ McKitterick, D (ed.), The Making of the Wren Library (Cambridge, 1995), chapter 3.

^ Fürst, V., 1956, The architecture of Sir Christopher Wren ^ Historic England .

"Trinity College, the Buildings Surrounding Great Court, Nevile's Court and New Court, and Including King's Hostel (1106371)" .

National Heritage List for England . Retrieved 30 March 2015 .

^ Newton, Isaac.

"Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica (Newton's personally annotated 1st edition)" .

^ Isaac Newton's Notebook ^ Pauline epistles Epistles of St Paul ^ 13th-century Anglo-Norman Trinity Apocalypse ^ The Western manuscripts in the library of Trinity College, Cambridge by M.R. James, Cambridge University Press, 1900, 3 vols.

^ Frommer's London 2013 By Donald Strachan ^ Autograph of Milton ^ The Vision of Piers Plowman Online Manuscript ^ The James Catalogue of Western Manuscripts ^ Archives made easy Information ^ Visit Cambridge Information ^ Wren Library Opening Times External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wren Library, Cambridge .

Official website 52°12′25.56″N 0°6′53.64″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2071000°N 0.1149000°E ﻿ / 52.2071000; 0.1149000 v t e Trinity College, Cambridge Trinity College arms Founder Henry VIII Master Professor Dame Sally Davies List of Masters List of alumni Trinity College arms Student life Choir First and Third Trinity Boat Club ( May Ball ) Mathematical Society Campus Bridge Burrell's Field Chapel Clock Great Court Nevile's Court Wren Library Related King's Hall Michaelhouse Cambridge Science Park Birkbeck Lectures Knowles Lectures Tarner Lectures Perrott-Warrick Fund Categories Trinity College Alumni Fellows Masters Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wren_Library&oldid=1231471959 " Categories : Trinity College, Cambridge 1695 establishments in England Christopher Wren buildings Buildings and structures completed in 1695 Grade I listed buildings in Cambridgeshire Grade I listed library buildings Libraries of the University of Cambridge Library buildings completed in the 17th century Research libraries in the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Use British English from February 2023 Articles needing additional references from September 2008 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 June 2024, at 13:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wren Library 5 languages Add topic

