Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Description 3 Distribution 4 Taxonomy 5 References Toggle the table of contents Divimonas 1 language Magyar Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genus of flagellates Divimonas Scientific classification Domain: Eukaryota Class: Planomonadea Order: Ancyromonadida Genus: Divimonas Barkhouse, Eglit, Weston & Simpson 2025 Species: D. melba Binomial name Divimonas melba (Simpson & Patterson 1996) Barkhouse, Eglit, Weston & Simpson 2025 Synonyms Ancyromonas melba Simpson & Patterson 1996 Divimonas is a genus of flagellates containing the single species Divimonas melba , found in sediments from hypersaline lakes and antarctic material. It belongs to the ancyromonads , a group of small flagellated microbes with a basal position in the eukaryotic tree of life. The species was initially classified within the genus Ancyromonas , but through genetic analysis it was determined to belong to a different evolutionary branch from that of any previously known ancyromonad.

[ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] The name of genus Divimonas is a reference to the divi-divi ( Libidibia coriaria ), the national tree of Curaçao , the island where the species was first successfully isolated. It is followed by -monas (from Greek μονάς , meaning 'unit'), [ 1 ] a common suffix for single-celled protists .

[ 2 ] The epithet melba has no specified etymology.

[ 3 ] Description [ edit ] Divimonas melba is a species of single-celled free-living flagellates . Their ovoid cells (4.2–4.6 μm in length, 3.4–3.7 μm in width) are flattened on the dorsal and ventral sides with the ventral side hollowed, sometimes with a typical ancyromonad "bean shape" due to an indented left edge and a rounded right edge. A ventral groove originates from the anterior ventral end (rostrum or "snout"), and runs longitudinally down the surface, continuing as a ventral crease rather than a depression.

[ 3 ] The rostrum contains spherical bumps that are presumably extrusomes .

[ 1 ] Each cell has two flagella . The posterior flagellum (9.7–10.5 μm long) emerges from the anterior end of the ventral groove and is held under the cell and used to attach to surfaces. The anterior flagellum (3.8–4.7 μm long) emerges from a small depression at the anterior dorsal end, and sweeps back and forth in front of the cell. Both flagella have a similar thickness.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] D. melba has been observed performing asexual reproduction through cell division, in which the daughter cells are last separated at the posterior end. It has not been observed feeding, but probable digestive vacuoles have been observed, presumably with bacteria .

[ 1 ] Distribution [ edit ] Divimonas melba has been found in hypersaline lakes from the Shark Bay region of Western Australia [ 3 ] and from the Caribbean island of Curaçao.

[ 1 ] It has also been observed in material obtained from Antarctica , [ 4 ] meaning it may not be restricted to hypersaline environments.

[ 3 ] Taxonomy [ edit ] Cells of this species were originally described in 1996 by protistologists David J. Patterson and Alastair G. B. Simpson, who discovered them in two hypersaline lakes in the Shark Bay region of Western Australia. They described them as a new species, Ancyromonas melba , due to the cells being strongly reminiscent of Ancyromonas sigmoides in several morphological features. As such, it was classified in the Ancyromonadida , a group of small eukaryotes with a basal position in eukaryotic evolution.

[ 3 ] However, this classification remained uncertain, as its morphological features were still very different from A. sigmoides and all other ancyromonads.

[ 1 ] In 2025, the first molecular data of A. melba was obtained. Cells of A. melba were isolated from salt crust samples belonging to a hypersaline pond near Fort Beekenburg , Curaçao. Their SSU rRNA gene was sequenced . Through a phylogenetic analysis performed with this gene, it was revealed that its evolutionary position is not within any known genus of ancyromonads, but as a new separate branch. Consequently, the species was transferred to a new genus and renamed as Divimonas melba . The genus Divimonas is considered incertae sedis within the order Ancyromonadida, as it is unclear to which family it should be assigned.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h Barkhouse, Kate M.; Eglit, Yana; Weston, Elizabeth J.; Jenkins, Adriana B. A.; Simpson, Alastair G. B. (10 March 2025).

"Cultivation of Ancyromonas melba , and Reclassification as the Type Species of Divimonas gen. nov., a Phylogenetically Important Ancyromonad Lineage" .

Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology .

72 (2): e70005.

doi : 10.1111/jeu.70005 .

PMC 11891473 .

PMID 40059502 .

^ Eglit, Yana; Williams, Shelby K.; Roger, Andrew J.; Simpson, Alastair G.B. (3 September 2024).

"Characterization of Skoliomonas gen. nov., a haloalkaliphilic anaerobe related to barthelonids (Metamonada)" .

Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology .

71 (6): e13048.

doi : 10.1111/jeu.13048 .

PMC 11603281 .

PMID 39225178 .

^ a b c d e f Patterson, David J.; Simpson, Alastair G. B. (31 December 1996). "Heterotrophic flagellates from coastal marine and hypersaline sediments in Western Australia".

European Journal of Protistology .

32 (4): 423– 448.

doi : 10.1016/S0932-4739(96)80003-4 .

^ Tong, S.; Vørs, N.; Patterson, D.

(1997). "Heterotrophic flagellates, centrohelid heliozoa and filose amoebae from marine and freshwater sites in the Antarctic".

Polar Biology .

18 (2): 91– 106.

Bibcode : 1997PoBio..18...91T .

doi : 10.1007/s003000050163 .

v t e Eukaryote classification Domain Archaea Bacteria Eukaryota (major groups Metamonada Discoba Diaphoretickes Hacrobia Cryptista Rhizaria Alveolata Stramenopiles Plants Amorphea Amoebozoa Opisthokonta Animals Fungi Mesomycetozoea ) Amorphea Amoebozoa Discosea Tubulinea Variosea Archamoebea Cutosea Eumycetozoa (true slime molds) Obazoa Apusomonadida Breviatea Opisthokonta Holomycota Rotosphaerida Fungi ¹ Holozoa Tunicaraptor † Bicellum Ichthyosporea Pluriformea Filozoa Filasterea Choanozoa Choanoflagellata Animalia (animals) ¹ Diaphoretickes Telonemia Haptista Centroplasthelida Haptophytina SAR Rhizaria Cercozoa Endomyxa Retaria Foraminifera Radiolaria * Alveolata Colponemida * Ciliophora (ciliates) Myzozoa Apicomplexa Chrompodellida Dinoflagellata Perkinsozoa Stramenopiles Platysulcus Kaonashia Bigyra * Bicosoecida Placidozoa Sagenista Gyrista Developea Pirsoniales Hyphochytriomycetes Ochrophyta (brown algae, diatoms and relatives) Oomycetes (water molds) Actinophryida CAM Pancryptista Microheliella Cryptista Palpitomonas Katablepharidida Cryptomonada Archaeplastida ( plants sensu lato ) Picozoa Rhodophyta (red algae) Rhodelphidia Glaucophyta Viridiplantae (green plants or plants sensu stricto ) Prasinodermophyta Chlorophyta Streptophyta Mesostigmatophyceae Chlorokybophyceae Spirotaenia Klebsormidiophyceae Charophyceae Coleochaetophyceae Zygnematophyceae Embryophyta (land plants or plants sensu strictissimo ) ¹ " Excavates "* Discoba Jakobea Tsukubamonas Discicristata Heterolobosea Euglenozoa Metamonada * Anaeramoebidae Parabasalia Barthelona Skoliomonas Fornicata Preaxostyla Malawimonadida Malawimonadidae Imasidae Incertae sedis Provora Nebulidia Nibbleridia Hemimastigophora Spironematellidae Paramastigidae Ancyromonadida Ancyromonadidae Planomonadidae Divimonas CRuMs Diphylleida Mantamonadida Rigifilida Glissandrida Genera of uncertain affiliation Acinetactis Actinastrum Berkeleyaesol Kamera Magosphaera Meringosphaera Meteora Parakaryon (?) Quasibodo Tetrahelia Acritarchs and other fossils † Algospongia † Archaeochaeta † Cephalonyx † Changchengia † Cheleutochroa † Chitinozoa † Coryphidium † Cucumiforma † Dictyosphaera † Diskagma (?) † Eosolena † Francevillian biota (?) † Germinosphaera † Grandilingulata † Granomarginata † Grypania † Gunflint microbiota † Horodyskia † Introvertocystis † Korilophyton † Leiosphaeridia † Navifusa † Portalites † Protosterol biota † Pterospermopsimorpha † Qingshania † Quadrisporites † Schizofusa † Shuiyousphaeridium † Simia † Tappania † Tawuia (?) † Tetraporina † Thuchomyces (?) † Tuanshanzia † Valeria † Vernanimalcula ¹non- protist groups *possibly paraphyletic groups bold denotes groups with over 1,000 species Taxonomy of protists Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Divimonas&oldid=1293176468 " Categories : Taxa described in 2025 Protist genera Eukaryote genera Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Taxonbars without primary Wikidata taxon IDs This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 04:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Divimonas 1 language Add topic

