Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work Toggle Life and work subsection 1.1 Linus Pauling and the molecular clock hypothesis 1.2 Later work 2 References Toggle the table of contents Emile Zuckerkandl 14 languages Čeština Deutsch Eesti Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית مصرى Polski Português Suomi Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Austrian-French biologist (1922–2013) For the anatomist and surgeon, see Emil Zuckerkandl .

Émile Zuckerkandl Born ( 1922-07-04 ) 4 July 1922 Vienna , Austria Died 9 November 2013 (2013-11-09) (aged 91) Palo Alto , California Known for Molecular clock Scientific career Fields Molecular Biology Émile Zuckerkandl (July 4, 1922 – November 9, 2013) was an Austrian-born French biologist considered one of the founders of the field of molecular evolution .

[ 1 ] He introduced, with Linus Pauling , the concept of the " molecular clock ", which enabled the neutral theory of molecular evolution .

Life and work [ edit ] Zuckerkandl was raised in Vienna , Austria in a household of intellectuals, but his family relocated in 1938 to Paris, and later Algiers, to escape the racial policy of Nazi Germany with respect to Jews . At the end of World War II , he spent one year at the University of Paris ( Sorbonne ), then came to the United States to study physiology—earning a master's degree in 1947 from the University of Illinois , under C. Ladd Prosser —then returned to the Sorbonne to complete a Ph.D. in biology. Zuckerkandl developed a strong interest in molecular problems; his early research at a marine biology lab in Roscoff emphasized the roles of copper oxidases and hemocyanin in the molting cycles of crabs. In 1957, Zuckerkandl met renowned chemist Linus Pauling , who was becoming interested in molecular diseases and molecular evolution as an outgrowth of his activism on topics concerning nuclear power. They arranged a post-doctoral fellowship, and Zuckerkandl (now with his wife Jane) returned to the United States to work with Pauling at the California Institute of Technology beginning in 1959.

[ 2 ] He was an atheist.

[ 3 ] Linus Pauling and the molecular clock hypothesis [ edit ] Zuckerkandl's first project under Pauling (working with graduate student Richard T. Jones) was the application of new protein identification techniques—a combination of paper chromatography and electrophoresis that produced a two-dimensional pattern—to hemoglobin . The peptide fragments of hemoglobin samples from different species, partially broken apart by digestive enzymes , would produce unique patterns that could be used to estimate differences of protein structure. Zuckerkandl, Jones and Pauling published a comparison of several species' hemoglobin identification patterns in 1960, observing that the degree of dissimilarity of protein patterns corresponded approximately to the phylogenetic distance between source species. However, the method was not conducive to quantitative comparisons, so Zuckerkandl began working on the determination of the actual peptide sequence of the α and β chains of human and gorilla hemoglobin.

[ 4 ] In 1962, Pauling and Zuckerkandl published their first paper using the molecular clock concept (though not yet by that name). Like a number subsequent collaborative papers, it was not peer-reviewed —it was an invited paper in honor of Albert Szent-Györgyi —and they intentionally took the opportunity to "say something outrageous". The paper used the number of differences in the α and β chains of hemoglobin to infer the time since the last common ancestor for a number of species, calibrated based on paleontological evidence for humans and horses. Though the paper did not provide any explanation for why amino acid differences in a protein should accumulate at a uniform rate (the essential assumption of the molecular clock), it did show that the results were fairly consistent with those of paleontologists.

[ 5 ] During the succeeding years, Zuckerkandl worked to refine the molecular clock. In 1963, he and Pauling invented the term " semantides " for biological sequences—DNA, RNA, and polypeptides—that have evolutionary information and argued that such sequences could be the basis for constructing molecular phylogenies, suggesting that the "molecular clock" method might be useful for other semantides besides proteins.

Emanuel Margoliash 's first publication of sequence data for cytochrome c allowed comparison of the rates of molecular evolution for different proteins (cytochrome c seemed to evolve faster than hemoglobin), which Zuckerkandl discussed at a 1964 conference in Bruges . Zuckerkandl also adjusted the mathematics of the "clock" to account for the observation that some positions in an amino acid sequence were more stable than others, and the likelihood of multiple substitutions at the same position. In September 1964, he attended the important Evolving Genes and Proteins symposium, where he and Pauling presented their most influential paper ("Evolutionary Divergence and Convergence in Proteins", published in the conference proceedings the next year). The paper, primarily Zuckerkandl's work, named the "evolutionary clock" and presented a derivation of its basic mathematical form. Though Zuckerkandl and Pauling saw the clock as compatible with natural selection , it would later become the basis of the neutral theory of molecular evolution , in which genetic drift rather than selection is the driving force of evolution at the molecular level.

[ 6 ] Later work [ edit ] In 1965, Zuckerkandl moved back to France to direct in Montpellier, the "Centre de Recherche de Biochimie Macromoléculaire" of the Centre National de Recherche Scientifique . In 1971, he became the founding editor of the Journal of Molecular Evolution , and in the late 1970s became President of the Linus Pauling Institute (then in 1992 of its successor, the Institute of Molecular Medical Sciences).

[ 7 ] His recent work includes criticism of social constructionism [ 8 ] and intelligent design .

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ derStandard.at.

"Emile Zuckerkandl 1922–2013 - Zeit" (in German). Derstandard.at . Retrieved 2013-11-20 .

^ Gregory J. Morgan , "Emile Zuckerkandl, Linus Pauling, and the Molecular Evolutionary Clock, 1959-1965", Journal of the History of Biology , Vol. 31 (1998), pp. 155-178. pp. 157, 159-161.

^ David Klinghoffer. "'Darwin Would Put God Out of Business'". Beliefnet, Inc. Retrieved 21 May 2013. The author is Emile Zuckerkandl of Stanford University. Prof. Zuckerkandl ferociously attacks ID and any belief in a designer, God, or other "superghost".

^ Gregory J. Morgan, "Emile Zuckerkandl, Linus Pauling, and the Molecular Evolutionary Clock, 1959-1965", Journal of the History of Biology , Vol. 31 (1998), pp. 155-178. pp. 161-162.

^ Gregory J. Morgan, "Emile Zuckerkandl, Linus Pauling, and the Molecular Evolutionary Clock, 1959-1965", Journal of the History of Biology , Vol. 31 (1998), pp. 155-178. pp. 163-166.

^ Gregory J. Morgan, "Emile Zuckerkandl, Linus Pauling, and the Molecular Evolutionary Clock, 1959-1965", Journal of the History of Biology , Vol. 31 (1998), pp. 155-178. pp. 169-173.

^ Jay Aronson , " Profiles-Emile Zuckerkandl Archived 2007-06-25 at the Wayback Machine " (December 9, 2001), Documents in Molecular Evolution website. Accessed May 27, 2007.

^ Emile Zuckerkandl, "Social constructionism, a lost cause", Journal of Molecular Evolution , Vol. 51, Issue 6 (2000), pp. 517-9 ^ Emile Zuckerkandl, "Intelligent design and biological complexity", Gene , Vol. 385 (2006), pp. 2-18 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany France BnF data Czech Republic People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Emile_Zuckerkandl&oldid=1297697450 " Categories : 1922 births 2013 deaths Scientists from Vienna American people of Austrian-Jewish descent 20th-century Austrian biologists Austrian emigrants to the United States Austrian secular Jews Evolutionary biologists Jewish American scientists Jewish atheists American molecular biologists University of Paris alumni University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign alumni California Institute of Technology faculty Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 22:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Emile Zuckerkandl 14 languages Add topic

