Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 China 2 Japan 3 Peru 4 Europe 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Cormorant fishing 13 languages Azərbaycanca Deutsch Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 日本語 Português தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fishing using trained cormorants to catch large fish Yangshuo cormorant fisherman Cormorant fishing is a traditional fishing technique in which fishermen use trained cormorants to catch fish in rivers. Historically, cormorant fishing has taken place in China and Japan , [ 1 ] as well as Greece , North Macedonia , and briefly, England and France . Sometimes known as "duck fishing," it was attested as a method used by the ancient Japanese in the Book of Sui , the official history of the Sui dynasty of China, completed in 636 CE. Though cormorant fishing was once a successful enterprise, its primary use today is to serve the tourism industry . This artisan fishing method is no longer used anywhere except southwestern China , where it is also under threat from competition from more modern methods.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] To control the birds, the fishermen tie a loose snare near the base of the bird's throat. The snare does not stop the bird from swallowing small fish, but prevents the bird from swallowing larger fish, which are held temporarily in their gullet . When a cormorant has caught a fish in its throat, the fisherman brings the bird back to the boat and has it regurgitate the fish.

The types of cormorants used differ based on the location. Chinese fishermen typically employ the great cormorant ( Phalacrocorax carbo ), [ 5 ] while the Japanese cormorant ( Phalacrocorax capillatus ) is used in Japan and the neotropic cormorant ( Nannopterum brasilianum ) in Peru.

Darters (birds in the genus Anhinga ), which are relatives of cormorants, are also used for this fishing technique on occasion.

China [ edit ] Chinese cormorant fisherman in Yangshuo See also: Fishing industry in China In Guilin , Guangxi , cormorants are famous for fishing on the shallow Lijiang River .

[ 4 ] Elsewhere in southern China, the Bai people have utilized cormorant fishing since the 9th century on the banks of Erhai Lake . Traditionally practised for sustenance, cormorant fishing is now primarily performed for tourists.

[ 6 ] Great cormorants are typically used by Chinese fishers Chinese fisherman with his cormorants Chinese fisherman with one of his cormorants on Erhai Lake near Dali, Yunnan . The bird's throat snare is visible via the constriction in the bird's neck.

Fishing with cormorants in China, c.

1894 Chinese cormorant fisherman traditionally use bamboo boats Contemporary fishing with cormorants on Poyang Lake , China Japan [ edit ] Cormorant fishing in Japan is called ukai ( 鵜飼 ) in Japanese . Originally, it was done as one of the main fishing methods for ayu (sweetfish) fishing.

[ 7 ] However, since it is "unique" (as it uses birds and skillful techniques), viewing cormorant fishing, since the Heian period , has been used as amusement for aristocratic classes and warlords in Japan.

[ 7 ] Oda Nobunaga started showing cormorant fishing for hospitality in Japan.

[ 8 ] In 1568 , Oda Nobunaga, welcoming a messenger from Takeda Shingen , made a new boat and invited the messenger as a guest to show cormorant fishing.

[ 8 ] In addition, he chose ayu (sweetfish) with his own eyes and sent it to the guest as a gift at a later date.

[ 8 ] Tokugawa Ieyasu , after the Summer Campaign (1615) of Siege of Osaka , visited Gifu, enjoyed seeing cormorant fishing and eating ayu.

[ 8 ] Thus began to offer ayu sushi to the Shogun , and masters of cormorant fishing were allowed to move freely over the river.

[ 8 ] Cormorant fishing currently takes place in 13 cities in Japan. The most famous location is Gifu, Gifu Prefecture , home to cormorant fishing on the Nagara River , which has continued uninterrupted for the past 1,300 years.

[ 9 ] Cormorant fishing in Seki also takes place on the Nagara River , but it is called 'Oze cormorant fishing' ( 小瀬鵜飼 Oze Ukai ). Only the cormorant fishing masters in Gifu and Seki are employed by the emperor and called Imperial Fishermen of the Imperial Household Agency .

Fuefuki , Yamanashi Prefecture ( Fuefuki River ) Gifu, Gifu Prefecture (Nagara River) Seki, Gifu Prefecture (Nagara River) Inuyama , Aichi Prefecture ( Kiso River ) Uji , Kyoto Prefecture ( Uji River ) Kyoto , Kyoto Prefecture ( Ōi River ) Arida , Wakayama Prefecture (Arida River) Miyoshi , Hiroshima Prefecture (Basen River) Masuda , Shimane Prefecture ( Takatsu River ) Iwakuni , Yamaguchi Prefecture ( Nishiki River ) Ōzu , Ehime Prefecture (Hiji River) Hita , Ōita Prefecture (Mikuma River) Asakura , Fukuoka Prefecture ( Chikugo River ) Japanese cormorants are typically used by Japanese fishers.

Japanese cormorant trained by its master in Japan Cormorant fishing master on a boat at night in Gifu, Japan Keisai Eisen 's print of cormorant fishing on the Nagara River during the Edo period Viewing of cormorant fishing as an amusement (a woodblock print of Utagawa Kunisada , 1852) Peru [ edit ] Tethered cormorant used for fishing on Lake Titicaca Cormorants are used for fishing on Lake Titicaca by the Uru people in Peru . There are claims cormorant fishing occurred in Peru during the 5th century, 100 years earlier than Japan.

[ 10 ] The neotropic cormorant is used for fishing in Peru Europe [ edit ] Cormorant fishing is an old tradition in Greece and North Macedonia , [ 11 ] especially on Doiran Lake which lies in the border of the two countries, and it is still practiced today by some traditional fishermen. In Western Europe, cormorant fishing took place from the 16th to 17th centuries, primarily in England and France .

[ 12 ] In the 19th century, Francis Henry Salvin reintroduced the practice in England by putting on displays and bringing his birds to fisheries exhibitions.

[ 13 ] This "second phase" of English cormorant fishing lasted until about 1890.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Otter fishing Cormorant fishing on the Nagara River Ukai (play) References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cormorant fishing .

^ Jackson, C. E. (1997). "Fishing with cormorants".

Archives of Natural History .

24 (2): 189– 211.

doi : 10.3366/anh.1997.24.2.189 .

^ Manzi, M.; Coomes, O. T. (2010). "Cormorant Fishing in Southwestern China: A Traditional Fishery Under Siege".

The Geographical Review .

92 (4): 597– 603.

doi : 10.1111/j.1931-0846.2002.tb00015.x .

S2CID 162736384 .

^ Rose, Gerald (1987).

The fisherman and the cormorants . London: Bodley Head.

ISBN 0-370-31060-8 .

^ a b "Heart of the Dragon: Cormorant fishing" .

Wild China .

BBC Two . 19 August 2010 . Retrieved 2020-08-16 .

^ "Cormorant Fishing "UKAI" " . May 2001.

Archived from the original on 2009-01-09 . Retrieved 2008-01-30 .

^ Larson-Wang, Jessica (7 May 2017).

"The History Behind the Cormorant Fishermen of Erhai Lake" .

Culture Trip .

Archived from the original on 2020-08-16 . Retrieved 2019-08-17 .

^ a b Ryozo, Yanagida (June 2010).

"「文化としての岐阜の都市空間に関する研究・その２−鵜飼の環境デザインを考える」" [A Study on Urban Space in Gifu as Culture (Part 2) Considering the Environmental Design of Cormorant Fishing] (PDF) .

Bulletin of Gifu City Women's Junior College (in Japanese).

59 (第59輯 (No.59)). Gifu City: Gifu City Women's College : 1.

doi : 10.24516/00000225 . Retrieved 17 September 2022 .

^ a b c d e "ぎふ長良川の鵜飼公式サイト「1300年以上の歴史と伝統」" [Over 1300 Years of History and Tradition].

ukai-gifucity.jp (in Japanese). Gifu-Ukai . Retrieved 2022-09-14 .

^ "Gifu Cormorant Fishing on the Nagara River" .

ukai-gifucity.jp . Gifu City Cormorant Fishing Observation Boat Office.

Archived from the original on 2020-08-16.

^ Leicht, Hermann (1960).

Pre-Inca Art and Culture . New York: Orion Press. pp.

49– 50.

^ "Macedonian cities - Dojran" .

macedonia.co.uk . Macedonian Cultural and Information Centre.

Archived from the original on 2020-06-14.

^ Beike, Marcus (2014).

"The history of Cormorant fishing in Europe" (PDF) .

Vogelwelt .

133 : 1– 21.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-08-16.

^ Wills, Simon (2017-11-30).

A History of Birds . Grub Street Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-5267-0157-2 .

^ Beike, Marcus (2012).

"The history of Cormorant fishing in Europe" (PDF) .

Vogelwelt : 1– 19.

v t e Fishing equipment and methods Fishing tackle Fish hook Circle hook Gaff Hookset Sniggle Fishing line Braided Knots Monofilament Multifilament Power pro Swivel Fishing sinker Arlesey Bomb Bombarda Downrigger Sandsinker Fishing rod Bamboo fly rod Fishing reel Fishing rod tapers Fly rod building Fishing bait Bait fish Boilies Chum Clonk Groundbait Vermicompost Worm charming Plastic bait Deadsticking Plastic worm Fishing lures Artificial fly Heddon Little Cleo Mormyshka Original Floater Plug Sabiki Spinnerbait Spoon lure Spoonplug Surface lure Swimbait Topwater lure Zara Spook Bite indicators Fishing float Pellet waggler Shortfloating Quiver tip Fishing rig Carolina rig Chod rig Drop shot rig Hair rig Texas rig Apparel Creel Diving mask Hip boot Personal flotation device Snorkel Waders Wetsuit Other Fish stringer Tackle box Fishing techniques Gathering Abalone Ama divers Clam digging Flounder tramping Gathering seafood by hand Noodling Pearl hunting Scallop aquaculture Trout binning Trout tickling Spears Bowfishing Gigging Harpoon Hawaiian sling Polespear Spearfishing Speargun Trident Fishing lines Angling Dropline Drum lines Handline fishing Jiggerpole Jigging Jug fishing Longline fishing Spin fishing Tip-up Trolling Trotline Fishing nets Cast net Cheena vala Drift net Ghost nets Gill net Glass floats Haaf net Hand net Ice jigger Lampara net Lampuki net Lave net Lift net Salambaw Seine net Surrounding net Tangle net Trawl net Turtle excluder device Fish traps Almadraba Barrier net Corf Crab trap Double-Heart of Stacked Stones Eel buck Fish corral Fish nest Fish wheel Fishing basket Fishing weir Lobster trap Putcher fishing Trabucco Other Basnig Blast fishing Cormorant fishing Cyanide fishing Dredging Electrofishing Electric pulse fishing Fish aggregating device Fish toxins Fishfinder Fishing light attractor Flossing Ice fishing Kite fishing Muro-ami Otter fishing Pa-aling Payaos Shrimp baiting Snagging v t e Fisheries and fishing topic areas Fisheries Aquaculture Diversity of fish Fish diseases and parasites Fish farming Fisheries management Fisheries science Individual fishing quota Sustainable fishery Overfishing Wild fisheries Fishing Artisanal fishing Fisherman Fishing vessel History of fishing Industry List of harvested aquatic animals by weight By country Commercial fishing Marketing Markets Processing Products Seafood Recreation Angling Big-game fishing Catch and release Fishing tournaments Fly fishing Techniques Destructive fishing practices Fish trap Fishfinder Fishing net Gathering seafood by hand Handline fishing Spearfishing Trawling Trolling Tackle Artificial flies Bait Bite indicators Hook Line Lures Rod Sinker Locations Fish ponds Fishing banks Fishing villages Marine habitats Crime Bering Sea Anti-Poaching Operations Coral poaching Freshwater eel poaching and smuggling Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Arctic Glossary Index Outline Category Authority control databases : National Japan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cormorant_fishing&oldid=1300262837 " Categories : Fishing techniques and methods Cormorants Working birds Fishing in Asia Hidden categories: CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Japanese-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 07:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cormorant fishing 13 languages Add topic

