Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Family 3 References 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Ivan Saltykov 8 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano Română Русский Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian Field Marshal For the nobility, see Saltykov .

Count Ivan Saltykov Иван Салтыков Military governor of Moscow In office 1797–1804 Preceded by Yuri Vladimirovich Dolgorukov Succeeded by Alexander Bekleshov Viceroy of Caucasus In office 1789–1790 Preceded by Peter Tekeli Succeeded by Anton de Balmen Personal details Born ( 1730-06-28 ) June 28, 1730 Died November 14, 1805 (1805-11-14) (aged 75) Relations Pyotr Saltykov (father) Darya Saltykova (wife) Awards Order of St. Alexander Nevsky (1762) Order of St. George 2nd Class (1775) Order of St. Andrew (1782) Order of St. Vladimir 1st Class (1789) Golden Weapon for Bravery Military service Rank General-Field Marshal Battles/wars Seven Years' War Russo-Turkish War (1768–1774) Sheikh Mansur Movement Russo-Turkish War (1787–1792) Russo-Swedish War Count Ivan Petrovich Saltykov ( Russian : Ива́н Петро́вич Салтыко́в ; 28 June 1730 – 14 November 1805) [ 1 ] was a Russian field marshal , the governor-general of Moscow from 1797 to 1804, and owner of the grand estate of Marfino .

Biography [ edit ] Ivan was the only son of Field-Marshal Pyotr Semyonovich Saltykov . He began military service at the age of 15 in the Semenovsky Regiment at the rank of private. In 1758 he was inducted into the Imperial Court at the junior rank of Kamer-Junker .

During the Seven Years' War Saltykov distinguished himself at the capture of both Königsberg and Elbing , and at the Battle of Zorndorf . After the onset of peace he received a promotion to major general and was decorated with the Order of St. Anna , 2nd class, by Peter III . At Catherine the Great 's coronation, he was awarded the Order of St. Alexander Nevsky .

At the start of the Russo-Turkish War of 1768–1774 the now Lieutenant-General Saltykov served under the command of Rumyantsev at the Battle of Kagul . He was also present at the seizure of Khotyn . Commanding the army's heavy cavalry forces, he gained marked distinction for his bravery and received both the Order of St. George , 2nd Class, and the Gold Sword for Bravery with Diamonds.

With the end of yet another war, Saltykov was now a full General and sent to command a corps stationed in the newly acquired Polish provinces of the empire.

In 1780, to improve the health of his family he set out on an extended journey beyond the borders of Russia. With his wife and young children he traveled to Berlin , Dresden , and Brussels . They lived for three months in London and spent the better part of a year in Paris , where the Saltykovs lived so extravagantly that a Russian messenger to the French court wrote to Count Alexander Vorontsov that "They are the disgrace of our whole nation." [ 2 ] In 1784 he was given governorship over both Vladimir and Kostroma Viceroyalties while also being appointed a General-Adjutant . In 1788 War broke out anew with Turkey, and the general was called to join the ranks of the field army.

His army succeeded in retaking the Khotyn Fortress . In 1790 Catherine entrusted him with command of the army based in Finland . During this, an unsuccessful operation was conducted under his supervision. Upon the signing of the Treaty of Värälä , Saltykov was granted the honorary lieutenant-colonelcy of the Life Guard Horse Regiment and the Order of St. Andrew with Diamonds.

Saltykov's military leadership was primarily distinguished by his tremendous bravery. His skills in other areas of command were considered somewhat lacking.

Suvorov , for example was reportedly highly skeptical of his abilities. Additionally, Saltykov became enmeshed in a controversy with Rumyantsev which forced him in 1795 to retire, yet the following year Paul ascended to the throne and recalled him to the service. The new emperor showered him with distinctions, updating his rank to full general, making him the chief of His Majesty's Cuirassier Regiment , and Governor-General of Kiev . Not soon after he was made a field marshal and inspector general of cavalry for the entire army.

Towards the end of 1797, Saltykov was appointed Governor-General of Moscow, which in a previous era had been held by his father. In reality, the reins of government were held by another appointee of Paul; the Prussian-born police chief Fyodor Ertel . The Count left for himself only the responsibilities of command over the city's military parades and ceremonial appearances. Muscovites for a long time afterwards recalled his magnificent and wasteful lifestyle.

The death of his wife in 1802 was a heavy blow for Saltykov, and was a major factor in the decline of his own health, which prompted him to ask for retirement in 1804. He moved to Saint Petersburg , living in the home of his wealthy son-in-law Pyotr Myatlev , and died soon after. He was buried near his father at the village of Nikolskoye near Rostov .

I.P. Saltykov, 1790 Family [ edit ] Count Saltykov was married to Darya Petrovna Saltykova , daughter of the noted diplomat Pyotr Grigoryevich Chernyshyov . She was esteemed as a pillar of the Moscow high society and had an extremely close relationship to her husband. Together they had four children: Praskovya (1772–1859), Ekaterina (1776–1815), Anna (1777–1824), and Pyotr (1784–1813). The daughters all served as ladies-in-waiting at the Imperial Court, and two went on to marry and have children. Pyotr followed in his father's footsteps as a cavalry officer. He became a decorated colonel in the army during Napoleon's Invasion of Russia, but died less than a year later from medical complications that resulted from being wounded in battle. He was unmarried and childless.

References [ edit ] ^ Волков С. В., Генералитет Российской империи. М.: Центрполиграф, 2009. Т. 2. С. 449 ^ Е. П. Карнович. Замечательные богатства частных лиц в России.- Спб., 1874.- С. 95.

Bibliography [ edit ] Великий князь Николай Михайлович. «Русские портреты XVIII и XIX столетий». Выпуск 2, № 104.

Бантыш-Каменский, Д. Н. 33-й Генералъ-Фельдмаршалъ Графъ Иванъ Петровичь Салтыковъ // Биографии российских генералиссимусов и генерал-фельдмаршалов. В 4-х частях. Репринтное воспроизведение издания 1840 года. – М.: Культура, 1991.

Government offices Preceded by Pyotr Rumyantsev as General Governor of Kiev, Chernigov and Novgorod-Siversky Governor-General of Kiev 1796–1802 Succeeded by v t e Russian general governors in Little Russia Little Russia (Poltava, Chernigov, Kiev) Pyotr Rumyantsev Sergey Vyazmitinov Aleksei Kurakin Yakov Lobanov-Rostovsky Nikolai Repnin-Volkonsky Aleksandr Guryev Vasiliy Levashov Alexander Stroganov Nikolai Dolgorukov Sergei Kokoshkin Southwestern Krai (1796–1832, Little Russia 1793–1796) Mikhail Krechetnikov Iosif Igelström Timofei Tutolmin Ivan Saltykov Didrich Rosenberg Ivan Gudovich Aleksandr Bekleshov Andrei Fensh Alexander Tormasov Mikhail Kutuzov Mikhail Miloradovich Peter Zheltukhin Boris Knyazhnin Vasiliy Levashov Aleksandr Guryev Dmitriy Bibikov Illarion Vasilchikov Nicholas Annenkov Aleksandr Bezak Aleksandr Dondukov-Korsakov Mikhail Chertkov Alexander Drenteln Aleksei Ignatiev Mikhail Dragomirov Nicholas Kleigels Vladimir Sukhomlinov Fyodor Trepov Ekaterinoslav and Taurida New Russia (and Bessarabia) (1764–1874) Aleksei Melgunov Grigory Potemkin Platon Zubov Emmanuel de Richelieu Aleksandr Rudzevich (as Kherson military governor) Alexandre de Langeron Ivan Inzov Mikhail Vorontsov Fyodor Palen Nicholas Annenkov Alexander Stroganov Paul Kotzebue Galicia and Bukovina (1914–1917) Georgiy Bobrinsky Fyodor Trepov Dmitriy Doroshenko (as commissar) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ivan_Saltykov&oldid=1285116035 " Categories : Governors-general of Moscow 1730 births 1805 deaths Field marshals of the Russian Empire Governors-general of Kiev Sheikh Mansur Movement Saltykov family Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Russian-language text This page was last edited on 11 April 2025, at 19:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ivan Saltykov 8 languages Add topic

