Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure and contents Toggle Structure and contents subsection 1.1 Place in the Parva Naturalia 1.2 Title and divisions of the treatise 1.3 The heart as the primary organ of soul 1.4 Heart and lungs 1.5 The life-cycle 1.6 Respiration 2 Commentaries 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration 3 languages Français 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration ( Greek : Περὶ νεότητος καὶ γήρως, καὶ ζωῆς καὶ θανάτου, καὶ ἀναπνοῆς ; Latin : De Juventute et Senectute, De Vita et Morte, De Respiratione ) is one of the short treatises that make up Aristotle 's Parva Naturalia .

Structure and contents [ edit ] Place in the Parva Naturalia [ edit ] In comparison to the first five treatises of the Parva Naturalia , this one and On Length and Shortness of Life , while still dealing with natural phenomena involving the body and the soul, are "definitely biological rather than psychological." [ 1 ] They are omitted from the Parva Naturalia commentary of Sophonias .

Title and divisions of the treatise [ edit ] Modern editions divide the treatise into 27 chapters.  The Bekker edition of Aristotle's works distinguished two works, De Senectute et Juventute (chapters 1-6), and De Respiratione (chapters 7-27, for this reason sometimes cited as De Respiratione , chapters 1-21).  However, the manuscripts give no basis for this distinction, and the contents are not accurately described by these labels; youth and old age only come into focus as "part of the explanation of life as a whole" in chapter 24.  The work may, instead, be considered as a single, unified treatise on life, death, and the functions necessary to life: nutrition and respiration.

[ 2 ] The title On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration , given in the Medieval manuscripts, derives from the treatise's opening words: "We must now treat of youth and old age and life and death. We must probably also at the same time state the causes of respiration as well, since in some cases living and the reverse depend on this."  This statement explains how respiration is part of the more general subject of life and death.  While De Vita et Morte might, then, seem to be a more satisfactory title for the work (and Ptolemy Chennus refers to the whole in this way), youth and old age are important aspects of the subject, because Aristotle's conception "is not of a constant, unvarying life" but of a life-cycle of natural development and decay.

[ 2 ] The heart as the primary organ of soul [ edit ] Aristotle begins by raising the question of the seat of life in the body ("while it is clear that [the soul's] essential reality cannot be corporeal, yet manifestly it must exist in some bodily part which must be one of those possessing control over the members") and arrives at the answer that the heart is the primary organ of soul, and the central organ of nutrition and sensation (with which the organs of the five senses communicate).

[ 3 ] The motivation for this "disappointing feature of Aristotle's physiology" is a matter of conjecture; the importance of the brain had been suggested before Aristotle by Alcmaeon of Croton (on the basis of "the fact...that the end-organs of smell and sight are connected with the brain," with which Aristotle was familiar [ 4 ] ), and this had been accepted in turn by Diogenes of Apollonia , Democritus , and Plato .

[ 3 ] Heart and lungs [ edit ] Aristotle's account of the heart provides one of the clearest indications that he was familiar with the medical theories of some parts of the Hippocratic Corpus .  Among other debts, "his comparison of the heart-lung system to a double bellows (ch. 26, 480a20-23) is clearly borrowed from the earlier treatise" On Regimen ( De Victu ).

[ 3 ] That is, the heart ("hot substance" in animals) is inside the lungs ("the primary organ of cooling," a function also served by gills ); the heart expands under the influence of heat, forcing the lungs to expand under the same influence, causing inhalation , and this introduction of cold air from outside in turn causes contraction and exhalation .  In this continuous process, "life and respiration are inseparable." [ 5 ] The life-cycle [ edit ] Chapter 24 of the treatise gives several definitions that summarize Aristotle's theory.

[ 5 ] generation (birth) the initial participation in the nutritive soul, mediated by warm substance (i.e., in animals, the heart, in which the nutritive soul is incorporated) life the maintenance of this participation youth the period of the growth of the primary organ of refrigeration (the lungs) the prime of life the intervening time between the growth and decay of the primary organ of refrigeration old age the decay of the primary organ of refrigeration violent death or dissolution the extinction or exhaustion of the vital heat natural death the exhaustion of the heat owing to lapse of time, and occurring at the end of life death, in old age the exhaustion due to inability on the part of the organ, owing to old age, to produce refrigeration Respiration [ edit ] Respiration is the process by which breathing helps to cool and moderate the inner vital heat ( thermotēta psychikēs ) held in the heart.

"We have said before that life and the possession of heat depend upon some degree of heat; for digestion, by which animals assimilate their food, cannot take place apart from the soul and heat; for all food is rendered digestible by fire." 474a25-27.

Aristotle explains that if there is an excess of heat created in the heart the animal will "burn out" by excessively consuming the power sustaining its life (474b10-24). Its heat must be kindled (474b13) and in order to preserve (sōtērias) life, a cooling must take place ( katapsyxis ) (474b23).

While all animals need both food and cooling (476a16), only those with lungs require breathing. Fish and insects cool by different means (e.g. gills or buzzing). Fish use the water to cool, and this occurs in the gills, Aristotle thinks (478a34).

"animals higher in the scale of creation have more heat...they must at the same time have a higher form of soul, so they have a higher nature than that of fish." 477a18.

Aristotle also says that warmer animals require more cooling (478a23).

Commentaries [ edit ] Michael of Ephesus , CAG XXII.1 ( Greek text ) W. D. Ross , Aristotle: Parva Naturalia , Oxford, 1955 Notes [ edit ] ^ Ross, p. 52 ^ a b King, pp. 38–40 ^ a b c Ross, pp. 55f.

^ Sense and Sensibilia , 438b25–30, 444a9 ^ a b Ross, pp. 60f.

References [ edit ] R.A.H. King, Aristotle on Life and Death , London: Duckworth, 2001 External links [ edit ] Works related to On Youth and Old Age at Wikisource Works related to On Life and Death at Wikisource Works related to On Breathing at Wikisource Ancient Greek text (with translation and notes in Modern Greek) English translation by G.R.T. Ross: University of Adelaide eBooks Archived 2006-10-18 at the Wayback Machine (HTML), MIT Classics Archive (HTML), Archive.org (scan of published version, with Bekker numbers and notes, beginning on p. 406 of the PDF file) Parva Naturalia public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=On_Youth,_Old_Age,_Life_and_Death,_and_Respiration&oldid=1304616486 " Category : Works by Aristotle Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Webarchive template wayback links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 03:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration 3 languages Add topic

