Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Riemann Surfaces 2 Generalizations 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Non-positive curvature Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia In mathematics , spaces of non-positive curvature occur in many contexts and form a generalization of hyperbolic geometry . In the category of Riemannian manifolds , one can consider the sectional curvature of the manifold and require that this curvature be everywhere less than or equal to zero. The notion of curvature extends to the category of geodesic metric spaces , where one can use comparison triangles to quantify the curvature of a space; in this context, non-positively curved spaces are known as (locally) CAT(0) spaces .

Riemann Surfaces [ edit ] If S {\displaystyle S} is a closed, orientable Riemann surface then it follows from the Uniformization theorem that S {\displaystyle S} may be endowed with a complete Riemannian metric with constant Gaussian curvature of either 0 {\displaystyle 0} , 1 {\displaystyle 1} or − − 1 {\displaystyle -1} . As a result of the Gauss–Bonnet theorem one can determine that the surfaces which have a Riemannian metric of constant curvature 0 {\displaystyle 0} − − 1 {\displaystyle -1} i.e. Riemann surfaces with a complete, Riemannian metric of non-positive constant curvature,  are exactly those whose genus is at least 1 {\displaystyle 1} . The Uniformization theorem and the Gauss–Bonnet theorem can both be applied to orientable Riemann surfaces with boundary to show that those surfaces which have a non-positive Euler characteristic are exactly those which admit a Riemannian metric of non-positive curvature. There is therefore an infinite family of homeomorphism types of such surfaces whereas the Riemann sphere is the only closed, orientable Riemann surface of constant Gaussian curvature 1 {\displaystyle 1} .

The definition of curvature above depends upon the existence of a Riemannian metric and therefore lies in the field of geometry. However the Gauss–Bonnet theorem ensures that the topology of a surface places constraints on the complete Riemannian metrics which may be imposed on a surface so the study of metric spaces of non-positive curvature is of vital interest in both the mathematical fields of geometry and topology . Classical examples of surfaces of non-positive curvature are the Euclidean plane and flat torus (for curvature 0 {\displaystyle 0} ) and the hyperbolic plane and pseudosphere (for curvature − − 1 {\displaystyle -1} ). For this reason these metrics as well as the Riemann surfaces which on which they lie as complete metrics are referred to as Euclidean and hyperbolic respectively.

Generalizations [ edit ] The characteristic features of the geometry of non-positively curved Riemann surfaces are used to generalize the notion of non-positive beyond the study of Riemann surfaces. In the study of manifolds or orbifolds of higher dimension, the notion of sectional curvature is used wherein one restricts one's attention to two-dimensional subspaces of the tangent space at a given point. In dimensions greater than 2 {\displaystyle 2} the Mostow–Prasad rigidity theorem ensures that a hyperbolic manifold of finite area has a unique complete hyperbolic metric so the study of hyperbolic geometry in this setting is integral to the study of topology .

In an arbitrary geodesic metric space the notions of being Gromov hyperbolic or of being a locally CAT(0) space generalise the notion that on a Riemann surface of non-positive curvature, triangles whose sides are geodesics appear thin whereas in settings of positive curvature they appear fat . This notion of non-positive curvature allows the notion of non-positive curvature is most commonly applied to graphs and is therefore of great use in the fields of combinatorics and geometric group theory .

See also [ edit ] Margulis lemma References [ edit ] Ballmann, Werner (1995).

Lectures on spaces of nonpositive curvature . DMV Seminar 25. Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag. pp. viii+112.

ISBN 3-7643-5242-6 .

MR 1377265 Bridson, Martin R.

; Haefliger, André (1999).

Metric spaces of non-positive curvature . Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences]. Vol. 319. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. pp. xxii+643.

ISBN 3-540-64324-9 .

MR 1744486 Papadopoulos, Athanase (2014) [2004].

Metric Spaces, Convexity and Nonpositive Curvature . IRMA Lectures in Mathematics and Theoretical Physics Vol. 6. Zürich: European Mathematical Society. p. 298.

ISBN 978-3-03719-010-4 .

MR 2132506 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Non-positive_curvature&oldid=1279216046 " Categories : Curvature (mathematics) Hyperbolic geometry Metric geometry This page was last edited on 7 March 2025, at 05:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Non-positive curvature Add languages Add topic

