Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aristotle's initial suggestion 2 Scholastic elaboration 3 Influence on corpuscularianism 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Minima naturalia 2 languages Deutsch Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Scholasticism Schools Thomism Scotism Occamism Major works Summa Theologica Cur Deus Homo Summa Grammatica Summa logicae Opus Oxoniense Libri Quattuor Sententiarum Precursors Augustine of Hippo Boethius Pope Gregory I Alcuin of York John Scotus Eriugena Philosophers Anselm of Canterbury ("Doctor Marianus") Peter Abelard ("Doctor Scholasticus") Peter Lombard ("The Master") Averroes ("The Commentator") Maimonides ("Rabbi Moses") Albertus Magnus ("Doctor Universalis") Thomas Aquinas ("Doctor Angelicus") Bonaventure ("Doctor Seraphicus") Duns Scotus ("Doctor Subtilis") William of Ockham ("Doctor Invincibilis") Francisco Suárez ("Doctor Eximius") Related Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Dominican Order Franciscan Order Catholic theology Islamic philosophy Empiricism Neoplatonism Neo-scholasticism Protestant scholasticism Problem of universals Protoscholastic writing Philosophy portal Catholicism portal v t e Minima naturalia ("natural minima") [ n 1 ] were theorized by Aristotle as the smallest parts into which a homogeneous natural substance (e.g., flesh, bone, or wood) could be divided and still retain its essential character. In this context, " nature " means formal nature. Thus, "natural minimum" may be taken to mean "formal minimum": the minimum amount of matter necessary to instantiate a certain form.

Speculation on minima naturalia in late Antiquity , in the Islamic world , and by Scholastic and Renaissance thinkers in Europe provided a conceptual bridge between the atomism of ancient Greece and the mechanistic philosophy of early modern thinkers like René Descartes , which in turn provided a background for the rigorously mathematical and experimental atomic theory of modern science.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Aristotle's initial suggestion [ edit ] According to Aristotle, the Pre-Socratic Greek philosopher Anaxagoras had taught that every thing, and every portion of a thing, contains within itself an infinite number of like and unlike parts. For example, Anaxagoras maintained that there must be blackness as well as whiteness in snow; how, otherwise, could it be turned into dark water? Aristotle criticized Anaxagoras' theory on multiple grounds, among them the following: [ 1 ] [ 3 ] Animals and plants cannot be infinitely small according to Aristotle; thus the relatively homogeneous substances of which they are composed (e.g., bone and flesh in animals, or wood in plants) could not be infinitely small, either, but must have a smallest determinate size—i.e., a natural minimum.

On Anaxagoras' argument in which all things contain all others infinitely, water could be drawn from flesh, then flesh from that water, and water from that flesh, and so on. However, as above, because there is a smallest determinate size beyond which a further divided substance would no longer be flesh, any further cycle of such drawings out would be impossible.

Moreover, "[s]ince every body must diminish in size when something is taken from it, and flesh is quantitatively definite in respect both of greatness and smallness, it is clear that from the minimum quantity of flesh no body can be separated out; for the flesh left would be less than the minimum of flesh." [ 3 ] Unlike the atomism of Leucippus , Democritus , and Epicurus , and also unlike the later atomic theory of John Dalton , the Aristotelian natural minimum was not conceptualized as physically indivisible--"atomic" in the contemporary sense. Instead, the concept was rooted in Aristotle's hylomorphic worldview, which held that every physical thing is a compound of matter (Greek hyle ) and a substantial form (Greek morphe ) that imparts its essential nature and structure. For instance, a rubber ball for a hylomorphist like Aristotle would be rubber (matter) structured by spherical shape (form).

Aristotle's intuition was that there is some smallest size beyond which matter could no longer be structured as flesh, or bone, or wood, or some other such organic substance that (for Aristotle, living before the microscope) could be considered homogeneous. For instance, if flesh were divided beyond its natural minimum, what would remain might be some elemental water, and smaller amounts of the other elements (e.g., earth) with which water was thought to mix to form flesh. But whatever was left, the water (or earth, etc.), would no longer have the formal " nature " of flesh in particular – the remaining matter would have the form of water (or earth, etc.) rather than the substantial form of flesh.

This is suggestive of modern chemistry, in which, e.g., a bar of gold can be continually divided until one has a single atom of gold, but further division of that atom of gold yields only subatomic particles ( electrons , quarks , etc.) which are no longer the chemical element gold. Just as water alone is not flesh, electrons alone are not gold.

Scholastic elaboration [ edit ] Aristotle's brief comments on minima naturalia in the Physics and Meteorology prompted further speculations by later philosophers. The idea was taken up by John Philoponus and Simplicius of Cilicia in late Antiquity and by the Islamic Aristotelian Averroes (Ibn Rushd).

Minima naturalia were discussed by Scholastic and Renaissance thinkers including Roger Bacon , Albertus Magnus , Thomas Aquinas , Giles of Rome , Siger of Brabant , Boethius of Dacia , Richard of Middleton , Duns Scotus , John of Jandun , William of Ockham , William Alnwick , Walter Bury, Adam de Wodeham , Jean Buridan , Gregory of Rimini , John Dumbleton , Nicole Oresme , John Marsilius Inguen, [ n 2 ] John Wycliffe , Albert of Saxony , Facinus de Ast, Peter Alboinis of Mantua, Paul of Venice , Gaetano of Thiene , Alessandro Achillini , Luis Coronel, Juan de Celaya , Domingo de Soto , Didacus de Astudillo, Ludovicus Buccaferrea, Francisco de Toledo , and Benedict Pereira .

[ 1 ] Of this list, the most influential Scholastic thinkers on minima naturalia were Duns Scotus and Gregory of Rimini.

[ 1 ] A chief theme in later commentary is reconciling minima naturalia with the general Aristotelian principle of infinite divisibility.

[ 2 ] Commentators like Philoponus and Aquinas reconciled these aspects of Aristotle's thought by distinguishing between mathematical and "natural" divisibility. For example, in his commentary on Aristotle's Physics , Aquinas writes of natural minima that, "although a body, considered mathematically, is divisible to infinity, the natural body is not divisible to infinity. For in a mathematical body nothing but quantity is considered. And in this there is nothing repugnant to division to infinity. But in a natural body the form also is considered, which form requires a determinate quantity and also other accidents. Whence it is not possible for quantity to be found in the species of flesh except as determined within some termini." [ 4 ] Influence on corpuscularianism [ edit ] In the early modern period, Aristotelian hylomorphism fell out of favor with the rise of the "mechanical philosophy" of thinkers like Descartes and John Locke , who were more sympathetic to the ancient Greek atomism of Democritus than to the natural minima of Aristotle. However, the concept of minima naturalia continued to shape philosophical thinking even among these mechanistic philosophers in the transitional centuries between the Aristotelianism of the medieval Scholastics and the worked-out atomic theory of modern scientists like Dalton .

The mechanist Pierre Gassendi discussed minima naturalia in the course of expounding his opposition to Scholastic Aristotelianism, and his own attempted reconciliation between the atomism of Epicurus and the Catholic faith. Aristotle's mininima naturalia became "corpuscles" in the alchemical works of Geber and Daniel Sennert , who in turn influenced the corpuscularian alchemist Robert Boyle , one of the founders of modern chemistry. Boyle occasionally referred to his postulated corpuscles as minima naturalia .

[ 2 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Minima naturalia is the conventional Latin translation of Greek ἐλάχιστα ("elachista," singular ἐλάχιστον, "elachiston"), which means "minima." ^ Not to be confused with Marsilius of Inghen [ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e John Emery Murdoch ; Christoph Herbert Lüthy; William Royall Newman (1 January 2001). "The Medieval and Renaissance Tradition of Minima Naturalia".

Late Medieval and Early Modern Corpuscular Matter Theories . BRILL. pp.

91– 133.

ISBN 90-04-11516-1 .

^ a b c Alan Chalmers (4 June 2009).

The Scientist's Atom and the Philosopher's Stone: How Science Succeeded and Philosophy Failed to Gain Knowledge of Atoms . Springer. pp.

75– 96.

ISBN 978-90-481-2362-9 .

^ a b Aristotle , Physics 1.4, 187b14–21.

^ Thomas Aquinas .

In octo libros Physicorum expositio .

Sed dicendum quod licet corpus, mathematice acceptum, sit divisibile in infinitum, corpus tamen naturale non est divisibile in infinitum. In corpore enim mathematico non consideratur nisi quantitas, in qua nihil invenitur divisioni in infinitum repugnans; sed in corpore naturali consideratur forma naturalis, quae requirit determinatam quantitatem sicut et alia accidentia. Unde non potest inveniri quantitas in specie carnis nisi infra aliquos terminos determinata.

v t e History of science Background Theories and sociology Historiography Pseudoscience History and philosophy of science By era Ancient world Classical Antiquity Medieval European Renaissance Scientific Revolution Age of Enlightenment Romanticism 19th century in science 20th century in science By culture African Argentine Brazilian Byzantine Chinese French Indian Japanese Korean Medieval Islamic Mexican Russian Spanish Natural sciences Astronomy Biology Chemistry Earth science Physics Mathematics Algebra Calculus Combinatorics Geometry Logic Probability Statistics Trigonometry Social sciences Anthropology Archaeology Economics Education History Political science Psychology Sociology Technology Agricultural science Computer science Materials science Engineering Medicine Human medicine Veterinary medicine Anatomy Neuroscience Neurology and neurosurgery Nutrition Pathology Pharmacy Timelines Portal Category v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐ffbcf756d‐2m97x
Cached time: 20250731153140
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.308 seconds
Real time usage: 0.385 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 923/1000000
Revision size: 10092/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 80620/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 631/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 42126/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.185/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4359529/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  286.882      1 -total
 39.73%  113.976      1 Template:Scholasticism
 38.96%  111.760      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 36.40%  104.411      2 Template:Reflist
 28.36%   81.363      3 Template:Cite_book
 21.29%   61.084      4 Template:Navbox
 16.20%   46.461      1 Template:History_of_science
  7.04%   20.193      3 Template:Portal-inline
  4.91%   14.081      1 Template:Aristotelianism
  3.87%   11.111      4 Template:Icon Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:42429011:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250731153140 and revision id 1303537392. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Minima_naturalia&oldid=1303537392 " Categories : Aristotelianism Atomism History of chemistry Scholasticism Philosophy of Aristotle This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 15:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Minima naturalia 2 languages Add topic

