Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Frans van Schooten 11 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands Português Română Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch mathematician (1615–1660) Frans van Schooten Born 1615 Leiden , Dutch Republic Died 29 May 1660 (1660-05-29) (aged 44–45) Leiden , Dutch Republic Known for Van Schooten's theorem Scientific career Fields Mathematics Frans van Schooten Jr.

also rendered as Franciscus van Schooten (15 May 1615 – 29 May 1660) was a Dutch mathematician who is most known for popularizing the analytic geometry of René Descartes . He translated La Géométrie in Latin and wrote commentaries and explanations to it.

[ 1 ] Because most contemporary scientists and mathematicians in Europe knew the invention of analytic geometry through Van Schooten's edition, with its extensive commentaries by Johannes Hudde , Johan de Witt , and Hendrik van Heuraet , he had a significant influence on the science and mathematics of Europe at the time; especially on the invention of calculus by Gottfried Leibniz and Isaac Newton .

Life [ edit ] Van Schooten's father, Frans van Schooten Senior [ nl ] was a professor of mathematics at the University of Leiden , having Christiaan Huygens , Johann van Waveren Hudde , and René de Sluze as students.

[ 2 ] Van Schooten met Descartes in 1632 and read his Géométrie (an appendix to his Discours de la méthode ) while it was still unpublished.

[ 3 ] Finding it hard to understand, he went to France to study the works of other important mathematicians of his time, such as François Viète and Pierre de Fermat . Frans van Schooten returned home to Leiden in 1643 to assist his father and, two years later, inherited his father's position as professor at Leiden's Engineering School. One of his most important pupils at this time was Huygens.

The pendant marriage portraits of him and his wife Margrieta Wijnants were painted by Rembrandt and are kept in the National Gallery of Art : [ 4 ] Portrait of a Gentleman with a Tall Hat and Gloves Portrait of a Lady with an Ostrich-Feather Fan Work [ edit ] Exercitationum mathematicarum libri , 1656-1657 Van Schooten's 1649 Latin translation of and commentary on Descartes' Géométrie was valuable in that it made the work comprehensible to the broader mathematical community, and thus was responsible for the spread of analytic geometry to the world.

Over the next decade he enlisted the aid of other mathematicians of the time, de Beaune , Hudde , Heuraet , de Witt and expanded the commentaries to two volumes, published in 1659 and 1661. This edition and its extensive commentaries was far more influential than the 1649 edition. It was this edition that Gottfried Leibniz and Isaac Newton knew.

Van Schooten was one of the first to suggest, in exercises published in 1657, that these ideas be extended to three-dimensional space. Van Schooten's efforts also made Leiden the centre of the mathematical community for a short period in the middle of the seventeenth century.

In elementary geometry Van Schooten's theorem is named after him.

References [ edit ] ^ Van Berkel, K., Van Helden, A., & Palm, L. C. (Eds.). (1999). The history of science in the Netherlands: Survey, themes and reference. Brill: 374 ^ Van Berkel, K., Van Helden, A., & Palm, L. C. (Eds.). (1999). The history of science in the Netherlands: Survey, themes and reference. Brill: 51 ^ Van Berkel, K., Van Helden, A., & Palm, L. C. (Eds.). (1999). The history of science in the Netherlands: Survey, themes and reference. Brill: 373 ^ Discovery of portraits of Leiden professor and his wife in NRC , 6 November 2018 Some Contemporaries of Descartes, Fermat, Pascal and Huygens: Van Schooten , based on W. W. Rouse Ball's A Short Account of the History of Mathematics (4th edition, 1908) External links [ edit ] Mathematische Oeffeningen van Frans van Schooten (in Dutch) Biografisch Woordenboek van Nederlandse Wiskundigen: Frans van Schooten (in Dutch) Frans van Schooten, and his Ruler Constructions at Convergence O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Frans van Schooten" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews An e-textbook developed from Frans van Schooten 1646 by dbook Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet Artists RKD Artists Scientific illustrators People Netherlands Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frans_van_Schooten&oldid=1286277546 " Categories : 1615 births 1660 deaths 17th-century Dutch mathematicians Leiden University alumni Academic staff of Leiden University Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles with Dutch-language sources (nl) This page was last edited on 18 April 2025, at 21:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Frans van Schooten 11 languages Add topic

