Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In general 2 Other thinkers 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Latency stage 16 languages العربية Български Español Français Galego 한국어 Italiano עברית Nederlands Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Freudian psychosexual development For other uses, see Latent period .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series of articles on Psychoanalysis Sigmund Freud's couch Concepts Psychosexual development Psychosocial development (Erikson) Unconscious Preconscious Consciousness Psychic apparatus Id, ego and superego Ego defenses Projection Introjection Libido Drive Transference Countertransference Resistance Denial Dreamwork Cathexis Important figures Abraham Adler Balint Bion Breuer Chodorow Erikson Fairbairn Ferenczi Freud (Anna) Freud (Sigmund) Fromm Guattari Horney Irigaray Jacobson Jones Jung Kohut Klein Kristeva Lacan Laing Laplanche Mahler Rank Reich Spielrein Stekel Strachey Sullivan Winnicott Žižek Important works The Interpretation of Dreams (1899) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905) Psychology of the Unconscious (1912) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) The Ego and the Id (1923) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis (1964) Anti-Oedipus (1972) The Sublime Object of Ideology (1989) Schools of thought Adlerian Ego psychology Jungian Lacanian Interpersonal Intersubjective Marxist Object relations Reichian Relational Self psychology Training Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis British Psychoanalytic Council British Psychoanalytical Society Columbia University Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research International Psychoanalytical Association World Association of Psychoanalysis List of schools of psychoanalysis See also Child psychoanalysis Depth psychology Psychodynamics Psychoanalytic theory Psychology portal v t e The latency stage is the fourth stage of Sigmund Freud 's model of a child's psychosexual development . Freud believed that the child discharges their libido (sexual energy) through a distinct body area that characterizes each stage.

The stages are: the "oral phase" (first stage) the "anal phase" (second stage) the "phallic phase" (third stage) the 'latency phase' (fourth stage) the "genital phase" (fifth stage).

In general [ edit ] The latency stage may begin around the age of 7 (the end of early childhood) and may continue until puberty , which happens around the age of 13. The age range is affected by child-rearing practices; mothers in developed countries, during the time when Freud was forming his theories, were more likely to stay at home with young children, and adolescents began puberty on average later than adolescents today.

Freud characterized the latency phase as a period of relative stability. During this time, no new organization of sexuality emerged, and he did not extensively focus on it. As a result, this phase is sometimes omitted in discussions of his theory's developmental phases and is instead regarded as a distinct period.

The latency phase originates during the phallic stage when the child's Oedipus complex begins to dissolve. The child realizes that their wishes and longings for the parent of the opposite sex cannot be fulfilled and will turn away from these desires.

They start to identify with the parent of the same sex. The libido is transferred from parents to friends of the same sex, clubs, and hero/role-model figures. The sexual and aggressive drives are expressed in socially accepted forms through the defense mechanisms of repression and sublimation .

During the latency phase, the energy the child previously put into the Oedipal problem can be used for developing the self. The superego is already present, but becomes more organized and principled. The child acquires culturally regarded skills and values. The child has evolved from a baby with primitive drives to a reasonable human being with complex feelings like shame, guilt and disgust. During this stage, the child learns to adapt to reality and also begins the process of what Freud terms " infantile amnesia ": the repression of the child's earliest traumatic, overly sexual or evil memories.

Other thinkers [ edit ] Freud's daughter, the psychoanalyst Anna Freud , saw possible consequences for the child when the solution of the Oedipal problem is delayed. She states that this will lead to a variety of problems in the latency period: the child will have problems with adjusting to belonging to a group, and will show a lack of interest, school phobias and extreme homesickness (if sent away to school). However, if the Oedipal problem is resolved, the latency phase may bring the child new problems, like joining gangs, rebelling against authority and the beginnings of delinquency.

[ citation needed ] On the contrary, Jacques Lacan emphasized the importance of the Oedipal problem for individuals' development and states that unsuccessful resolution of it is the most likely cause for inability to come to terms with symbolic relations such as the law and expectations of society. In most extreme cases of failure—where there is no opposition for the child's access to his mother and vice versa—the result is perversion.

[ 1 ] The developmental psychologist and psychoanalyst Erik Erikson developed a stage model for the evolution of the ego. The latency phase corresponds to his stage of competence, or "industry and inferiority", age 5 to puberty. The child is eager to learn new skills. During this stage, the child compares their self-worth to others. Because the child can recognize major disparities in their abilities relative to other children, the child may develop a sense of inferiority to them.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Fink, Bruce.

A Clinical Introduction to Lacanian Psychoanalysis: Theory and Technique , Harvard University Press, 1999.

References [ edit ] Baldwin, A.L. (1967).

Theories of child development.

United States of America: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Carver, S.C., Scheier, M.J. (2004).

Perspectives on Personality (5th edition). United States of America: Pearson Education, Inc.

Erikson, E.H. (1972).

Het kind en de samenleving (6e druk). Utrecht/Antwerpen: Het 	Spectrum.

Etchegoyen, A. (1993). Latency – a reappraisal.

International Journal of Psychoanalysis , 74, 347-357.

Freud, A. (1965/1980).

Het normale en het gestoorde kind (vertaling, 1e druk). Rotterdam: Kooyker Wetenschappelijke Uitgeverij (Oorspr.: Normality and pathology in childhood, 1965).

Kriekemans, A. (1965).

Geschiedenis van de kinderpsychologie tot en met Sigmund Freud, Anna Freud en Melanie Klein.

Tielt: Uitgeverij Lannoo.

Kuiper, P.C. (1972).

Neurosenleer (6e druk). Deventer: Van Loghum Slaterus.

Woodworth, R.S, & Sheehan, M.R. (1967).

Contemporary schools of psychology (6e druk). Great Britain: the Ronald Press Company.

External links [ edit ] Nagera, Humberto, ed. (2014) [1969].

"Latency (pp. 20ff.)" .

Basic Psychoanalytic Concepts on the Libido Theory .

Abingdon-on-Thames : Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-31767038-4 .

Freud's Psychosexual Stages .

Felluga, Dino.

"Modules on Freud: On Psychosexual Development" . Introductory Guide to Critical Theory.

West Lafayette , Indiana : Purdue University College of Liberal Arts .

A short feminist critique of Freud's stages .

v t e Sigmund Freud Books On Aphasia (1891) Studies on Hysteria (1895) The Interpretation of Dreams (including On Dreams ) (1899) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901) Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious (1905) Totem and Taboo (1913) Introduction to Psychoanalysis (1916–17) The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement (1917) Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1921) The Ego and the Id (1923) The Question of Lay Analysis (1926) The Future of an Illusion (1927) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) Moses and Monotheism (1939) Essays " The Aetiology of Hysteria " (1896) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905) Delusion and Dream in Jensen's Gradiva (1907) Creative Writers and Day-Dreaming (1908) Leonardo da Vinci, A Memory of His Childhood (1910) On Narcissism (1914) The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement (1914) Some Character-Types Met with in Psycho-Analytic Work (1915) Thoughts for the Times on War and Death (1916) Mourning and Melancholia (1918) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) Medusa's Head (1922) Dostoevsky and Parricide (1928) Case studies "Dora" (Ida Bauer) Emma Eckstein Herbert Graf ("Little Hans") Irma's injection "Anna O." ( Bertha Pappenheim ) "Rat Man" Sergei Pankejeff ("Wolfman") Daniel Paul Schreber Original concepts Psychoanalysis Id, ego and superego Libido Preconscious Ego ideal censorship Free association Transference Psychosexual development Oral stage Anal stage Phallic stage Latency stage Genital stage Oedipus complex Father complex Deferred obedience Reality principle Seduction theory Related Bibliography complete works Archives Vienna home and museum London home and museum 1971 statue Interment Freudian slip Humor Inner circle Neo-Freudianism Views on homosexuality Religious views Cultural depictions Freud: The Secret Passion (1962 film) The Visitor (1993 play) Mahler on the Couch (2010 film) A Dangerous Method (2011 film) Freud (2020 TV series) Freud's Last Session (2023 film) Family Martha Bernays (wife) Anna Freud (daughter) Ernst L. Freud (son) Clement Freud (grandson) Lucian Freud (grandson) Walter Freud (grandson) Amalia Freud (mother) Jacob Freud (father) Edward Bernay (nephew) Jofi (dog) Prizes Sigmund Freud Prize Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Latency_stage&oldid=1298710530 " Categories : Freudian psychology Child sexuality Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2011 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013 This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 05:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Latency stage 16 languages Add topic

