Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Career 3 Research 4 Assault conviction 5 Awards 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Vladimir Platonov 8 languages Беларуская Deutsch Français مصرى Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Soviet, Belarusian, and Russian mathematician Vladimir Petrovich Platonov ( Belarusian : Уладзімір Пятровіч Платонаў, Uladzimir Piatrovic Platonau ; Russian : Влади́мир Петро́вич Плато́нов ; born 1 December 1939, Stayki village, Vitebsk Region , Byelorussian SSR ) is a Soviet, Belarusian and Russian mathematician . He is an expert in algebraic geometry and topology and member of the Russian Academy of Sciences .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] From 1992–2004 he worked at research centers in the United States , Canada and Germany .

[ 1 ] Education [ edit ] In 1961 Platonov graduated with highest distinction from Belarusian State University . In 1963 he received his Ph.D. from the Academy of Sciences of Belarus. In 1967, Platonov received his Doctor of Science degree from the Academy of Sciences of USSR.

Career [ edit ] At age 28 Platonov received a title of full professor at Belarus State. This made him the youngest full professor in the nation's history. In 1972 he became an Academician of the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus and its President (1987–1993).

[ 4 ] He has been an Academician of the Russian/USSR Academy of Sciences since 1987. He was the Director of the Institute of Mathematics of the Academy of Sciences of Belarus from 1977 to 1992.

Research [ edit ] His interests are algebra , algebraic geometry and number theory . He solved the Strong approximation problem, developed the reduced K-theory and solved the Tannaka–Artin problem .

[ 5 ] He solved the Kneser-Tits and Grothendieck problems. Together with F. Grunewald he solved the arithmeticity problem for finite extensions of arithmetic groups and the rigidity problem for arithmetic subgroups of algebraic groups with radical. Platonov solved the rationality problem for spinor varieties and the Dieudonne problem on spinor norms .

Platonov was an invited speaker of the International Congresses of Mathematicians in Vancouver (1974), Helsinki (1978) and the European Congress of Mathematicians in Budapest (1996).

He is a member of the Canadian Mathematical Society and from 1993 to 2001 was a Professor of the Faculty of Mathematics of the University of Waterloo in Waterloo, Ontario , Canada .

He is the author, with Andrei Rapinchuk, of Algebraic Groups and Number Theory .

[ 6 ] He currently works as a Chief Science Officer of Scientific Research Institute of System Development (NIISI RAN).

[ 7 ] Assault conviction [ edit ] On November 9, 1999, Platonov appeared in court on a bail hearing on a charge of attempted murder for an attack on his wife.

[ 8 ] He was convicted of assault.

[ 9 ] The court gave him a conditional sentence of two years. In September 2001, Platonov took early retirement as a professor of the University of Waterloo.

Awards [ edit ] Order of the Red Banner of Labour 1968: Lenin Komsomol Prize , for a series of works in topological group theory 1978: Lenin Prize in Science and Technology, for a fundamental series of works "Arithmetics of Algebraic Groups and Reduced K-Theory " ("Арифметика алгебраических групп и приведенная К-теория") 1993: Humboldt Prize See also [ edit ] List of University of Waterloo people References [ edit ] ^ a b Платонов Владимир Петрович , profile as the Russian Academy of Science website, President of the Belarus Academy of Science (1987–1992).

^ Владимир Петрович Платонов (К 60-летию со дня рождения).

("Vladimir Petrovich Platonov (on the occasion of the 60th anniversary)"), Известия Национальной академии наук Беларуси
СЕРИЯ ФИЗИКО-МАТЕМАТИЧЕСКИХ НАУК, No. 1, 2000, pp. 135–136 ^ Academician Vladimir P. Platonov Archived 2004-10-20 at the Wayback Machine , Belarusian Academy of Sciences ^ "Academician Vladimir P. Platonov" . Belarusian Academy of Sciences. Archived from the original on 2004-10-20 . Retrieved 2004-08-17 .

^ V. P. Platonov, "The Tanaka–Artin problem and reduced K-theory," Izv.

Akad. Nauk SSSR ,. Ser. Mat., 40:2, 1976, pp. 227–261 ( (in Russian) Проблема Таннака–Артина и приведенная K -теория ) ^ Vladimir Platonov, Andrei Rapinchuk, Algebraic Groups and Number Theory , Academic Press, 1993, ISBN 978-0-12-558180-6 , (in Russian) Алгебраические группы и теория чисел , УМН , 1992, No. 47:2 (284), pp. 117–141 ^ (in Russian) Vladimir Platonov at NIISI website ^ "Prof charged with attempted murder" .

Waterloo Daily Bulletin . Nov 9, 1999.

^ "Statement on Prof. Vladimir Platonov" . University of Waterloo Communications & Public Affairs. 19 January 2018.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vladimir_Platonov&oldid=1278862146 " Categories : 1939 births 20th-century Belarusian mathematicians Living people People from Orsha district Academic staff of Belarusian State University Academic staff of the University of Waterloo Academicians of the Byelorussian SSR Academy of Sciences Academicians of the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus Belarusian State University alumni Foreign fellows of the Indian National Science Academy Full Members of the Russian Academy of Sciences Full Members of the USSR Academy of Sciences Members of the Central Committee of the 28th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Members of the Supreme Soviet of the Byelorussian SSR (1985–1990) Humboldt Research Award recipients Recipients of the Lenin Komsomol Prize Recipients of the Lenin Prize Recipients of the Order of the Red Banner of Labour Belarusian mathematicians Soviet mathematicians Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Belarusian-language text Articles containing Russian-language text This page was last edited on 5 March 2025, at 01:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vladimir Platonov 8 languages Add topic

