Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Noted works 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents William Batchelder Greene 9 languages العربية Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia مصرى Polski Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American minister and activist (1819–1878) William Batchelder Greene Born ( 1819-04-04 ) April 4, 1819 Haverhill, Massachusetts , US Died May 30, 1878 (1878-05-30) (aged 59) Somerset , England Nationality American Occupation(s) Anarchist, minister, political scientist Known for Mutual Banking Academic background Alma mater Harvard (1841) Thesis De cosinuum et sinuum potestatibus secundum cosinus et sinus arcuum multiplicium evolvendis / von Ernst Eduard Kummer (1832) Academic work Doctoral students Paul Du Bois-Reymond This article is part of a series on Anarchism in the United States Ideologies Anarcho-capitalism Anarcho-pacifism Autarchism Chicago idea Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Philosophical anarchism History Cincinnati Time Store Most–Grottkau debate Haymarket affair Homestead strike Assassination of William McKinley Immigration Act of 1903 Ferrer Center and Colony Immigration Act of 1918 Galleanisti First Red Scare 1919 bombings Palmer Raids Sacco and Vanzetti Libertarian Book Club and League Counterculture of the 1960s Protests of 1968 Battle of Seattle Occupy Wall Street Qilombo Capitol Hill Occupied Protest People Abbott Alston Andrews Appleton Austin Balagoon Bari Berkman Best Biehl Bookchin Bushnell Carson Chomsky Cleyre Cornell Czologsz Day Dixon Dolgoff Duffy Turner Emerson Ervin Esteve Fielden Fischer Galleani Goldman Goodman Grace Graeber Greene Hahnel Haldeman-Julius Hammond Harman Heywood (Angela) Heywood (Ezra) Hill Hoffman Holmes Ingalls Kaczynski Konkin Labadie Lingg Lloyd Lum Magón Milstein Most Parsons Perlman Sale Schwab (Justus) Schwab (Michael) Solanas Spies Spooner Thoreau Tucker Waisbrooker Walker Warren Wilson Winn Wolff Zerzan Zinn Active Organizations ABC No Rio Anarcho-Syndicalist Review Anti-Racist Action Beehive Design Collective Catholic Worker Movement Common Ground Collective CrimethInc.

Earth Liberation Front Indecline Industrial Workers of the World Institute for Anarchist Studies Institute for Social Ecology Kate Sharpley Library Labadie Collection Metropolitan Anarchist Coordinating Council MOVE Profane Existence Red Emma's Ruckus Society Zizians Defunct Organizations Cincinnati Time Store Curious George Brigade Diggers Don't Just Vote, Get Active Ferrer Center and Colony George Jackson Brigade Institute for Applied Autonomy International Working People's Association Libertarian Book Club and League Love and Rage New England Non-Resistance Society New York Social Revolutionary Club Portland Anarchist Road Care Qilombo Right to Existence Group Spanish Camp Tenacious Unicorn Ranch Union of Russian Workers Up Against the Wall Motherfucker Vanguard Group Why? Group Youth International Party Media Publications AK Press Autonomedia The Blast Catholic Worker Cronaca Sovversiva Fifth Estate Free Society Freiheit Golos Truda Liberty Loompanics Mother Earth PM Press Regeneración Vanguard The Word Works " Resistance to Civil Government " (1849) " To the Workingmen of America " (1883) Anarchism and Other Essays (1910) Now and After (1929) In Defense of Anarchism (1970) Post-Scarcity Anarchism (1971) " The Abolition of Work " (1986) Industrial Society and Its Future (1995) From Bakunin to Lacan (2001) Understanding Power (2002) Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology (2004) Direct Action: An Ethnography (2009) Related topics American Left Anarchism in Puerto Rico Libertarianism in the U.S.

Labor history of the United States Minarchism Socialism in the U.S.

Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e William Batchelder Greene (April 4, 1819 – May 30, 1878) was an American individualist anarchist , Unitarian minister, soldier, mutualist , [ 1 ] promoter of free banking in the United States, and member of the First International .

[ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] Born in Haverhill, Massachusetts , Greene was the son of the Democratic journalist and Boston postmaster Nathaniel Greene . He was appointed to the United States Military Academy from Massachusetts in 1835, but he left before graduation. He was made 2nd lieutenant in the 7th infantry in July 1839 and after serving in the second Seminole War resigned in November 1841. Subsequently, he was connected with George Ripley 's utopian movement at Brook Farm , after which he met several transcendentalists including Orestes Brownson , Elizabeth Peabody and Ralph Waldo Emerson .

[ 3 ] According to James J. Martin in Men Against the State , Greene did not become a "full-fledged anarchist" until the last decade of his life, but his writings show that by 1850 he had articulated a Christian mutualism , drawing heavily on the writings of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon's sometimes-antagonist Pierre Leroux (see Equality ; 1849 and Mutual Banking ; 1850), writing in The Radical Deficiency of Existing Circulating Medium (1857): The existing organization of credit is the daughter of hard money, begotten upon it incestuously by that insufficiency of circulating medium which results from laws making specie the sole legal tender. The immediate consequences of confused credit are want of confidence, loss of time, commercial frauds, fruitless and repeated applications for payment, complicated with irregular and ruinous expanses. The ultimate consequences are compositions, bad debts, expensive accommodation-loans, law-suits, insolvency, bankruptcy, separation of classes, hostility, hunger, extravagance, distress, riots, civil war, and, finally, revolution. The natural consequences of mutual banking are, first of all, the creation of order, and the definitive establishment of due organization in the social body, and, ultimately, the cure of all the evils. which flow from the present incoherence and disruption in the relations of production and commerce.

In his radical, anonymously published pamphlet Equality , Greene had this to say about equality before the law: "It is right that persons should be equal before the law: but when we have established equality before the law, our work is but half done. We ought to have EQUAL LAWS also". His comments were directed towards the creation of corporations .

[ 4 ] Greene spent his final days in Somerset , England. His remains were transported to Boston to be buried at Forest Hills, Roxbury (Jamaica Plain).

[ 5 ] Noted works [ edit ] Mutual Banking . Boston: New England Labor Reform League, 1870.

Remarks on the Science of History, followed by an a priori Autobiography (1849).

Equality Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine . West Brookfield, Mass.: O.S. Cooke, 1849.

Mutual Banking Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine . West Brookfield, Mass.: O.S. Cooke, 1850.

Sovereignty of the People , pamphlet (Boston, 1863).

Heywood, Ezra and William B. Greene.

Declaration of Sentiments and Constitution of the New England Labor Reform League Archived 2018-12-04 at the Wayback Machine . Boston, Weekly American Workman, 1869.

Explanations of the Theory of the Calculus , pamphlet (1870).

Transcendentalism , pamphlet (1870).

Theory of the Calculus (1870).

The Facts of Consciousness and the Philosophy of Mr. Herbert Spencer , pamphlet (1871).

The Blazing Star: With an Appendix Treating of the Jewish Kabbala. Also, a Tract on the Philosophy of Mr. Herbert Spencer and One on New-England Transcendentalism . Boston: A. William and Co., 1872.

The Working Woman: A letter to the Rev. Henry W. Foote, Minister of King's Chapel, in vindication of the poorer class of the Boston working-women . Princeton, Mass.: Co-operative Pub. Co. (1873).

Socialistic, Communistic, Mutualistic, and Financial Fragments (1875).

International Address: An elaborate, comprehensive, and very entertaining Exposition of the principles of the Working-People's International Association .

See also [ edit ] Individualist anarchism in the United States References [ edit ] ^ Martin, James J.

Men Against the State.

Ralph Myles Publisher Inc.: Colorado. 1970. pp. 135. “Coming at a time when the labor and consumer groups were experimenting with the ‘associated workshops’ and ‘protective union stores,’ Greene suggested that the mutual bank be incorporated in the movement, forming what he called ‘complementary units of production, consumption, and exchange,…the triple formula of practical mutualism.’ This program of mutualism he considered best adapted to local community level.” ^ Woodcock, George (1962).

Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements . Melbourne: Penguin. p. 434.

^ Wayne, Tiffany K. (2014).

Encyclopedia of Transcendentalism . Infobase Publishing.

ISBN 978-1438109169 .

^ Sarat, Austin (September 2016).

10.3M – Rhetorical Processes and Legal Judgments: How Language and Arguments Shape . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1107155503 . Retrieved May 14, 2014 .

^ Wilbur, Shawn (November 14, 2007).

"Masonic Tribute to William B. Greene" .

Libertarian Labyrinth . Retrieved July 28, 2019.

Further reading [ edit ] (in French) Ronald Creagh (1983).

L'Anarchisme aux États-Unis 1826–1896 . Coll. Études Anglo-américaines. Pris: Klincksieck.

ISBN 2864600234 . See Chapter 8.

William B. Greene et les origins du mouvement anarchiste dans le Massachusetts . pp. 343–398.

External links [ edit ] William Batchelder Greene . Libertarian Labyrinth.

Ruch, John (August 2007).

"Anarchy in JP: Greene was early local radical" Archived 2007-09-28 at the Wayback Machine .

Jamaica Plain Gazette .

"In Memoriam" . (1878). A tribute by the Massachusetts Masons .

"Greene, Nathaniel" .

Appletons' Cyclopædia of American Biography . 1900.

The Radical Pamphlet Collection at the Library of Congress has material written by Greene.

Portals : Anarchism Libertarianism Politics v t e Anarchism in the United States History Cincinnati Time Store Most–Grottkau debate Haymarket affair Homestead strike Assassination of William McKinley Immigration Act of 1903 Ferrer Center and Colony Immigration Act of 1918 First Red Scare 1919 bombings Palmer Raids Sacco and Vanzetti Libertarian Book Club and League Counterculture of the 1960s Protests of 1968 Battle of Seattle Occupy Wall Street Qilombo Capitol Hill Occupied Protest People Abbott Alston Andrews Appleton Austin Balagoon Bari Berkman Best Biehl Bookchin Bushnell Carson Chomsky Cleyre Cornell Czologsz Day Dixon Dolgoff Duffy Turner Emerson Ervin Fielden Fischer Goldman Goodman Graeber Greene Hahnel Haldeman-Julius Hammond Heywood (Angela) Heywood (Ezra) Hill Hoffman Holmes Ingalls Kaczynski Labadie Lingg Lloyd Lum Magón Milstein Most Newman Parsons Perlman Sale Schwab (Justus) Schwab (Michael) Solanas Spies Spooner Thoreau Tucker Waisbrooker Walker Warren Wilson Winn Wolff Zerzan Zinn Organizations Active ABC No Rio Anarcho-Syndicalist Review Anti-Racist Action Beehive Design Collective Catholic Worker Movement Common Ground Collective CrimethInc.

Curious George Brigade Earth Liberation Front Industrial Workers of the World Institute for Anarchist Studies Institute for Social Ecology Kate Sharpley Library Labadie Collection Metropolitan Anarchist Coordinating Council MOVE Portland Anarchist Road Care Profane Existence Red Emma's Ruckus Society Defunct Cincinnati Time Store Don't Just Vote, Get Active Ferrer Center and Colony George Jackson Brigade Institute for Applied Autonomy International Working People's Association Libertarian Book Club and League New England Non-Resistance Society New York Social Revolutionary Club Qilombo Spanish Camp Tenacious Unicorn Ranch Union of Russian Workers Up Against the Wall Motherfucker Vanguard Group Why? Group Youth International Party Media Publications AK Press Autonomedia The Blast Catholic Worker Cronaca Sovversiva Fifth Estate Free Society Freiheit Golos Truda Liberty Loompanics Mother Earth PM Press Regeneración Vanguard The Word Works " Resistance to Civil Government " (1849) " To the Workingmen of America " (1883) Anarchism and Other Essays (1910) Now and After (1929) In Defense of Anarchism (1970) Post-Scarcity Anarchism (1971) " The Abolition of Work " (1986) From Bakunin to Lacan (2001) Understanding Power (2002) Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology (2004) Direct Action: An Ethnography (2009) See also American Left Anarchism History in Puerto Rico Anarchist economics Anarcho-capitalism Anarcho-pacifism Autarchism Chicago idea Galleanisti Green anarchism Individualist anarchism in the United States Labor history of the United States Libertarianism in the U.S.

Minarchism Outline of anarchism Philosophical anarchism Politics of the United States Socialism in the U.S.

Anarchism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=William_Batchelder_Greene&oldid=1285903804 " Categories : 1819 births 1878 deaths 19th-century American clergy 19th-century American male writers 19th-century American non-fiction writers 19th-century Unitarian clergy American anarchist writers American anti-capitalists American economics writers American male non-fiction writers American political writers American Unitarian clergy Christian anarchists Harvard Divinity School alumni Individualist anarchists Massachusetts Democrats Mutualists People from Haverhill, Massachusetts Writers from Massachusetts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Webarchive template wayback links Articles with French-language sources (fr) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Appleton's Cyclopedia This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 13:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents William Batchelder Greene 9 languages Add topic

