Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Rotating snakes 2 Gallery 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Inline citations 3.2 General references 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Peripheral drift illusion 2 languages မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of optical illusion Two images that exhibit peripheral drift illusion. The different pattern of light and dark causes the two circles to appear to rotate in opposite directions.

The peripheral drift illusion (PDI) refers to a motion illusion generated by the presentation of a sawtooth luminance grating in the visual periphery. This illusion was first described by Faubert and Herbert (1999), although a similar effect called the "escalator illusion" was reported by Fraser and Wilcox (1979). A variant of the PDI was created by Kitaoka Akiyoshi and Ashida (2003) who took the continuous sawtooth luminance change, and reversed the intermediate greys. Kitaoka has created numerous variants of the PDI, and one called "rotating snakes" has become very popular. The latter demonstration has kindled great interest in the PDI.

The illusion is easily seen when fixating off to the side of it, and then blinking as fast as possible. Most observers can see the illusion easily when reading text with the illusion figure in the periphery. The motion of such illusions is consistently perceived in a dark-to-light direction.

Two papers have been published examining the neural mechanisms involved in seeing the PDI (Backus & Oruç, 2005; Conway et al., 2005). Faubert and Herbert (1999) suggested the illusion was based on temporal differences in luminance processing producing a signal that tricks the motion system. Both of the articles from 2005 are broadly consistent with those ideas, although contrast appears to be an important factor (Backus & Oruç, 2005).

Rotating snakes [ edit ] Illusion similar to Rotating Snakes Rotating snakes is an optical illusion developed by Professor Akiyoshi Kitaoka in 2003.

[ 1 ] A type of peripheral drift illusion, the "snakes" consist of several bands of color which resemble coiled serpents . Although the image is static, the snakes appear to be moving in circles.  The speed of perceived motion depends on the frequency of microsaccadic eye movements (Alexander & Martinez-Conde, 2019).

Gallery [ edit ] Illusion similar to Primrose Field by Kitaoka Akiyoshi A peripheral drift illusion by Paul Nasca A peripheral drift illusion by Paul Nasca Combination of a Café wall illusion and a horizontal peripheral drift illusion A peripheral drift illusion giving a throbbing effect References [ edit ] Inline citations [ edit ] ^ "Akiyoshi's illusion pages" .

General references [ edit ] Alexander, R. G., Martinez-Conde, S. (2019).

Fixational eye movements. Eye Movement Research . Springer, Cham, 104–106, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-20085-5_3 .

Backus, B. T., Oruç, İ. (2005). Illusory motion from change over time in the response to contrast and luminance.

Journal of Vision , 5(11), 1055–1069, [1] , doi : 10.1167/5.11.10 .

Conway, B. R., Kitaoka, A., Yazdanbakhsh, A., Pack, C. C., Livingstone, M. S. (2005). Neural basis for a powerful static motion illusion.

Journal of Neuroscience , 25, 5651–5656.

Faubert, J., Herbert, A. M. (1999).

The peripheral drift illusion: A motion illusion in the visual periphery.

Perception, 28, 617–622.

Fraser, A., Wilcox, K. J. (1979). Perception of illusory movement.

Nature , 281, 565–566.

Kitaoka. A., Ashida. H. (2003). Phenomenal characteristics of the peripheral drift illusion.

Journal of Vision , 15, 261–262.

External links [ edit ] Rotating snakes at Akiyoshi's illusion pages Rotating rings at Sarcone's optical illusion pattern page These patterns move, but it’s an illusion Archived 2013-09-01 at archive.today by Smithsonian Research Lab Does your pet see Peripheral drift?

a slideshow designed for testing on animals v t e Optical illusions ( list ) Illusions Afterimage Ambigram Ambiguous image Ames room Autostereogram Barberpole Bezold Café wall Checker shadow Chubb Cornsweet Delboeuf Ebbinghaus Ehrenstein Flash lag Fraser spiral Gravity hill Grid Hering Impossible trident Irradiation Jastrow Lilac chaser Mach bands McCollough Müller-Lyer Necker cube Oppel-Kundt Orbison Penrose stairs Penrose triangle Peripheral drift Poggendorff Ponzo Rubin vase Sander Schroeder stairs Shepard tables Spinning dancer Ternus Vertical–horizontal White's Wundt Zöllner Popular culture Op art Trompe-l'œil Spectropia (1864 book) Ascending and Descending (1960 drawing) Waterfall (1961 drawing) The dress (2015 photograph) Related Accidental viewpoint Auditory illusions Illusions Tactile illusions Temporal illusion Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peripheral_drift_illusion&oldid=1294133506 " Categories : Optical illusions Vision Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template archiveis links This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 20:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peripheral drift illusion 2 languages Add topic

