Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Religious usage 2 Philosophical usage 3 Measure of religiosity 4 Military usage 5 Cold War doctrines 6 Peacekeeping doctrines 7 Political usage 8 Legal usage 9 Doctor 10 See also 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Doctrine 68 languages العربية Arpetan Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiZulu עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча ລາວ Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Religious doctrine ) For the PHP object-relational mapping framework, see Doctrine (PHP) . For the album by Pestilence, see Doctrine (album) .

Codification of beliefs Doctrine (from Latin : doctrina , meaning 'teaching, instruction') is a codification of beliefs or a body of teachings or instructions, taught principles or positions, as the essence of teachings in a given branch of knowledge or in a belief system . The etymological Greek analogue is ' catechism '.

[ 1 ] Often the word doctrine specifically suggests a body of religious principles as promulgated by a church.

Doctrine may also refer to a principle of law, in the common-law traditions, established through a history of past decisions.

Religious usage [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Doctrine" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Examples of religious doctrines include: Christian theology : Doctrines such as the Trinity , the virgin birth and atonement The Salvation Army Handbook of Doctrine [ 2 ] Transubstantiation and Marian teachings in Roman Catholic theology . The department of the Roman Curia which deals with questions of doctrine is called the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The distinctive Calvinist doctrine of "double" predestination The Methodist Church of Great Britain refers to the "doctrines to which the preachers of the Methodist Church are pledged" as doctrinal standards [ 5 ] Yuga in Hinduism Postulation or Syādvāda in Jainism The Four Noble Truths in Buddhism Roman Catholic and Orthodox doctrine generally comes from the writings of the Church Fathers , which has been clarified in various Ecumenical councils . Short versions can be found in brief statements of Christian doctrine , in prayer books.

[ 6 ] Longer versions take the form of catechisms .

Protestants generally reject Christian tradition and instead derive their doctrine solely from the Bible .

[ 7 ] Philosophical usage [ edit ] Epicurus ' 40 Principal Doctrines, the first four of which make up the Tetrapharmakos [ citation needed ] Measure of religiosity [ edit ] According to sociologist Mervin Verbit , doctrine may be understood as one of the key components of religiosity . He divides doctrine into four categories: content, frequency (degree to which it may occupy the person's mind), intensity and centrality. Each of these may vary from one religion to the next, within that religious tradition.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] In this sense, doctrine is similar to Charles Glock 's "belief" dimension of religiosity.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Military usage [ edit ] The term also applies to the concept of an established procedure to execute an operation in warfare . The typical example is tactical doctrine in which a standard set of maneuvers, kinds of troops and weapons are employed as a default approach to a kind of attack.

Examples of military doctrines include: Guerre de course Hit-and-run tactics Mahanian of late 19th up to mid-20th century Manhunting doctrine , or assured individual destruction Shock and awe Soviet deep battle of World War II Trench warfare of World War I Cold War doctrines [ edit ] The Cold War saw the enunciation of several strategic doctrines designed to contain Soviet expansion.

Carter Doctrine was announced in 1980 by American President Jimmy Carter after the Soviet invasion and occupation of Afghanistan. It declared that any Soviet aggression towards the Persian Gulf would be considered a danger to the essential interests of the United States. This led to the creation of significant American military installations in the area and the formation of the Rapid Deployment Force . The proclamation reinforced the previous Truman Doctrine and Eisenhower Doctrine and to some extent it rejected the Nixon Doctrine . See also Reagan Doctrine .

[ 13 ] Peacekeeping doctrines [ edit ] In modern peacekeeping operations , which involve both civilian and military operations, more comprehensive (not just military) doctrines are now emerging such as the 2008 United Nations peacekeeping operations' "Capstone Doctrine" [ 14 ] which speaks to integrated civilian and military operations.

Political usage [ edit ] By definition, political doctrine is "[a] policy, position or principle advocated, taught or put into effect concerning the acquisition and exercise of the power to govern or administrate in society." [ 15 ] The term political doctrine is sometimes wrongly identified with political ideology. However, doctrine lacks the actional aspect of ideology. It is mainly a theoretical discourse, which "refers to a coherent sum of assertions regarding what a particular topic should be" (Bernard Crick). Political doctrine is based on a rationally elaborated set of values, which may precede the formation of a political identity per se . It is concerned with philosophical orientations on a meta-theoretical level.

[ 16 ] Legal usage [ edit ] A legal doctrine is a body of interrelated rules (usually of common law and built over a long period of time) associated with a legal concept or principle. For example, the doctrine of frustration of purpose now has many tests and rules applicable with regards to each other and can be contained within a "bubble" of frustration . In a court session a defendant may refer to the doctrine of justification.

[ citation needed ] It can be seen that a branch of law contains various doctrines, which in turn contain various rules or tests . The test of non-occurrence of crucial event is part of the doctrine of frustration which is part of contract law . Doctrines can grow into a branch of law ; restitution is now considered a branch of law separate to contract and tort .

[ citation needed ] Doctor [ edit ] The title of Doctor in fact means "one with the authority to establish doctrine in his or her respective field of study"; a doctorate is a terminal academic degree that legally confers said authority within its respective field. For more information, see Doctor (title) .

See also [ edit ] Betancourt Doctrine Bush Doctrine – Foreign policy principles of U.S. president George W. Bush Carter Doctrine – 1980 U.S. foreign policy Doxa – Greek word meaning common belief or popular opinion Dogma – Beliefs accepted by members of a group without question Drago Doctrine Eisenhower Doctrine – American policy on the Middle East Giedroyc Doctrine – Political doctrine urging reconciliation among European countries Hallstein Doctrine – 1955–1970 one-Germany policy during the Cold War Monroe Doctrine – 1823 U.S. foreign policy on the Western Hemisphere Truman Doctrine – Anti-Soviet U.S. Cold War foreign policy References [ edit ] ^ Doctrine – Definition at WordIQ.com 2010 ^ Salvation Army International Theological Council (2010).

Handbook of Doctrine . London: Salvation Books.

ISBN 978-0-85412-822-8 .

^ "Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith (Roman Catholic Church) – Britannica Online Encyclopedia" . Britannica.com . Retrieved 2013-03-07 .

^ "Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" . Ewtn.com . Retrieved 2013-03-07 .

^ Doctrine of the Methodist Church , accessed 25 May 2018 ^ Callan, Very Rev. Charles J. (1925).

"Brief Statement Of Christian Doctrine" .

Blessed be God; a complete Catholic prayer book . P. J. Kenedy & Sons.

^ Wisse, Maarten (2017).

"PART I: Systematic Perspectives – Contra et Pro Sola Scriptura " . In Burger, Hans; Huijgen, Arnold; Peels, Eric (eds.).

Sola Scriptura: Biblical and Theological Perspectives on Scripture, Authority, and Hermeneutics . Studies in Reformed Theology. Vol. 32.

Leiden : Brill Publishers . pp.

19– 37.

doi : 10.1163/9789004356436_003 .

ISBN 978-90-04-35643-6 .

ISSN 1571-4799 .

^ Verbit, M. F. (1970). The components and dimensions of religious behavior: Toward a reconceptualization of religiosity. American mosaic, 24, 39.

^ Küçükcan, T. (2010). Multidimensional Approach to Religion: a way of looking at religious phenomena. Journal for the Study of Religions and Ideologies, 4(10), 60–70.

^ "Microsoft Word - M-26.doc" (PDF) . Retrieved 2018-09-24 .

^ Glock, Charles Y. (1972-06-01). "On the Study of Religious Commitment". In Faulkner, Joseph E. (ed.).

Religion's Influence in Contemporary Society: Readings in the Sociology of Religion . Ohio: Charles E. Merrill Publishing Co. p. 39 (of 38–56).

ISBN 978-0675091053 .

^ Glock, Charles Y. (July 1962).

"Religious Education: On the Study of Religious Commitment" .

University of Georgia Libraries . Survey Research Center, University of California, Berkeley. pp. 98–110 (Volume 57, Issue 4). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-09-27.

^ Melvyn P. Leffler, "From the Truman Doctrine to the Carter Doctrine: Lessons and Dilemmas of the Cold War." Diplomatic History 7.4 (1983): 245–266.

^ "Peacekeeping Resource Hub" (PDF) .

pbpu.unlb.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2008 . Retrieved 27 March 2018 .

^ "Political doctrine (definition)" . Eionet.europa.eu. 2012-07-20 . Retrieved 2013-03-07 .

^ Dr. Daniel Șandru.

"Ideology, Between the Concept and the Political Reality" .

The Knowledge Based Society Project . Sfera Politicii nr. 169. Archived from the original on April 24, 2018 . Retrieved March 10, 2013 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of doctrine at Wiktionary Quotations related to Doctrine at Wikiquote Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Doctrine&oldid=1271765091#Religious_usage " Categories : Doctrines Belief Dogma Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles needing additional references from August 2021 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 This page was last edited on 25 January 2025, at 16:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Doctrine 68 languages Add topic

