Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Climate zones according to Köppen Toggle Climate zones according to Köppen subsection 1.1 Group A: Tropical climates 1.2 Group B: Dry climates 1.3 Group C: Temperate climates 1.4 Group E: Alpine climates 2 Climate zones according to altitude Toggle Climate zones according to altitude subsection 2.1 Very Hot 2.2 Warm 2.3 Cool 2.4 Mild/Temperate 2.5 Cold 2.6 Very Cold 2.7 Frosty 2.8 Glacial 3 Gallery of maps Toggle Gallery of maps subsection 3.1 Maps of climate zones according to Köppen 3.2 Maps of climate zones by altitude 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Climate of Venezuela 4 languages Español Hausa Português Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Temperature regimes of Venezuela The Climate of Venezuela is characterized for being tropical and megathermal as a result of its geographical location near the Equator , but because of the topography and the dominant wind direction, several climatic types occur which can be the same as found in temperate latitudes , and even polar regions . Latitude exerts little influence on the Venezuelan climate. While the coastal cities of Maracaibo, Barcelona, Porlamar and Maiquetia can get extremely hot, cities in valleys such as Mérida, Caracas, Los Teques and San Cristobal have cooler climates, and the highest towns of Mucuchies and Apartaderos have cold (tundra) climates.

The hottest part of Venezuela is the northwest ( Paraguana Peninsula and Guajira Peninsula ), where temperatures of more than 38 °C (100 °F) are frequently recorded. The coldest part in the country are located in the highest areas of the Cordillera de Mérida , where temperatures lower than −2 °C (28 °F) are recorded. The Venezuelan Coastal Range and Guiana Highlands have average temperatures from 25 °C (77 °F) to 11 °C (52 °F), while the Llanos average temperature is over 23 °C (73 °F).

The highest temperature recorded was 42 °C (108 °F) in Machiques , [ 1 ] and the lowest temperature recorded was −11 °C (12 °F), it has been reported from an uninhabited high altitude at Páramo de Piedras Blancas ( Mérida state ), [ 2 ] even though no official reports exist, lower temperatures in the mountains of the Sierra Nevada de Mérida are known.

Climate zones according to Köppen [ edit ] Köppen climate classification map of Venezuela.

According to the Köppen climate classification , Venezuela's climate types are: [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Group A: Tropical climates [ edit ] It's the most prevalent and characteristic climate of the country. Maintaining temperatures above 18 °C (64 °F) and rainfall in most of the year: Tropical savanna climate (Aw) It can be found throughout the country, dominating the Llanos and northern Guayana Region , as well as other parts of the country. It is dry between December and March with annual rainfall between 600 and 1,500 mm.

Tropical monsoon climate (Am) It is located in the Guayana Region , Orinoco Delta , west of Zulia , Andean and Coastal range foothills, Paria Peninsula and Barlovento region; with rainfall between 1,600 and 2,500 mm per year and a drought of just 45 days.

Tropical rainforest climate (Af) It's located south of Venezuela, Orinoco Delta , El Tamá area in west of Venezuela, and south of Maracaibo Lake . Rainfall exceeds 2,500 mm, not tending dry season.

Tropical climates of Venezuela Tropical savanna climate, influenced by a temperate highland climate in Caracas Valley Tropical savanna climate in the Gran Sabana Tropical savanna climate in the Llanos Tropical monsoon climate  in Sur del Lago Tropical monsoon climate in Canaima Tropical rainforest climate in Orinoco Delta Tropical rainforest climate in Paria Peninsula Group B: Dry climates [ edit ] This type of climate the evaporation exceeds precipitation. In Venezuela is typical of desert and arid coastal areas and with annual temperatures above 18 °C. The cold semiarid type can be found at elevated portions of the Andes, where annual average are below 18 °C, resulting in cooler air.

Hot desert climate (BWh) It can be found in Guajira Peninsula , Paraguana Peninsula , Araya Peninsula and most of the Insular region .

Hot semi-arid climate (BSh) It is located in the northern part of Zulia state, most of the area of Lara state and Falcón state , the coastal area, Insular region and some semi-arid areas in Venezuelan Andes .

Cold semi-arid (BSk) It can be found locked at the temperate zones of high Andean valleys of Cordillera de Mérida . This climate type occurs because, at these elevations, the air is cooler, which reduces humidity and results in lower precipitation. Combined with higher rates of evaporation relative to precipitation, these areas experience a semi-arid steppe-like environment.

Dry climates of Venezuela Hot desert climate in Medanos de Coro National Park Hot desert climate in Cabo San Roman Hot desert climate  in Coche Island Hot semi-arid climate in Puerto La Cruz Hot semi-arid climate in Barquisimeto Cold semi-arid climate in Los Nevados Cold semi-arid climate in the Southern foothills of the Sierra Nevada de Mérida Group C: Temperate climates [ edit ] The monthly averages temperatures are below 22 °C (72 °F) but above  0 °C (32 °F). At least one month's average temperature is below 18 °C (64 °F). This cooler climate occur primarily in high-altitude regions of the country, because of their elevation, which moderates the tropical temperature found at lower altitud. The main types found in Venezuela are: Temperate highland climates with dry winters (Cwb) It tends to experience noticeably drier weather during the lower-sun "winter" season. It's located in the medium areas of the southern-east slope of Cordillera de Mérida and Sierra de Perija , the highest areas of south-western Venezuelan coastal range .

Temperate highland climates without dry season (Cfb) This climate doesn't tend to has a dry season. It's located in the medium areas of the Cordillera de Mérida and Sierra de Perija , the highest areas of Venezuelan coastal range , and the top of the highest Guiana Highlands Tepuis .

Temperate climates of Venezuela Temperate highland climate in Colonia Tovar Temperate highland climate in Auyantepui Temperate highland climate in Amazonas Temperate highland climate  in Sierra La Culata Temperate highland climate in El Avila National Park Temperate highland climate in Táchira Group E: Alpine climates [ edit ] It's characterized by average temperatures below 10 °C in all 12 months of the year: Alpine tundra (ETH) Also known as páramo climate , this climate often undergo a sudden and drastic change in daily-weather in which they fluctuate between temperatures from below freezing to as high as 20 °C. Mean annual temperatures range from 2 °C (36 °F) to 10 °C (50 °F). It is located above the 3,000 m in the Sierra de Perija and Cordillera de Mérida . Snowfall is possible above 3,800 meters but becomes more noticeable around 4,200 meters, especially during the rainy season from late May to early October. This coincides with the peak activity of the Intertropical Convergence Zone , bringing humid air from the southeast of the Mérida Cordillera , originating from the Venezuelan Llanos , and from the south of Lake Maracaibo Lowlands , which contribute moisture to the region. The most popular village with this climate in the country is the town of Apartaderos [ 5 ] Alpine glacier (EFH) This climate is reserved to the highest peaks of the Venezuelan Andes , such as Pico Bolívar , Pico Humboldt , Pico Bonpland , among others, where exposed rocky surfaces and patches of glaciers remain from the last Pleistocene glaciation, known locally as Mérida glaciation . Snowfall typically occurs during the rainy season, from late May to early October, further accentuating the frigid conditions of these high altitudes.

Alpine climates of Venezuela Alpine glacier in the Pico Humboldt Alpine glacier in the Pico Bolívar Alpine glacier climate  in Pico La Concha Alpine tundra climate in Sierra de La Culata Alpine tundra climate in Pico Piedras Blancas Alpina tundra at Laguna de Mucubají Alpine tundra at Laguna Coromoto Snow in Mérida Alpina tundra at Mifafí Valley Climate zones according to altitude [ edit ] Venezuelan climatic types, according to their thermal floors.

Venezuelan climates are structured in "thermal floors", as mentioned next: [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Very Hot [ edit ] This climate is characterized by very hot temperatures above 26 °C (79 °F), with precipitations that ranges from dry (less than 300 mm) to pluvial (more than 3300 mm) conditions. This climate can be found in areas below 300 m in sedimentary basins and lowlands such as the Llanos , Orinoco Delta , Maracaibo Basin , Orinoco Basin , and coastal plains and islands; it comprises almost all the country. This climate zone is present in cities like Maracaibo , Punto Fijo , Ciudad Guayana , Porlamar , Puerto La Cruz , Barinas , Tucupita , Cumaná , Maturin , Anaco , Ciudad Bolívar , Cabimas , El Vigía and others.

Warm [ edit ] Warm climate can be found between 300 and 650 m. It's characterized by temperatures from 23 °C (73 °F) to 26 °C (79 °F) and precipitations that ranges from scarcely rainy (300 – 700 mm) to pluvial (more than 3300 mm) conditions. This climate can be found in lower foothills and plateaus in the Guiana Highlands , Venezuelan Coastal Range , Coro region and Venezuelan Andes . Cities which have this climate zone are Barquisimeto , Maracay , Valencia , Guarenas-Guatire , San Juan de Los Morros , Charallave , Valera , Barinitas , San Antonio del Táchira , Quibor and others.

Cool [ edit ] This climate features temperatures between 18 °C (64 °F) to 23 °C (73 °F) and precipitations that ranges from scarcely rainy (300 – 700 mm) to pluvial (more than 3300 mm) conditions. It can be found in the country's mountainous areas between 650 and 1,350-1,600 m This climate zone is present in cities like Mérida , San Cristóbal , Caracas , Sanare , Villa de Cura , Ejido , Trujillo , Escuque , Rubio , Tovar , Boconó , Duaca , Bejuma , Los Teques , Nirgua , Santa Elena de Uairen , among others.

Mild/Temperate [ edit ] Mild or Temperate climate can be found in the mountainous areas between 1,350-1,600 to 2,400 m. It features temperatures around 13 °C (55 °F) to 18 °C (64 °F) and precipitations that ranges from scarcely rainy (300 – 700 mm) to pluvial (more than 3300 mm) conditions. This climate zone is present in cities like Mérida (higher part), Colonia Tovar , San Antonio de Los Altos , El Jarillo , El Junquito , Galipan , Timotes , La Grita , Tabay , La Mucuy and others; most of the top of the tepuis also present this climate.

Cold [ edit ] This climate is characterized by temperatures above 8 °C (46 °F) and below 13 °C (55 °F), with precipitations that ranges from scarcely rainy (300 – 700 mm) to pluvial (more than 3300 mm) conditions. This climate can be found in mountainous areas around 2,400 to 3,200 m specifically in Sierra de Perija , Cordillera de Mérida , higher elevations at Venezuelan Coastal Range and higher tepuis ( Monte Roraima , Kukenan , Cerro Marahuaca , Chimantá Massif ). This climate zone is present in towns like Mucuchíes , Chachopo and Los Nevados .

Very Cold [ edit ] This climate can be found in the Venezuelan Andes area, between 3,200 and 4,150 m. It's characterized by temperatures from 3 °C (37 °F) to 8 °C (46 °F) and precipitations that ranges from scarcely rainy (300 – 700 mm) to rainy (1800–2500 mm) conditions. This climate zone is present in towns like Apartaderos and Llano del Hato . The condition of this climate is also known as páramo .

Frosty [ edit ] Frosty climate is found at the highest areas in Venezuelan Andes , between 4,150 and 4,700 m. where the temperatures are between 0 °C (32 °F) to 3 °C (37 °F). This climate zone is present exclusively at Sierra Nevada de Mérida , Sierra de La Culata and Sierra de Santo Domingo .

Glacial [ edit ] This climate is characterized by average temperatures below 0 °C (32 °F) all year, it's located in the highest peaks of Venezuela in the Cordillera de Mérida such as Pico Bolívar , Pico Humboldt , Pico La Concha , Pico Bonpland , Pico Espejo , Pico Mucuñuque and Pico Piedras Blancas . Only Pico Bolivar and Pico Humboldt have their glaciers preserved, while the other peaks are exposed to nival zone conditions.

Gallery of maps [ edit ] Maps of climate zones according to Köppen [ edit ] Koppen climate zones across Venezuela's natural regions Venezuelan Andes (Mérida Cordillera) Venezuelan Andes (Sierra de Perijá) Central section (Venezuelan Coastal Range) Eastern section (Venezuelan Coastal Range) Maracaibo Lowlands Guayana Los Llanos Orinoco Delta Coriano System (Lara-Falcón System) Maps of climate zones by altitude [ edit ] Climate zones by altitude across Venezuela's natural regions Venezuelan Andes (Mérida Cordillera) Venezuelan Andes (Sierra de Perijá) Central section (Venezuelan Coastal Range) Eastern section (Venezuelan Coastal Range) Maracaibo Lowlands Guayana Los Llanos Orinoco Delta Coriano System (Lara-Falcón System) See also [ edit ] Geography of Venezuela References [ edit ] ^ "Extreme High Temperature in Venezuela" . wunderground. Archived from the original on 20 September 2014 . Retrieved 16 October 2012 .

^ "Extreme Low Temp in Venezuela" . Wunderground. Archived from the original on 6 July 2013 . Retrieved 16 October 2012 .

NOTE: Pass the cursor over the subrayed record to see the source of this. "This location is probably uninhabited, but is close to the town of San Isidro de Apartaderos. −11 °C (12 °F) has been reported from an uninhabited high altitude at Páramo de Piedras Blancas, Mérida state." ^ "Tipos Climáticos" .

Venezuela Virtual . Archived from the original on 2 September 2012 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Sánchez-Dávila, Gabriel (15 Sep 2022).

"Clasificación climática de Sudamérica" .

ArcGIS StoryMaps (in Spanish) . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ Sanchez Davila, Gabriel.

"Sierra de Santo Domingo: Biogeographic reconstructions for the Quaternary of a former snowy mountain range" .

Academia (in Spanish). p. 51 . Retrieved 5 July 2019 .

^ Silva, Gustavo (2010).

Tipos y subtipos climáticos de Venezuela (PDF) (in Spanish). Universidad de Los Andes . Retrieved 5 August 2016 .

^ Silva, Gustavo (2002).

"Classification of thermal floors in Venezuela" (PDF) .

Revista Geográfica Venezolana (in Spanish).

43 (2): 311– 328 . Retrieved 5 August 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Climate of Venezuela .

v t e Venezuela articles History New Granada Captaincy General War of Independence Gran Colombia ( reunification ) Revolution of the Reforms Federal War Revindicating Revolution 1895 crisis Restorative Liberal Revolution 1902–03 crisis World War II El Trienio Adeco 1958 coup d'état Puntofijo Pact El Carupanazo El Porteñazo Caracazo 1992 coup d'état attempts Vargas tragedy 2002 coup d'état attempt 2002–03 general strike Crisis 2017 constitutional crisis 2019 presidential crisis Civil wars Coups d'état Geography Borders Cities metropolitan areas Climate Earthquakes Environmental issues Fauna Flora National parks Natural Regions World Heritage Sites Politics Censorship Corruption Torture in Venezuela Human rights in Venezuela LGBT Crisis in Venezuela Administrative divisions Regions States Constitution Elections Foreign relations Law enforcement Military Missions National Assembly President President List Vice President Cabinet Supreme Tribunal of Justice In exile Guayana Esequiba (Reclamation area) Parties Great Patriotic Pole United Socialist Party Movement We Are Venezuela Communist Party For Social Democracy Tupamaro People's Electoral Movement Democratic Unity Roundtable Justice First Popular Will A New Era Democratic Action Come Venezuela Agreement for Change Progressive Advance Movement for Socialism COPEI Ecological Movement of Venezuela Economy Agriculture Currency Companies PDVSA CVG Cooperatives Energy Oil industry Science and technology Stock Exchange Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Crime Demographics Diaspora Education Healthcare Immigration Indigenous peoples Languages List of Venezuelans Public holidays Refugees Squatting Women Culture Cinema Cuisine Literature Media Miss Venezuela Music Religion Sport Symbols anthem coat of arms flag Outline Category Portal v t e Climate of South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Climate_of_Venezuela&oldid=1283038715 " Categories : Climate of Venezuela Climate by country Geography of Venezuela Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 March 2025, at 02:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Climate of Venezuela 4 languages Add topic

