Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Works Progress Administration 2.2 Philadelphia Housing Association 2.3 Academia 3 Awards 4 Personal life 5 Works 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Edmund Bacon (architect) 5 languages العربية Deutsch עברית مصرى 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American urban planner and architect (1910–2005) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Edmund Bacon" architect – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Edmund Bacon Born Edmund Norwood Bacon ( 1910-05-02 ) May 2, 1910 Philadelphia , Pennsylvania, U.S.

Died October 14, 2005 (2005-10-14) (aged 95) Alma mater Cornell University Cranbrook Academy of Art Occupation(s) Urban planner , architect Children 6, including Kevin and Michael Relatives Sosie Bacon (granddaughter) Kyra Sedgwick (daughter-in-law) Edmund Norwood Bacon (May 2, 1910 – October 14, 2005) was an American urban planner , architect, educator, and author. During his tenure as the executive director of the Philadelphia City Planning Commission from 1949 to 1970, his visions shaped today's Philadelphia , the city of his birth, to the extent that he is sometimes described as "The Father of Modern Philadelphia".

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] He authored the seminal urban planning book Design of Cities . He was the father of actor Kevin Bacon .

Early life and education [ edit ] Bacon was born in West Philadelphia , the son of Helen Atkinson ( née Comly) and Ellis Williams Bacon.

[ 3 ] He grew up in the Philadelphia suburbs and graduated from Swarthmore High School in Swarthmore, Pennsylvania in 1928.

He attended Cornell University , where he studied architecture. His senior thesis at Cornell made the case for a new civic center for Philadelphia that included an urban park where LOVE Park was ultimately built.

After college, while traveling the world on a small inheritance, Bacon found work as an architect in Shanghai , China in Henry Murphy's office. He was responsible for designing the Nanjing Dajiaochang Airport . With Murphy, he visited Beijing, a city that exerted a deep influence on his thinking. After a year in China, he returned to Philadelphia where he worked for architect William Pope Barney .

He soon was awarded a scholarship to the Cranbrook Academy of Art , in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan , with Finnish architect and planner Eliel Saarinen , who Bacon revered and whose theories about the city as a living organism as expressed in Saarinen's book The City were a basis for Bacon's later work.

Career [ edit ] Works Progress Administration [ edit ] Saarinen sent Bacon to Flint, Michigan to guide a WPA traffic survey. This project transformed into a permanent position for Bacon at the Flint Institute for Planning and Research. Bacon became very active in civic life in Flint, helping to establish the Flint Housing Association and reforming the city's Planning Commission. During his time in Flint, Bacon witnessed the 1936-37 Flint Sit-Down Strike , and felt empathetic to the workers.

Bacon gained close contacts with individuals who were active in establishing the Federal Housing Authority, such as Catherine Bauer and Lewis Mumford . Through these contacts he helped secure federal housing dollars for Flint. Bacon convened a housing council that brought together business, labor and civic interest groups in hopes of funding a public housing project. However, the local real-estate industry came to see this Federal funding for public housing as a threat to their business of selling converted garages to workers as homes, as was the case in several cities early in the history of the FHA, and the automobile unions helped kill the initiative. Bacon and other members of the council who remained in support of the project were red-baited , the funding was turned down, and Bacon was effectively run out of Flint in 1939.

[ 4 ] Philadelphia Housing Association [ edit ] From Flint, Bacon returned to Philadelphia to serve as managing director of the Philadelphia Housing Association. He served in the United States Navy aboard the USS Shoshone in the Pacific in World War II . In 1947, he joined the staff of the Philadelphia City Planning Commission under executive director Robert Mitchell, and served as co-designer to the 1947 Better Philadelphia Exhibition in collaboration with Oscar Stonorov and Louis Kahn . Bacon was also an early member of the City Policy Committee, a grassroots movement of young Philadelphians, established by future civic leader Walter M. Phillips, that was instrumental in Philadelphia's political reform movement. Members of the Committee went on to become leaders in Philadelphia government after 1952, when the reform Democrat and later ( U.S. Senator ) Joseph Sill Clark was elected Mayor , Richardson Dilworth became District Attorney, and a new Home Rule Charter was instituted.

In 1949, Bacon succeeded Mitchell as executive director of the Philadelphia City Planning Commission. Serving under Mayors Samuel , Clark, Dilworth, and Tate , his work brought him national repute along with his counterparts Edward J. Logue in Boston and Robert Moses in New York City during the mid-century era of urban renewal . His face appeared on the cover of Time magazine in 1964, and in 1965, Life magazine devoted its cover story to his work.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] That same year, Bacon was appointed by President Johnson to serve as a member of the White House 's Conference on Recreation and Natural Beauty. In 1967, he wrote Design of Cities , still considered an important architectural text. It’s a seminal work on urban design that illustrates the relationship between historical and modern principles as well as practices of urban planning, applied particularly to Philadelphia.

[ 7 ] It was during his tenure at the City Planning Commission that Bacon and his staff conceived and implemented numerous large and small-scale design ideas that shaped today's Philadelphia. These design concepts became Penn Center , Market East , Penn's Landing , Society Hill , Independence Mall and the Far Northeast . The Center City Commuter Connection , a seemingly radical idea at the time, was conceived during the 1950s by Planning Commission staff member, R. Damon Childs, who succeeded Bacon as executive director.

Not all of the concepts that Bacon supported materialized. One proposal that he inherited from Robert Mitchell was to encircle Center City with a series of expressways, including the so-called " Crosstown Expressway " ( I-695 ) and the Vine Street Expressway ( I-676 ) linking the Schuylkill Expressway ( I-76 ) with the Delaware Expressway (I-95) via South Street . Three of the four expressways were built, however the Crosstown Expressway faced significant local opposition and was never built, while a scaled-down expressway was built at Vine Street.

[ 8 ] As an unintended consequence , the Crosstown Expressway proposal depressed property values and rents in the South Street corridor, leading to a turnover of the neighborhood's character from largely Jewish-owned garment shops to the thriving commercial and nightlife center that it is today. Other concepts conceived during Bacon's tenure, such as Schuylkill River Park, included in the 1963 Center City Plan, came into being many years later.

[ 9 ] Academia [ edit ] After Bacon's retirement from the Planning Commission in 1970, he served as vice president for the private planning firm Mondev U.S.A., was an adjunct professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and at the University of Pennsylvania , from 1950 to 1987, and narrated "Understanding Cities", an award-winning series of documentary films describing the history and development of Rome under Pope Sixtus V , Paris under Georges-Eugène Haussmann , Regency London under John Nash , American cities, and cities in the future post-oil era. He vociferously but unsuccessfully opposed the development of skyscrapers in Center City Philadelphia taller than Philadelphia City Hall , which until 1984 set the informal height limit for downtown at the hat of the statue of William Penn . That custom, known as the " Gentlemen's agreement ", was broken by developer Willard G. Rouse III 's One Liberty Place .

The New York Times correctly noted Bacon's opposition to the project, but it was incorrect in saying that "in opposing the skyscraper One Liberty Place, Mr. Bacon refused to attend the tower's 1986 groundbreaking and stopped speaking to his friend Willard G. Rouse III, who built it. 'I think it's very, very destructive that he and he alone has chosen to destroy a historical tradition that set a very fine and disciplined form for the city,' Mr. Bacon said at the time." Bacon was present at the groundbreaking, which took place in May 1985. Of course, Rouse was not capable of single-handedly changing the custom, even if it was not formally legal. Rouse's enormous project had the support of Mayor W. Wilson Goode , Philadelphia City Council, and the City Planning Commission, which was forced by the announcement of Rouse's plan to admit that it had no up-to-date plan of its own for the future of Philadelphia's downtown.

Bacon continued to assert his vision for Philadelphia's future actively in his later years. During the 1990s, he proposed new concepts to improve Independence Mall, Penn's Landing, and the Benjamin Franklin Parkway . During the same period, he promoted a design competition for North American cities to design the best "Post-Petroleum" city.  Only one municipality, in Ottawa, Canada, committed to it. In 2002, at age 92, he skateboarded in LOVE Park , the plaza he founded and designed at Cornell University in 1932, as a protest against the city's ban on skateboarding in the park.

[ 10 ] In 2003, he appeared in the documentary My Architect about Louis Kahn , a Philadelphia architect . In September 2006, at the northwest corner of 15th Street and J.F.K. Boulevard, by LOVE Park, The Ed Bacon Foundation and the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission dedicated a state historical marker honoring Bacon's memory and commemorating his work.

Awards [ edit ] Bacon was awarded the Frank P. Brown Medal in 1962, the American Institute of Planners Distinguished Service Award, the Philadelphia Award , and an honorary doctorate from the University of Pennsylvania . In 1983, Bacon was elected into the National Academy of Design as an associate member, and became a full member in 1994. From 2004 until his death at the age of 95 the following year, Bacon helped found and served as an honorary director of a foundation that bears his name, the Ed Bacon Foundation, whose programs are now managed by the Edmund N. Bacon Memorial Committee at the Philadelphia Center for Architecture .

Personal life [ edit ] Bacon was the father of six children, including two sons, actor Kevin Bacon , musician Michael Bacon , and four daughters, Karin, Elinor, Hilda and Prudence (later Kira). His wife was Ruth Hilda Holmes, a teacher and liberal political activist. His friends included Buckminster Fuller , Steen Eiler Rasmussen , James Rouse , and Konstantinos Apostolos Doxiadis .

[ 11 ] Works [ edit ] Design of Cities (May 20, 1976) Penguin.

ISBN 0-14-004236-9 Understanding Cities documentary film series (1981) Greg Heller, Ed Bacon: Planning, Politics, and the Building of Modern Philadelphia . (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2013) References [ edit ] ^ "The Father of Modern Philadelphia" .

Mural Arts Philadelphia . Lincoln Financial Mural Arts Center at the Thomas Eakins House . Retrieved August 22, 2017 .

^ Pierznik, Christopher (February 14, 2015).

"The Father of Modern Philadelphia" .

Medium . Christopher Pierznik . Retrieved August 22, 2017 .

^ Greg Heller, Ed Bacon: Planning, Politics, and the Building of Modern Philadelphia . (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2013) p.17 ^ "Edmund Bacon Oral History" .

Temple University Libraries . September 13, 1974 . Retrieved January 22, 2025 .

^ "The City: Under the Knife, or All For Their Own Good" .

Time . November 6, 1964.

ISSN 0040-781X . Retrieved October 17, 2019 .

^ A City's Future Takes Shape . Time Inc. December 24, 1965. pp. 9, 141, 169.

^ Caves, R. W. (2004).

Encyclopedia of the City . Routledge. p. 24.

^ "Crosstown Expressway" .

Encyclopedia of Greater Philadelphia . Retrieved April 27, 2024 .

^ "Saving South Street Through the Lens of Denise Scott Brown" .

Hidden City Philadelphia . February 4, 2020 . Retrieved April 27, 2024 .

^ McQuade, Dan (February 14, 2016).

"WATCH: That Time Ed Bacon Skateboarded Across LOVE Park" .

Philadelphia Magazine . Retrieved April 27, 2024 .

^ Sharp, John (January 2, 2015). "Ed Bacon: planning, politics, and the building of modern Philadelphia, by Gregory Heller".

Urban Geography .

36 (1): 152– 154.

doi : 10.1080/02723638.2014.959403 .

ISSN 0272-3638 .

S2CID 143455785 .

Further reading [ edit ] Heller, Gregory L.

Ed Bacon: Planning, Politics, and the Building of Modern Philadelphia (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2013) 320 pp .

Clow, David F. "Edmund N. Bacon: A Biographical Sketch of His Life from 1910 to 1939".

[1] Clow, David F. "The 1947 Better Philadelphia Exhibition: An Historic Turning Point" (January 1987. Conference: Second National Conference on American Planning History, The Society for American City and Regional Planning History, At Columbus, Ohio) [2] Clow, David F. "A Short Distance in the Right Direction: Penn Center and City Planning During the Clark Years in Philadelphia, 1952-1956" [3] Clow, David F. "Realizing Time: Participation, Planning and Politics in Philadelphia 1956-1962" [4] Clow, David F. "House Divided: Philadelphia's Controversial Crosstown Expressway" (January 1989. Conference: Third National Conference on American Planning History The Society for American City and Regional Planning History, At Cincinnati, Ohio. Selected as a Working Paper by the American Panning Association.) [5] External links [ edit ] Biography portal Philadelphia portal "Big City" (1961), Ed Bacon interview on urban redevelopment The Ed Bacon Foundation New York Times death announcement, 18 October 2005 .

Ed Bacon seized city by the lapels (October 19, 2005) Kevin Bacon's father helped mold him and Philadelphia (July 6, 2011) v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Japan Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Edmund_Bacon_(architect)&oldid=1304351396 " Categories : 1910 births 2005 deaths American urban planners Architects from Philadelphia Cornell University College of Architecture, Art, and Planning alumni Cranbrook Academy of Art alumni Friends' Central School alumni United States Navy personnel of World War II University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign faculty University of Pennsylvania faculty Bacon family (United States) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2022 Articles needing additional references from October 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 14:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Edmund Bacon (architect) 5 languages Add topic

