Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Variations 3 Astrolabe compared with equatorium 4 Uses 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Equatorium 11 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Astronomical calculating instrument For the region of South Sudan, see Equatoria .

Equatorium from Johannes Schöner An equatorium (plural, equatoria ) is an astronomical calculating instrument . It can be used for finding the positions of the Moon , Sun , and planets without arithmetic operations, using a geometrical model to represent the position of a given celestial body .

History [ edit ] In his comment on Ptolemy's Handy Tables , 4th century mathematician Theon of Alexandria introduced some diagrams to geometrically compute the position of the planets based on Ptolemy's epicyclical theory . The first description of the construction of a solar equatorium (as opposed to planetary) is contained in Proclus 's fifth-century work Hypotyposis , [ 1 ] where he gives instructions on how to construct one in wood or bronze.

[ 2 ] The earliest known descriptions of planetary equatoria are in the Latin translation of an early eleventh century text by Ibn al‐Samḥ and a 1080/1081 [ 3 ] treatise by al-Zarqālī , contained in the Libros del saber de astronomia ( Books of the knowledge of astronomy ), a Castilian compilation of astronomical works collected under the patronage of Alfonso X of Castile in the thirteenth century.

[ 2 ] The Theorica Planetarum (c. 1261–1264) by Campanus of Novara is the earliest extant description of the construction of an equatorium in Latin Europe.

[ 4 ] Campanus' instrument resembled an astrolabe, with several interchangeable plates within a mater. The best manuscripts of Campanus' treatise contain paper and parchment equatoria with moveable parts.

[ 2 ] Variations [ edit ] A 1600 equatorium, possibly from France The history of the equatorium does not just end after the 11th century, but it inspired a more diverse invention called “The Albion”. The Albion is an astronomical instrument invented by Richard of Wallingford at the beginning of the 14th century.

[ 5 ] It has various functional uses such as that of the equatorium for planetary and conjunction computations. It can calculate when eclipses will occur. The Albion is made up of 18 different scales which makes it extremely complex in comparison to the equatorium. The history of this instrument is still disputed to this day, as the only Albion from the past is both unnamed and unmarked.

[ 5 ] Astrolabe compared with equatorium [ edit ] The roots of the equatorium lie in the astrolabe . The history of the astrolabe dates back to roughly 220 BC in the works of Hipparchus .

[ 6 ] The difference between the two instruments is that the astrolabe measures the time and position of the sun and stars at a specific location in time.

[ 7 ] In contrast, the equatorium is used to calculate the past or future positions of the planets and celestial bodies according to the planetary theory of Ptolemy.

[ citation needed ] Uses [ edit ] The equatorium can further be specialized depending on the epicycle . There are three possible epicycles that can be adjusted to serve for planetary positions in three groups: the Moon, the stars, and the Sun. The Sun was considered a planet in the Ptolemaic system, hence why the equatorium could be used to determine its position.

[ 8 ] Through the use of Ptolemy's model, astronomers were able to make a single instrument with various capabilities that catered to the belief that the Solar System had the Earth at the center. In fact, specialized equatoriums had astrological aspects of medicine, as the orientation of planets gave insight to zodiac signs which helped some doctors cater medical treatments to patients.

At least 15 minutes was needed to calculate the planetary position with the use of a table for each celestial body.

[ 9 ] A horoscope of that era would have required the positions of seven astronomical objects, requiring nearly two hours of manual calculation time.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Equatorium .

Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrarium Astrolabe Astronomical clock Orrery Planetarium The Equatorie of the Planetis Torquetum References [ edit ] ^ Proclus (1909).

Hypotyposis Astronomicarum Positionum . Bibliotheca scriptorum Graecorum et Romanorum Teubneriana. Karl Manitius (ed.). Leipzig: Teubner .

^ a b c Evans, James (1998).

The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy . Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press . p. 404.

ISBN 978-0-19-509539-5 .

^ "Zarqali" .

islamsci.mcgill.ca . Retrieved 2018-05-09 .

^ Toomer, G. J.

(1971). "Campanus of Novara". In Gillispie, Charles Coulston (ed.).

Dictionary of scientific biography . Vol. III. New York: Scribner. pp.

23– 29.

ISBN 978-0-684-10114-9 .

^ a b Truffa, Giancarlo.

"The Albion of Rome. A unique example of Medieval Equatorium" .

^ "Third Solution: The Equant Point - SliderBase" .

www.sliderbase.com . Retrieved 2018-05-09 .

^ "the definition of astrolabe" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 2018-05-09 .

^ Colledge, Eric (1955). "The Equatorium of the Planets".

Blackfriars .

36 ( 424– 5): 276– 284.

doi : 10.1111/j.1741-2005.1955.tb00671.x .

JSTOR 43816789 .

^ Fosmire, Michael (2014). "Richard of Wallingford".

Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . Springer, New York, NY. pp.

1831– 1832.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4419-9917-7_1167 .

ISBN 978-1-4419-9916-0 .

Further reading [ edit ] Seb Falk's blog: making a planetary equatorium Portals : Astronomy Outer space Solar System Spaceflight Stars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Equatorium&oldid=1282367535 " Categories : Astronomical instruments History of astrology Historical scientific instruments Analog computers Arab inventions Mechanical calculators Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 March 2025, at 00:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Equatorium 11 languages Add topic

