Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Authorship 2 Content 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Rhetoric to Alexander 7 languages Español Français Íslenska Italiano 日本語 Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e The Rhetoric to Alexander (also widely known by its title in Latin : Rhetorica ad Alexandrum ; Ancient Greek : Τέχνη ῥητορική ) is a treatise traditionally attributed to Aristotle . It is now generally believed to be the work of Anaximenes of Lampsacus .

[ 1 ] Authorship [ edit ] Quintilian seems to refer to this work under Anaximenes' name in Institutio Oratoria , [ 2 ] as the Italian Renaissance philologist Piero Vettori first recognized. This attribution has been disputed by some scholars however.

Content [ edit ] As a complete Greek manual on rhetoric still extant from the fourth century BCE, Rhetoric to Alexander gives us an invaluable look into the rhetorical theory of the time. Aristotle did in fact write a work On Rhetoric at much the same time. The author claims to have based this treatise on the Techne of Corax and the Theodectea of Aristotle which may in fact refer to On Rhetoric seeing that Aristotle's work was not published until 83 BCE. The teaching of Aristotle on the matter was made available during his lectures and his lecturing notes was preserved after his death by his pupil, Theophrastus.

[ 3 ] The structure of Rhetoric to Alexander is quite similar to that of Aristotle's work.

[ 4 ] Chapters 1-5 deal with arguments specific to each of the species of rhetoric corresponding to the first book of Aristotle's work. Chapters 6-22 are about "uses" what Aristotle calls "topics", discussing them in the latter part of his second book. Chapters 23-28 discuss style which Aristotle discusses in the first half of his third book. And chapters 29-37 finally treat arrangement as discussed by Aristotle in the latter part of his third book. From this it is clear that both the Rhetoric to Alexander and Aristotle's On Rhetoric were using a structure common to rhetorical handbooks of the fourth century. 
In contrast to Aristotle, the author of Rhetoric to Alexander does not use examples illustrating his precepts. Because this treatise differs from Aristotle in some details it is sometimes thought to have stood in the tradition surrounding the person of Isocrates, but there is no clear evidence for this. The treatise Rhetoric to Alexander does not seem to have made a big impact on rhetorical studies at the time and is not often heard of afterwards. It only survived because it was thought to have been written by Aristotle.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Rhetoric (Aristotle) Rhetorica ad Herennium References [ edit ] ^ Chiron, P. (2010). "The Rhetoric to Alexander". In Worthington, Ian (ed.).

A Companion to Greek Rhetoric . John Wiley & Sons. p. 90.

ISBN 9781444334142 .

^ Quitilian, Institutio Oratoria 3.4.9 ^ Kennedy, George (1991).

Aristotle on Rhetoric: A Theory of Civil Discourse . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 305.

ISBN 0195064879 .

^ Kennedy, George (1994).

A New History of Classical Rhetoric . Princeton: Princeton University Press. p.

50 .

ISBN 069100059X .

^ Kennedy, George (1994).

A New History of Classical Rhetoric . Princeton: Princeton University Press. p.

51 .

ISBN 069100059X .

External links [ edit ] Greek text , edited by Immanuel Bekker , Oxford 1837 Greek text with Latin commentary edited by Leonhard von Spengel , Leipzig, 1847 English translations: Aristotle's Rhetoric to King Alexander (London, 1686); De Rhetorica ad Alexandrum , translated by E.S. Forster, Oxford, 1924 (beginning on p. 231 of the PDF file) Rhetoric to Alexander & On Virtues and Vices public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 4 National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Australia Spain Vatican Israel Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rhetoric_to_Alexander&oldid=1253286598 " Categories : Rhetoric Works by Aristotle Hidden categories: Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 25 October 2024, at 05:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rhetoric to Alexander 7 languages Add topic

