Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Selected publications 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Jerome Karabel 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American sociologist Jerome Bernard Karabel (born May 20, 1950) is an American sociologist, political and social commentator, and professor of sociology at the University of California, Berkeley .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] He has written extensively on American institutions of higher education and on various aspects of social policy and history in the United States, often from a comparative perspective.

Life and career [ edit ] Karabel graduated from Phillips Exeter Academy (1968).

[ 3 ] He holds a BA (1972) and Ph.D. (1977) from Harvard University , and also conducted postgraduate studies at Nuffield College at Oxford University in England and at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes in Paris, France. He has been a recipient of grants from the National Science Foundation , the National Institute of Education, and the Ford Foundation .  In 2009-2010, Karabel was a Fellow at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington DC, where he was working on a project entitled “American Exceptionalism, Social Well-Being, and the Quality of Life in the United States.” [ 4 ] Karabel is the author of The Chosen:  The Hidden History of Admission and Exclusion at Harvard, Yale, and Princeton (2005), which received the Distinguished Scholarly Book Award from the American Sociological Association .

[ 5 ] He is also co-author (with Steven Brint ) of The Diverted Dream:  Community Colleges and the Promise of Educational Opportunity in America, 1900-1985 (1989), which received the Outstanding Book Award from the American Educational Research Association .

[ 6 ] His research in the sociology of education explores notions of meritocracy , opportunity, access, and cultural capital in American higher education, and the role of the educational system in legitimating the existing social order.

In The Chosen , Karabel chronicles the admissions policies of Harvard, Yale, and Princeton over the course of the twentieth century, describing how new admissions criteria—including letters of recommendation, athletic and extracurricular achievements, and interviews, in addition to a student’s academic credentials—were first introduced in the 1920s in an effort to limit the number of Jewish students.  Such starkly redefined measures of “merit” were institutionalized at these and other elite institutions over time, even as these schools later adapted such admission policies in response to growing demands for greater democratization and diversity during the mid and latter half of the twentieth century.

[ 7 ] Karabel’s articles have been published in the American Sociological Review , Harvard Educational Review , Theory and Society , Social Forces , and Politics and Society among others.  He is also a contributor to publications such as The New York Times , The Huffington Post , The New York Review of Books , The Nation , The Los Angeles Times , and Le Monde Diplomatique .

Selected publications [ edit ] The Chosen:  The Hidden History of Admission and Exclusion at Harvard, Yale, and Princeton (Houghton Mifflin, 2005) (Winner of the 2005 National Jewish Book Award ).

"Towards a Theory of Intellectuals and Politics," Theory and Society 25, no. 2 (April 1996):  205-233.

The Diverted Dream: Community Colleges and the Promise of Educational Opportunity in America, 1990-1985 , with Steven Brint (Oxford University Press, 1989).

Power and Ideology in Education , co-edited with an introduction by A.H. Halsey (Oxford University Press, 1977).

References [ edit ] ^ Who’s Who in America 2009 , Vol. 1. Marquis, 2009.  p. 2544.

^ Jerome Karabel’s faculty profile on the Sociology Department website at the University of California at Berkeley http://sociology.berkeley.edu/profiles/karabel/pubs.php Archived 2010-06-14 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Pean .

Phillips Exeter Academy . 1968.

^ Biography of Jerome Karabel, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars [1] ^ “Jerome Karabel Award Statement,” American Sociological Association http://www.asanet.org/about/awards/book/karabel.cfm ^ “Outstanding Book Award – Past Recipients,” American Educational Research Association http://www.aera.net/AboutAERA/Default.aspx?menu_id=20&id=233 ^ Review of The Chosen by Malcolm Gladwell, “Getting In:  The Social Logic of Ivy League Admissions,” The New Yorker, October 10, 2005 http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2005/10/10/051010crat_atlarge External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Jerome Karabel .

Biography of Jerome Karabel, Berkeley Sociology Department Homepage Biography of Jerome Karabel, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars Review of The Chosen by Malcolm Gladwell, “Getting In:  The Social Logic of Ivy League Admissions” in The New Yorker (October 10, 2005) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jerome_Karabel&oldid=1294425567 " Categories : Living people 1950 births Harvard University alumni UC Berkeley College of Engineering faculty Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 17:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jerome Karabel 1 language Add topic

