Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Visual arts 2 Literature 3 Film 4 Music 5 Popular culture and other media 6 Linguistics 7 Rhetoric 8 History Toggle History subsection 8.1 Classical and Romance genre theory 9 Audiences 10 Subgenre 11 Microgenre 12 See also 13 References Toggle References subsection 13.1 Citations 13.2 Sources 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Genre 78 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Română Русский Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש Žemaitėška 中文 Ghanaian Pidgin Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wiktionary Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Category of creative works based on stylistic and/or thematic criteria For other uses, see Genre (disambiguation) .

Genre ( French for 'kind, sort') [ 1 ] is any style or form of communication in any mode (written, spoken, digital, artistic, etc.) with socially agreed-upon conventions developed over time.

[ 2 ] In popular usage, it normally describes a category of literature , music , or other forms of art or entertainment, based on some set of stylistic criteria, as in literary genres , film genres , music genres , comics genres , etc.

[ 3 ] Often, works fit into multiple genres by way of borrowing and recombining these conventions. Stand-alone texts, works, or pieces of communication may have individual styles, but genres are amalgams of these texts based on agreed-upon or socially inferred conventions. Some genres may have rigid, strictly adhered-to guidelines, while others may show great flexibility. The proper use of a specific genre is important for a successful transfer of information ( media-adequacy ).

[ 4 ] Critical discussion of genre perhaps began with a classification system for ancient Greek literature , as set out in Aristotle's Poetics .

[ 5 ] For Aristotle, poetry ( odes , epics , etc.), prose , and performance each had specific features that supported appropriate content of each genre. Speech patterns for comedy would not be appropriate for tragedy, for example, and even actors were restricted to their genre under the assumption that a type of person could tell one type of story best.
The academic discipline about genres is called genre studies (or genre theory ).

Genres proliferate and develop beyond Aristotle's classifications— in response to changes in audiences and creators.

[ 6 ] Genre has become a dynamic tool to help the public make sense out of unpredictability through artistic expression. Given that art is often a response to a social state, in that people write, paint, sing, dance, and otherwise produce art about what they know about, the use of genre as a tool must be able to adapt to changing meanings.

Among non-Western approaches, the five-category Cinematic Taxonomy proposed by Alireza Kaveh distinguishes genre from adjacent concepts such as style, format, medium, and tradition.

Visual arts [ edit ] A genre painting , The Peasant Dance , c.

1568 , by Pieter Brueghel the Elder The term genre is often used in the history and criticism of visual art, but in art history has meanings that overlap rather confusingly.

Genre painting is a term for paintings where the main subject features human figures to whom no specific identity attaches – in other words, figures are not portraits, characters from a story, or allegorical personifications. They usually deal with subjects drawn from "everyday life". These are distinguished from staffage : incidental figures in what is primarily a landscape or architectural painting. "Genre" is also be used to refer to specialized types of art such as still-life , landscapes, marine paintings and animal paintings, or groups of artworks with other particular features in terms of subject-matter, style or iconography .

The concept of the " hierarchy of genres " was a powerful one in artistic theory, especially between the 17th and 19th centuries. It was strongest in France, where it was associated with the Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture which held a central role in academic art . The genres, which were mainly applied to painting, in hierarchical order are: History painting , including narrative, religious, mythological and allegorical subjects Portrait painting Genre painting or scenes of everyday life Landscape painting (landscapists were the "common footmen in the Army of Art" according to the Dutch theorist Samuel van Hoogstraten ) and cityscape Animal painting Still life The hierarchy was based on a distinction between art that made an intellectual effort to "render visible the universal essence of things" ( imitare in Italian) and that which merely consisted of "mechanical copying of particular appearances" ( ritrarre ).

[ 7 ] Idealism was privileged over realism in line with Renaissance Neo-Platonist philosophy.

Literature [ edit ] Literature Oral literature Folklore fable fairy tale folk play folksong heroic epic legend myth proverb Oration Performance audiobook spoken word Saying Major written forms Book Drama closet drama Poetry lyric narrative Prose Nonsense verse Ergodic Electronic Long prose fiction Anthology Serial Novel / romance Short prose fiction Novella Novelette Short story Drabble Sketch Flash fiction Parable Religious Wisdom Prose genres Fiction Children's Encyclopedic Genre action adventure coming-of-age crime erotic fantasy horror military paranormal romance science fiction supernatural western Historical Realist Speculative Non-fiction Academic history philosophy Anecdote Epistle Essay Journalism Letter Life Nature Persuasive Travelogue Poetry genres Narrative Children Epic Dramatic Verse novel National Lyric Ballad Elegy Epigram Ghazal Haiku Hymn Limerick Ode Qasida Sonnet Villanelle Lists Epic Groups and movements Poets Dramatic genres Comedy Libretto Play historical moral Satire Script Tragedy Tragicomedy History Ancient Classical Medieval Modernist Postmodern Lists and outlines Outline Glossary Books Writers Movements Cycles Literary awards poetry Short story collection Lost literary work Lacuna Theory and criticism Sociology Magazines Composition Language Narrative Feud Estate Literature portal v t e Main articles: Literary genre and List of writing genres A literary genre is a category of literary composition. Genres may be determined by literary technique , tone , content , or even (as in the case of fiction) length. Genre should not be confused with age category, by which literature may be classified as either adult, young adult , or children's . They also must not be confused with format, such as graphic novel or picture book. The distinctions between genres and categories are flexible and loosely defined, often with subgroups.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The most general genres in literature are (in loose chronological order) epic , tragedy , [ 10 ] comedy , novel , and short story . They can all be in the genres prose or poetry , which shows best how loosely genres are defined. Additionally, a genre such as satire might appear in any of the above, not only as a subgenre but as a mixture of genres. Finally, they are defined by the general cultural movement of the historical period in which they were composed. In popular fiction , which is especially divided by genres, genre fiction is the more usual term.

In literature , genre has been known as an intangible taxonomy . This taxonomy implies a concept of containment or that an idea will be stable forever. The earliest recorded systems of genre in Western history can be traced back to Plato and Aristotle.

Gérard Genette , a French literary theorist and author of The Architext , describes Plato as creating three Imitational genres: dramatic dialogue, pure narrative, and epic (a mixture of dialogue and narrative).

Lyric poetry , the fourth and final type of Greek literature , was excluded by Plato as a non-mimetic mode. Aristotle later revised Plato's system by eliminating the pure narrative as a viable mode and distinguishing by two additional criteria: the object to be imitated, as objects could be either superior or inferior, and the medium of presentation such as words, gestures or verse. Essentially, the three categories of mode, object, and medium dialogue, epic (superior-mixed narrative), comedy (inferior-dramatic dialogue), and parody (inferior-mixed narrative).

Genette continues by explaining the later integration of lyric poetry into the classical system during the romantic period , replacing the now removed pure narrative mode. Lyric poetry, once considered non-mimetic, was deemed to imitate feelings, becoming the third leg of a new tripartite system: lyrical, epical, and dramatic dialogue. This system, which came to "dominate all the literary theory of German romanticism (and therefore well beyond)…" (38), has seen numerous attempts at expansion or revision. However, more ambitious efforts to expand the tripartite system resulted in new taxonomic systems of increasing scope and complexity.

Genette reflects upon these various systems, comparing them to the original tripartite arrangement: "its structure is somewhat superior to…those that have come after, fundamentally flawed as they are by their inclusive and hierarchical taxonomy, which each time immediately brings the whole game to a standstill and produces an impasse" (74). Taxonomy allows for a structured classification system of genre, as opposed to a more contemporary rhetorical model of genre.

Film [ edit ] Main article: Film genre The basic genres of film can be regarded as drama, in the feature film and most cartoons , and documentary . Most dramatic feature films, especially from Hollywood fall fairly comfortably into one of a long list of film genres such as the Western , war film , horror film , romantic comedy film , musical , crime film , and many others. Many of these genres have a number of subgenres, for example by setting or subject, or a distinctive national style, for example in the Indian Bollywood musical.

Music [ edit ] Main article: Music genre A music genre is a conventional category that identifies pieces of music as belonging to a shared tradition or set of conventions.

[ 11 ] It is to be distinguished from musical form and musical style , although in practice these terms are sometimes used interchangeably.

[ citation needed ] There are numerous genres in Western classical music and popular music , as well as musical theatre and the music of non-Western cultures. The term is now perhaps over-used to describe relatively small differences in musical style in modern rock music , that also may reflect sociological differences in their audiences.

[ citation needed ] Timothy Laurie suggests that in the context of rock and pop music studies, the "appeal of genre criticism is that it makes narratives out of musical worlds that often seem to lack them".

[ 12 ] Music can be divided into different genres in several ways. The artistic nature of music means that these classifications are often arbitrary and controversial, and some genres may overlap. There are several academic approaches to genres. In his book Form in Tonal Music , Douglass M. Green lists madrigal , motet , canzona , ricercar , and dance as examples of genres from the Renaissance period. According to Green, "Beethoven's Op. 61 and Mendelssohn's Op. 64 are identical in genre – both are violin concertos – but different in form. However, Mozart's Rondo for Piano, K. 511 , and the Agnus Dei from his Mass, K. 317 are quite different in genre but happen to be similar in form." [ 13 ] Some, like Peter van der Merwe , treat the terms genre and style as the same, saying that genre should be defined as pieces of music that share a certain style or "basic musical language".

[ 14 ] Others, such as Allan F. Moore, state that genre and style are two separate terms, and that secondary characteristics such as subject matter can also differentiate between genres.

[ 15 ] A music genre or subgenre may be defined by the musical techniques , the styles, the context, and content and spirit of the themes. Geographical origin is sometimes used to identify a music genre, though a single geographical category will often include a wide variety of subgenres.

Several music scholars have criticized the priority accorded to genre-based communities and listening practices. For example, Laurie argues that "music genres do not belong to isolated, self-sufficient communities. People constantly move between environments where diverse forms of music are heard, advertised and accessorised with distinctive iconographies, narratives and celebrity identities that also touch on non-musical worlds." [ 12 ] Popular culture and other media [ edit ] The concept of genre is often applied, sometimes rather loosely, to other media with an artistic element, such as video game genres . Genre, and numerous minutely divided subgenres, affect popular culture very significantly, not least as they are used to classify it for publicity purposes. The vastly increased output of popular culture in the age of electronic media encourages dividing cultural products by genre to simplify the search for products by consumers, a trend the Internet has only intensified.

Linguistics [ edit ] In philosophy of language , genre figures prominently in the works of philosopher and literary scholar Mikhail Bakhtin . Bakhtin's basic observations were of "speech genres" (the idea of heteroglossia ), modes of speaking or writing that people learn to mimic, weave together, and manipulate (such as "formal letter" and "grocery list", or "university lecture" and "personal anecdote"). In this sense, genres are socially specified: recognized and defined (often informally) by a particular culture or community. The work of Georg Lukács also touches on the nature of literary genres , appearing separately but around the same time (1920s–1930s) as Bakhtin.

Norman Fairclough has a similar concept of genre that emphasizes the social context of the text: Genres are "different ways of (inter)acting discoursally" (Fairclough, 2003: 26).

A text's genre may be determined by its: Linguistic function.

Formal traits.

Textual organization.

Relation of communicative situation to formal and organizational traits of the text (Charaudeau and Maingueneau, 2002:278–280).

Rhetoric [ edit ] In the field of rhetoric , genre theorists usually understand genres as types of actions rather than types or forms of texts.

[ 16 ] On this perspective, texts are channels through which genres are enacted. Carolyn Miller's [ 17 ] work has been especially important for this perspective. Drawing on Lloyd Bitzer 's concept of rhetorical situation, [ 18 ] Miller reasons that recurring rhetorical problems tend to elicit recurring responses; drawing on Alfred Schütz , [ 19 ] she reasons that these recurring responses become "typified" – that is, socially constructed as recognizable types. Miller argues that these "typified rhetorical actions" (p. 151) are properly understood as genres.

Building off of Miller, Charles Bazerman and Clay Spinuzzi have argued that genres understood as actions derive their meaning from other genres – that is, other actions. Bazerman therefore proposes that we analyze genres in terms of "genre systems", [ 20 ] while Spinuzzi prefers the closely related concept of "genre ecologies".

[ 21 ] Reiff and Bawarshi define genre analysis as a critical reading of people's patterns of communication in different situations.

[ 16 ] This tradition has had implications for the teaching of writing in American colleges and universities. Combining rhetorical genre theory with activity theory , David Russell has proposed that standard English composition courses are ill-suited to teach the genres that students will write in other contexts across the university and beyond.

[ 22 ] Elizabeth Wardle contends that standard composition courses do teach genres, but that these are inauthentic "mutt genres" that are often of little use outside composition courses.

[ 23 ] Genre is effective as a tool in rhetoric because it allows a speaker to set the context for a rhetorical discussion. Devitt, Reiff, and Bawarshi suggest that rhetorical genres may be assigned based on careful analysis of the subject matter and consideration of the audience.

[ 24 ] Genre is related to Ludwig Wittgenstein's theory of Family resemblance in which he describes how genres act like a family tree, where members of a family are related, but not exact copies of one another.

[ 25 ] History [ edit ] This concept of genre originated from the classification systems created by Plato . Plato divided literature into the three classic genres accepted in Ancient Greece : poetry , drama , and prose .

Poetry is further subdivided into epic , lyric , and drama . The divisions are recognized as being set by Aristotle and Plato ; however, they were not the only ones. Many genre theorists added to these accepted forms of poetry .

Classical and Romance genre theory [ edit ] The earliest recorded systems of genre in Western history can be traced back to Plato and Aristotle .

Gérard Genette explains his interpretation of the history of genre in "The Architext". He described Plato as the creator of three imitational, mimetic genres distinguished by mode of imitation rather than content. These three imitational genres include dramatic dialogue, the drama ; pure narrative, the dithyramb ; and a mixture of the two, the epic . Plato excluded lyric poetry as a non-mimetic, imitational mode. Genette further discussed how Aristotle revised Plato's system by first eliminating the pure narrative as a viable mode. He then uses two additional criteria to distinguish the system. The first of the criteria is the object to be imitated, whether superior or inferior. The second criterion is the medium of presentation: words, gestures, or verse. Essentially, the three categories of mode , object , and medium can be visualized along an XYZ axis. Excluding the criteria of medium, Aristotle's system distinguished four types of classical genres: tragedy , epic , comedy , and parody .

Genette explained the integration of lyric poetry into the classical system by replacing the removed pure narrative mode.

Lyric poetry , once considered non-mimetic, was deemed to imitate feelings, becoming the third "Architext", a term coined by Gennette, of a new long-enduring tripartite system: lyrical; epical, the mixed narrative; and dramatic, the dialogue. This new system that came to "dominate all the literary theory of German romanticism " (Genette 38) has seen numerous attempts at expansion and revision. Such attempts include Friedrich Schlegel 's triad of subjective form, the lyric; objective form, the dramatic; and subjective-objective form, the epic. However, more ambitious efforts to expand the tripartite system resulted in new taxonomic systems of increasing complexity. Gennette reflected upon these various systems, comparing them to the original tripartite arrangement: "its structure is somewhat superior to most of those that have come after, fundamentally flawed as they are by their inclusive and hierarchical taxonomy, which each time immediately brings the whole game to a standstill and produces an impasse".

Audiences [ edit ] Although genres are not always precisely definable, genre considerations are one of the most important factors in determining what a person will see or read. The classification properties of genre can attract or repel potential users depending on the individual's understanding of a genre.

Genre creates an expectation in that expectation is met or not. Many genres have built-in audiences and corresponding publications that support them, such as magazines and websites. Inversely, audiences may call out for change in an antecedent genre and create an entirely new genre.

The term may be used in categorizing web pages , like "news page" and "fan page", with both very different layout, audience, and intention (Rosso, 2008). Some search engines like Vivísimo try to group found web pages into automated categories in an attempt to show various genres the search hits might fit.

Subgenre [ edit ] A subgenre is a subordinate within a genre, [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Two stories being the same genre can still sometimes differ in subgenre. For example, if a fantasy story has darker and more frightening elements of fantasy, it would belong in the subgenre of dark fantasy ; whereas another fantasy story that features magic swords and wizards would belong to the subgenre of sword and sorcery .

Microgenre [ edit ] Main article: Microgenre A microgenre is a highly specialized, narrow classification of a cultural practice. The term has come into usage in the 21st century, and most commonly refers to music.

[ 28 ] It is also associated with the hyper-specific categories used in recommendations for television shows and movies on digital streaming platforms such as Netflix , and is sometimes used more broadly by scholars analyzing niche forms in other periods and other media.

[ 29 ] See also [ edit ] List of genres References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "genre" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 2022-09-22 .

^ Devitt, Amy J. (2015), Heilker, Paul; Vandenberg, Peter (eds.), "Genre" , Keywords in Writing Studies , Utah State University Press, pp.

82– 87, doi : 10.7330/9780874219746.c017 , ISBN 978-0-87421-974-6 , archived from the original on 2020-11-30 , retrieved 2021-02-04 ^ Miller, Carolyn R. (1984). " "Genre as Social Action" ".

Quarterly Journal of Speech .

70 (2): 151– 167.

doi : 10.1080/00335638409383686 .

^ Giessen, Hans W (2015). "Media-Based Learning Methodology: Stories, Games, and Emotions". In Ally, Mohamed; Khan, Badrul H. (eds.). International Handbook of E-Learning Volume 2: Implementation and Case Studies. Routledge, 43-54.

^ Aristotle (2000), Butcher, S. H. (ed.), Poetics , Internet Classics Archive, archived from the original on 2014-12-29 , retrieved 2021-04-27 ^ Todorov, Tzvetan (1976), " "The Origins of Genre" ", New Literary History , 8 (1): 159– 170, doi : 10.2307/468619 , JSTOR 468619 ^ Laura L., The Drama of the Portrait: Theater and Visual Culture in Early Modern Spain , p. 36, Penn State Press, 2008, ISBN 0-271-03304-5 , ISBN 978-0-271-03304-4 , Google books ^ Todorov, Tzvetan; Howard, Richard (1976). "The Fantastic: A Structural Approach to a Literary Genre".

The Slavic and East European Journal .

20 (2): 186– 189.

doi : 10.2307/305826 .

JSTOR 305826 .

^ Pavel, Thomas (2003). "Literary Genres as Norms and Good Habits".

New Literary History .

34 (2).

The Johns Hopkins University Press : 201– 210.

doi : 10.1353/nlh.2003.0021 .

JSTOR 20057776 .

S2CID 144429849 .

^ Bakhtin 1983, p. 3.

^ Samson, Jim.

"Genre" .

Grove Music Online . Retrieved 2023-01-25 .

^ a b Laurie, Timothy (2014).

"Music Genre as Method" .

Cultural Studies Review .

20 (2).

doi : 10.5130/csr.v20i2.4149 .

^ Green, Douglass M. (1965).

Form in Tonal Music . Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, Inc. p. 1.

ISBN 0-03-020286-8 .

^ van der Merwe, Peter (1989).

Origins of the Popular Style: The Antecedents of Twentieth-Century Popular Music . Oxford: Clarendon Press. p.

3 .

ISBN 0-19-316121-4 .

^ Moore, Allan F.

"Categorical Conventions in Music Discourse: Style and Genre" Archived 2018-10-01 at the Wayback Machine .

Music & Letters , Vol. 82, No. 3 (Aug. 2001), pp. 432–442.

^ a b Anis S. Bawarshi; Mary Jo Reiff (2010). "5. Genre in Rhetorical and Sociological Traditions, 6. Rhetorical Genre Studies".

Genre: An Introduction to History, Theory, Research, and Pedagogy . Parlor Press.

ISBN 9781602351738 .

Archived from the original on 2023-06-11 . Retrieved 2023-06-11 .

^ Miller, C. R. (1984). Genre as social action. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 70(2), 151–167.

^ Bitzer, L. F. (1968). The Rhetorical Situation. Philosophy and Rhetoric, 1(1), 1–14.

^ Schutz, A., & Luckmann, T. (1973). The Structures of the Life-World. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.

^ Bazerman, C. (1994). Systems of Genre and the Enactment of Social Intentions. In Genre and the New Rhetoric (pp. 79–101). London/Bristol: Taylor & Francis.

^ Spinuzzi, C., & Zachry, M. (2000). Genre Ecologies : An Open-System Approach to Understanding and Constructing Documentation. ACM Journal of Computer Documentation, 24(3), 169–181.

^ Russell, D. R. (1995). Activity theory and its implications for writing instruction. In J. Petraglia (Ed.), Reconceiving writing, rethinking writing instruction (pp. 51–78). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

^ Wardle, E. (2009). "Mutt Genres" and the Goal of FYC: Can we Help Students Write the Genres of the University? College Composition and Communication, 60(4), 765–789.

^ Cope, Emily; Ringer, Jeffery M. (2015).

Rhetorical Choices: Analyzing and Writing Arguments . Pearson. pp.

87– 98.

ISBN 9781269885805 .

^ Wittgenstein, Ludwig (2001).

Philosophical Investigations: The German Text, with a Revised English Translation . Blackwell. p. 23.

ISBN 9780631231592 .

^ "subgenre" .

dictionary.com .

^ "Subgenre" .

The Free Dictionary . Farlex.

Archived from the original on 2021-11-08 . Retrieved 2015-07-09 .

^ Patrick D. McDermott; Emilie Friedlander (October 8, 2015).

"A Recent History of Microgenres" .

The FADER . Illustration by Hisashi Okawa.

Archived from the original on 2017-04-04 . Retrieved 2020-02-21 .

^ O'Donnell, Molly C.; Stevens, Anne H., eds. (2020).

The microgenre: a quick look at small culture . New York: Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-5013-4584-5 .

OCLC 1139150914 .

Sources [ edit ] Aristotle (2000).

Poetics . Translated by Butcher, S. H. Cambridge, MA: The Internet Classics Archive.

Archived from the original on 2014-12-29 . Retrieved 2021-04-27 .

Bakhtin, Mikhail M.

(1983).

"Epic and Novel" . In Holquist, Michael (ed.).

The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays . Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.

ISBN 0-292-71527-7 .

Charaudeau, P.; Maingueneau, D. and Adam, J.

Dictionnaire d'analyse du discours . Seuil, 2002.

Devitt, Amy J. "A Theory of Genre".

Writing Genres . Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2004. 1–32.

Fairclough, Norman.

Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research . Routledge, 2003.

Genette, Gérard.

The Architext: An Introduction . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992. [1979] Jamieson, Kathleen M. "Antecedent Genre as Rhetorical Constraint".

Quarterly Journal of Speech 61 (1975): 406–415.

Killoran, John B. "The Gnome In The Front Yard and Other Public Figurations: Genres of Self-Presentation on Personal Home Pages". Biography 26.1 (2003): 66–83.

LaCapra, Dominick. "History and Genre: Comment".

New Literary History 17.2 (1986): 219–221.

Miller, Carolyn. "Genre as Social Action".

Quarterly Journal of Speech . 70 (1984): 151–67.

Rosso, Mark. "User-based Identification of Web Genres".

Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 59 (2008): 1053–1072.

Todorov, Tzvetan. "The Origins of Genre".

New Literary History 8.1 (1976): 159-170.

Further reading [ edit ] Pare, Anthony. "Genre and Identity".

The Rhetoric and Ideology of Genre: Strategies for Stability and Change . Eds. Richard M. Coe, Lorelei Lingard, and Tatiana Teslenko. Creskill, N.J.: Hampton Press, 2002.

ISBN 978-1572733848 .

Sullivan, Ceri (2007) "Disposable elements? Indications of genre in early modern titles", Modern Language Review 102.3, pp. 641–653.

External links [ edit ] Genre at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Wikidata has the property: genre (P136) (see uses ) Library resources about Genre Resources in your library Genres of film at the Internet Movie Database Helping Children Understand Literary Genres Archived 2021-10-16 at the Wayback Machine Rhetorica Genre Archived 2021-02-24 at the Wayback Machine Museum of Broadcast Communications Archived 2013-05-14 at the Wayback Machine Dictionary.com v t e Narrative Character Antagonist Archenemy Character arc Character flaw Characterization Confidant Deuteragonist False protagonist Focal character Foil Gothic double Hamartia Hero Anti Byronic Tragic Narrator Protagonist Stock character Straight man Supporting character Title character Tritagonist Villain Plot Ab ovo Action Backstory Origin story Chekhov's gun Cliché Cliffhanger Conflict Deus ex machina Dialogue Dramatic structure Eucatastrophe Foreshadowing Flashback Flashforward Frame story In medias res Kishōtenketsu MacGuffin Pace Plot device Plot twist Poetic justice Red herring Reveal Self-insertion Shaggy dog story Stereotype Story arc Story within a story Subplot Suspense Trope Setting Alternate history Backstory Crossover Dreamworld Dystopia Fictional location city country universe parallel Utopia Worldbuilding Theme Irony Leitmotif Metaphor Moral Moral development Motif Deal with the Devil Conflict between good and evil Self-fulfilling prophecy Time travel Style Allegory Bathos Comic relief Diction Figure of speech Imagery Mode Mood Narration Narrative techniques Hook Show, don't tell Stylistic device Suspension of disbelief Symbolism Tone Structure Act Act structure Three-act structure Freytag's Pyramid Exposition / Protasis Rising action/Epitasis Climax / Peripeteia Falling action/Catastasis Denouement/Catastrophe Linear narrative Nonlinear narrative films television series Premise Types of fiction with multiple endings Form Drama Fabliau Flash fiction Folklore Fable Fairy tale Legend Myth Tall tale Gamebook Narrative art Narrative poetry Epic poetry Novel Novella Parable Short story Vignette Genre ( List ) Fiction Action fiction Adventure Comic Crime Docu Epistolary Ergodic Erotic Historical Western Mystery Nautical Paranoid Philosophical Picaresque Political Pop culture Psychological Religious Rogue Romance Chivalric Prose Saga Satire Speculative fiction Fantasy Gothic Southern Horror Magic realism Science Hard Utopian and dystopian Underwater Superhero Theological Thriller Urban Nonfiction Autobiography Biography Novel Creative Narration Diegesis First-person Second-person Third-person Third-person omniscient narrative Subjectivity Unreliable narrator Multiple narrators Stream of consciousness Stream of unconsciousness Tense Past Present Future Related Dominant narrative Fiction writing Continuity Canon Reboot Retcon Parallel novel Prequel / Sequel Genre List Literary science Literary theory Narrative identity Narrative paradigm Narrative therapy Narratology Metafiction Political narrative Rhetoric Glossary Screenwriting Series of works Storytelling Tellability Verisimilitude v t e Film genres By style Action Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Art Biographical Comedy Action Black Commedia all'italiana Sexy Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated City symphony Direct cinema Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Video essay Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Erotic Category III films Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Black Body Cannibal Chinese horror Christmas horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo List of films Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Melodrama Korean Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Maximalist film Minimalist film Mumblecore Musical Arthouse Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Crossover Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography ( Malayalam ) Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Art Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Iyashikei Slow cinema Survival Thriller Comedy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cabrito Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Cute Girls Doing Cute Things Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Ero guro Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Space Suburban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBTQ Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Kaiju Mummy Vampire Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sageuk Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shoshimin-eiga Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel imaginary voyage Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Contemporary Western Dacoit Western Fantasy Florida Horror Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Science fiction Singing cowboy Space Spaghetti Weird Western Zapata Western By movement or period Absolute American eccentric cinema Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Moral Anxiety Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film d'art Film gris Free Cinema French Impressionist French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Golden Age of Argentine cinema Golden Age of Mexican Cinema Golden Age of Nigerian Cinema Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Indiewood Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Modernist film Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Objectivity New Queer No Wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Pan-Indian film Parallel cinema Persian Film Philippine New Wave Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi The Prague film school Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Slow cinema Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Taiwan New Cinema Telefoni Bianchi Thai New Wave Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Art Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Behind-the-scenes Black-and-white Blockbuster Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Direct-to-video ONA OVA Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage High concept Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking List of American independent films Interstitial art Live action animation Low-budget Major film studios Masala Maximalist film Message picture Meta-film Minimalist film Mockbuster Modernist film Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Slow cinema Socialist realist Sound Television film Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie Category v t e Lists of music genres and styles General lists Music genres and styles A–F G–M N–R S–Z Microgenres Uses accordion Genres Classical and art music traditions Electronic Ambient Breakbeat EDM Hardstyle House Industrial Techno Trance Popular Country Hip hop Jazz Reggae Rock Heavy metal Punk rock Hardcore punk Themes and movements Historically informed performance Martial Progressive Psychedelic Cultural and regional genres Caribbean Folk traditions American Central North South Asian Caribbean European Middle Eastern and North African Oceanic and Australian Sub-Saharan African Gamelan NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8h6br
Cached time: 20250816083351
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.665 seconds
Real time usage: 0.873 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2819/1000000
Revision size: 30954/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 162792/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3035/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 132880/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.390/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13937168/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  655.365      1 -total
 31.00%  203.161      1 Template:Reflist
 13.00%   85.198      1 Template:Langnf
 12.51%   81.964      1 Template:Literature
 12.36%   80.972      4 Template:Cite_web
 10.63%   69.696      1 Template:Cite_Merriam-Webster
  8.81%   57.757      1 Template:Sister_project_links
  8.41%   55.125      1 Template:Short_description
  6.43%   42.152      8 Template:Cite_book
  6.31%   41.337      3 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:44706:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816083351 and revision id 1298251294. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Genre&oldid=1298251294 " Categories : Genres Narratology Theme Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with Langnf omitting second positional parameter Articles containing French-language text Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2013 Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 10:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Genre 78 languages Add topic

