Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Occurrence in nature 2 Applications 3 Relation to PID controllers 4 Strain absement 5 Anglement 6 Phase space: Absement and momentement 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Absement 4 languages العربية Euskara فارسی 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Measure of sustained displacement of an object from its initial position Absement When an object moves, its motion can be described by the integrals of displacement, including absement, absity , abseleration , abserk , etc., as well as the derivatives of displacement, including velocity , acceleration , jerk , jounce , etc.

Common symbols A SI unit metre-second In SI base units m·s Dimension L T Part of a series on Classical mechanics F = d p d t {\displaystyle {\textbf {F}}={\frac {d\mathbf {p} }{dt}}} Second law of motion History Timeline Textbooks Branches Applied Celestial Continuum Dynamics Field theory Kinematics Kinetics Statics Statistical mechanics Fundamentals Acceleration Angular momentum Couple D'Alembert's principle Energy kinetic potential Force Frame of reference Inertial frame of reference Impulse Inertia / Moment of inertia Mass Mechanical power Mechanical work Moment Momentum Space Speed Time Torque Velocity Virtual work Formulations Newton's laws of motion Analytical mechanics Lagrangian mechanics Hamiltonian mechanics Routhian mechanics Hamilton–Jacobi equation Appell's equation of motion Koopman–von Neumann mechanics Core topics Damping Displacement Equations of motion Euler's laws of motion Fictitious force Friction Harmonic oscillator Inertial / Non-inertial reference frame Motion ( linear ) Newton's law of universal gravitation Newton's laws of motion Relative velocity Rigid body dynamics Euler's equations Simple harmonic motion Vibration Rotation Circular motion Rotating reference frame Centripetal force Centrifugal force reactive Coriolis force Pendulum Tangential speed Rotational frequency Angular acceleration / displacement / frequency / velocity Scientists Kepler Galileo Huygens Newton Horrocks Halley Maupertuis Daniel Bernoulli Johann Bernoulli Euler d'Alembert Clairaut Lagrange Laplace Poisson Hamilton Jacobi Cauchy Routh Liouville Appell Gibbs Koopman von Neumann Physics portal Category v t e Integrals and derivatives of displacement, including absement, as well as integrals and derivatives of energy , including actergy . (Janzen et al. 2014) In kinematics , absement (or absition ) is a measure of sustained displacement of an object from its initial position , i.e. a measure of how far away and for how long. The word absement is a portmanteau of the words absence and displacement . Similarly, its synonym absition is a portmanteau of the words absence and position .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Absement changes as an object remains displaced and stays constant as the object resides at the initial position. It is the first time- integral of the displacement [ 3 ] [ 4 ] (i.e. absement is the area under a displacement vs. time graph), so the displacement is the rate of change (first time- derivative ) of the absement. The dimension of absement is length multiplied by time . Its SI unit is meter second (m·s), which corresponds to an object having been displaced by 1 meter for 1 second. This is not to be confused with a meter per second (m/s), a unit of velocity , the time-derivative of position.

For example, opening the gate of a gate valve (of rectangular cross section) by 1 mm for 10 seconds yields the same absement of 10 mm·s as opening it by 5 mm for 2 seconds. The amount of water having flowed through it is linearly proportional to the absement of the gate, so it is also the same in both cases.

[ 5 ] Occurrence in nature [ edit ] Whenever the rate of change f ′ of a quantity f is proportional to the displacement of an object, the quantity f is a linear function of the object's absement. For example, when the fuel flow rate is proportional to the position of the throttle lever, then the total amount of fuel consumed is proportional to the lever's absement.

The first published paper on the topic of absement introduced and motivated it as a way to study 
flow-based musical instruments, such as the hydraulophone , to model empirical observations of some hydraulophones in which obstruction of a water jet for a longer period of time resulted in a buildup in sound level , as water accumulates in a sounding mechanism (reservoir), up to a certain maximum filling point beyond which the sound level reached a maximum, or fell off (along with a slow decay when a water jet was unblocked).

[ 1 ] Absement has also been used to model artificial muscles, [ 6 ] as well as for real muscle interaction in a physical fitness context.

[ 7 ] Absement has also been used to model human posture.

[ 8 ] As the displacement can be seen as a mechanical analogue of electric charge , the absement can be seen as a mechanical analogue of the time-integrated charge, a quantity useful for modelling some types of memory elements.

[ 4 ] Applications [ edit ] In addition to modeling fluid flow and for Lagrangian modeling of electric circuits, [ 4 ] absement is used in physical fitness and kinesiology to model muscle bandwidth, and as a new form of physical fitness training.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] In this context, it gives rise to a new quantity called actergy , which is to energy as energy is to power.  Actergy has the same units as action (joule-seconds) but is the time-integral of total energy (time-integral of the Hamiltonian rather than time-integral of the Lagrangian).
Just as displacement and its derivatives form kinematics, so do displacement and its integrals form "integral kinematics".

[ 9 ] Relation to PID controllers [ edit ] PID controllers are controllers that work on a signal that is proportional to a physical quantity (e.g. displacement, proportional to position) and its integral(s) and derivative(s), thusly defining PID in the context of integrals and derivatives of a position of a control element in the Bratland sense: [ 11 ] depending on the type of sensor inputs, PID controllers can contain gains proportional to position, velocity, acceleration or the time integral of position (absement)… Example of PID controller: [ 11 ] P, position; I, absement; D, velocity.

Strain absement [ edit ] Strain absement is the time-integral of strain , [ 3 ] and is used extensively in mechanical systems and memsprings. As Pei et al. describe: [ 3 ] ...

[but] these newer models deserve deeper study, in part because of a little-studied quantity called absement which allows mem-spring models to display hysteretic response in great abundance.

Anglement [ edit ] Absement originally arose in situations involving valves and fluid flow, for which the opening of a valve was by a long, T-shaped handle, which actually varied in angle rather than position.  The time-integral of angle is called "anglement" and it is approximately equal or proportional to absement for small angles, because the sine of an angle is approximately equal to the angle for small angles.

[ 12 ] Building on the concept of anglement, Einstein's Lane Method could be used to describe the spatiotemporal trajectory of systems involving rotational motion or angular displacement. Einstein’s Lane Method provides a framework for analyzing the curved paths of rotating objects or systems under the influence of gravitational fields, similar to how general relativity describes the bending of spacetime. This method would use angular displacements (rather than linear positions) as key variables, integrating them over time, much like the time-integral of angle in anglement.

Phase space: Absement and momentement [ edit ] In regard to a conjugate variable for absement, the time-integral of momentum, known as momentement, has been proposed.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] This is consistent with Jeltsema's 2012 treatment with charge and flux as the base units rather than current and voltage.

[ 17 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Mann, Steve; Janzen, Ryan; Post, Mark (2006).

Hydraulophone design considerations: absement, displacement, and velocity-sensitive music keyboard in which each key is a water jet . MM06: The 14th ACM International Conference on Multimedia. Santa Barbara, CA: Association for Computing Machinery. pp.

519– 528.

doi : 10.1145/1180639.1180751 .

^ Amarashiki (2012-11-10).

"LOG#053. Derivatives of position" .

The Spectrum Of Riemannium . Archived from the original on 2022-09-10 . Retrieved 2016-03-08 .

^ a b c Pei, Jin-Song; Wright, Joseph P.; Todd, Michael D.; Masri, Sami F.; Gay-Balmaz, François (2015).

"Understanding memristors and memcapacitors in engineering mechanics applications" .

Nonlinear Dynamics .

80 ( 1– 2): 457– 489.

doi : 10.1007/s11071-014-1882-3 .

S2CID 254891059 .

for example, a new concept and state variable called "absement," the time integral of deformation, emerge ^ a b c Jeltsema, Dimitri (2012). "Memory Elements: A Paradigm Shift in Lagrangian Modeling of Electrical Circuits".

IFAC Proceedings Volumes .

45 (2): 445– 450.

arXiv : 1201.1032 .

doi : 10.3182/20120215-3-AT-3016.00078 .

S2CID 119564676 .

Although time-integrated charge is a somewhat unusual quantity in circuit theory, it may be considered as the electrical analogue of a mechanical quantity called absement.

^ Maya Burhanpurkar .

Absement: Direct Evidence of the Time-Integral of Distance . Canada-Wide Science Fair 2014.

^ ROBUST CONTROL LAW FOR PNEUMATIC ARTIFICIAL MUSCLES, Jonathon E. Slightam and Mark L. Nagurka, Proceedings of the ASME/Bath 2017 Symposium on Fluid Power and Motion Control, FPMC 2017, October 16–19, 2017, Sarasota, USA ^ Effectiveness of Integral Kinesiology Feedback
for Fitness-based Games, Steve Mann, Max Lv Hao, Ming-Chang Tsai, Maziar Hafezi, Amin Azad, and Farhad Keramatimoezabad, 2018 IEEE Games, Entertainment, Media Conference (GEM), pages 43-50 ^ Postural strategy for mediolateral weight shifting in healthy adult, J Tousignant, C Cherriere, A Pouliot-Laforte, É Auvinet, Gait & Posture, 2018 - Elsevier ^ a b Janzen, Ryan; Mann, Steve (October 2014).

Actergy as a reflex performance metric: Integral-kinematics applications . 2014 IEEE Games Media Entertainment. IEEE. pp.

1– 2.

doi : 10.1109/GEM.2014.7048123 .

ISBN 978-1-4799-7545-7 .

^ "Integral Kinematics (Time-Integrals of Distance, Energy, etc.) and Integral Kinesiology", by Mann etal, in Proceedings of the IEEE GEM 2014, pp. 270-2.

^ a b Bratland, Magne; Haugen, Bjørn; Rølvåg, Terje (2014). "Modal analysis of active flexible multibody systems containing PID controllers with non-collocated sensors and actuators".

Finite Elements in Analysis and Design .

91 : 16– 29.

doi : 10.1016/j.finel.2014.06.011 .

^ Integral Kinesiology Feedbackfor Weight and Resistance Training, 2019 15th International Conference on Signal-Image Technology & Internet-Based Systems (SITIS), http://wearcam.org/sitis2019.pdf ^ Mann, S., Janzen, R., Ali, M. A., Scourboutakos, P., & Guleria, N. (2014, October). Integral kinematics (time-integrals of distance, energy, etc.) and integral kinesiology. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Games, Entertainment, Media Conference (GEM), Toronto, ON, Canada (pp. 22-24).

^ Mann, S., Defaz, D., Pierce, C., Lam, D., Stairs, J., Hermandez, J., ... & Mann, C. (2019, June). Keynote-Eye Itself as a Camera: Sensors, Integrity, and Trust. In The 5th ACM Workshop on Wearable Systems and Applications (pp. 1-2).

^ Biolek, Z., Biolek, D., Biolková, V., & Kolka, Z. (2021). Lagrangian and Hamiltonian formalisms for coupled higher-order elements: theory, modeling, simulation. Nonlinear Dynamics, 1-14.

^ Mann, S., Pierce, C., Zheng, B. C., Hernandez, J., Scavuzzo, C., & Mann, C. (2019, November). Integral kinesiology feedback for weight and resistance training. In 2019 15th International Conference on Signal-Image Technology & Internet-Based Systems (SITIS) (pp. 319-326). IEEE.

^ Jeltsema, Dimitri (2012). "Memory Elements: A Paradigm Shift in Lagrangian Modeling of Electrical Circuits".

IFAC Proceedings Volumes .

45 (2): 445– 450.

arXiv : 1201.1032 .

doi : 10.3182/20120215-3-AT-3016.00078 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Absement at Wikimedia Commons v t e Kinematics ← Integrate … Differentiate → Absement Displacement ( Distance ) Velocity ( Speed ) Acceleration Jerk Higher derivatives v t e Classical mechanics SI units Linear/translational quantities Angular/rotational quantities Dimensions 1 L L 2 Dimensions 1 θ θ 2 T time : t s absement : A m s T time : t s 1 distance : d , position : r , s , x , displacement m area : A m 2 1 angle : θ , angular displacement : θ rad solid angle : Ω rad 2 , sr T −1 frequency : f s −1 , Hz speed : v , velocity : v m s −1 kinematic viscosity : ν , specific angular momentum : h m 2 s −1 T −1 frequency : f , rotational speed : n , rotational velocity : n s −1 , Hz angular speed : ω , angular velocity : ω rad s −1 T −2 acceleration : a m s −2 T −2 rotational acceleration s −2 angular acceleration : α rad s −2 T −3 jerk : j m s −3 T −3 angular jerk : ζ rad s −3 M mass : m kg weighted position : M ⟨ x ⟩ = ∑ m x moment of inertia : I kg m 2 ML MT −1 Mass flow rate : m ˙ ˙ {\displaystyle {\dot {m}}} kg s −1 momentum : p , impulse : J kg m s −1 , N s action : 𝒮 , actergy : ℵ kg m 2 s −1 , J s MLT −1 angular momentum : L , angular impulse : Δ L kg m rad s −1 MT −2 force : F , weight : F g kg m s −2 , N energy : E , work : W , Lagrangian : L kg m 2 s −2 , J MLT −2 torque : τ , moment : M kg m rad s −2 , N m MT −3 yank : Y kg m s −3 , N s −1 power : P kg m 2 s −3 , W MLT −3 rotatum : P kg m rad s −3 , N m s −1 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Absement&oldid=1304483705 " Categories : Motion (physics) Vector physical quantities Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 08:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Absement 4 languages Add topic

