Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Rationale behind the new system 2 Permitted units 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Mesures usuelles 4 languages Afrikaans Français Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Old French measurement system Mesures usuelles ( French pronunciation: [məzyʁ yzɥɛl] , customary measures ) were a French system of measurement introduced by French Emperor Napoleon I in 1812 to act as compromise between the metric system and traditional measurements . The system was restricted to use in the retail industry and continued in use until 1840, when the laws of measurement from 1795 and 1799 were reinstituted.

[ 1 ] Rationale behind the new system [ edit ] The ordinary measures were introduced by Napoleon I in 1812.

In the five years immediately before the French First Republic introduced the metric system , every effort was made to make the citizens aware of the upcoming changes and to prepare them for it.

[ 2 ] The administration distributed tens of thousands of educational pamphlets, private enterprise produced educational games, guides, almanacs , and conversion aids, and metre standards were built into the walls of prominent buildings around Paris .

[ 2 ] The introduction was phased by district over the next few years, with Paris being the first district to change. The government also realised that the people would need metre rulers, but they had only provided 25,000 of the 500,000 rulers needed in Paris as late as one month after the metre became the sole legal unit of measure.

[ 2 ] To compensate, the government introduced incentives for the mass-production of rulers. Paris police reported widespread flouting of the requirement for merchants to use only the metric system.

[ 2 ] Where the new system was in use, it was abused, with shopkeepers taking the opportunity to round prices up and to give smaller measures.

[ 2 ] The mesures usuelles were abolished by Louis-Philippe I in 1839.

Napoleon I, the French Emperor, disliked the inconvenience of surrendering the high factorability of traditional measures in the name of decimalisation , and recognised the difficulty of getting it accepted by the populace.

[ 3 ] Under the décret impérial du 12 février 1812 (imperial decree of 12 February 1812), he introduced a new system of measurement, the mesures usuelles or "customary measures", for use in small retail businesses. However, all government, legal, and similar works still had to use the metric system and the metric system continued to be taught at all levels of education.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The prototypes of the metric unit, the kilogram and the metre , enabled an immediate standardisation of measurement over the whole country, replacing the varying legal measures in different parts of the country, and even more across the whole of Europe . The new livre (known as the livre métrique ) was defined as five hundred grams , and the new toise ( toise métrique ) was defined as two metres. Products could be sold in shops under the old names and with the old relationships to one another, but with metric-based and slightly changed absolute sizes. This series of measurements was called mesures usuelles .

Napoleon's decree was eventually revoked during the reign of King Louis Philippe I by the loi du 4 juillet 1837 (law of 4 July 1837), which took effect on 1 January 1840, and reinstated the original metric system. This brought the system of mesures usuelles to a legal end, [ 4 ] though the livre remains in some informal use to this day.

Permitted units [ edit ] The law authorised the following units of measure: [ 6 ] The toise (fathom) was defined as exactly two metres and was as before divided into 6 pieds (or "feet") or 72 pouces (inches). The pouce was divided into 12 lignes (or "lines"). The pied and pouce , at precisely 333.

3 mm and 27.

7 mm, were about 2.6% larger than the previous Parisian measures and 9% larger than their English counterparts.

The aune ( ell ), used to measure cloth, was defined as 120 centimetres, and divided into the demi aune (half an ell, or 60 cm) and the tiers aune (third of an ell, or 40 cm). It was 1.3% larger than l’aune de Paris (118.48 cm) and 5.0% larger than its English counterpart (45 inches; 114.3 cm).

[ 7 ] The litre was subdivided like a British quart , into demis (literally, "halves", being the equivalent of a pint of about sixteen fluid ounces ), quarts (literally, "fourths", being the equivalent of a cup of about eight fluid ounces), huitièmes (literally, "eighths"), and seizièmes (literally, "sixteenths", of about two fluid ounces).

The boisseau , ( bushel ), was redefined as being an eighth of a hectolitre and with associated measures double-boisseau , demi-boisseau and quart-boisseau (double, half, and quarter bushels respectively). The original boisseau , like the English bushel, varied depending on the commodity for which it was used, as well as the region where it was used.

The livre , ( pound ), was defined as 500 grams, divided into 16 onces , (ounces), each once being divided into 8 gros . Each gros being thought of as being composed of 72 grains , whose name is the same as in English. Hence, the livre was 9216 grains .

[ 8 ] The livre and once were about 10% larger than their English counterparts, while the grain was 17% less than its English counterpart.

The mesures usuelles did not include any units of length greater than the toise - the myriamètre (10 km) remaining in use throughout this period.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] French units of measurement History of measurement History of the metric system International System of Units List of unusual units of measurement Metric system Systems of measurement Units of measurement References [ edit ] ^ "History of measurement" . Métrologie française . Retrieved 2011-02-06 .

^ a b c d e Alder, Ken (2002).

The Measure of all Things - The Seven-Year-Odyssey that Transformed the World . London: Abacus.

ISBN 0-349-11507-9 .

^ Napoleon I (19 December 1809).

"Letter to Général Clarke, duc de Feltre" .

Correspondance de Napoléon Ier: publiée par ordre de l'empereur Napoléon III . Retrieved 2011-02-10 .

Je me moque des divisions décimales [I don't care about decimal divisions] ^ a b Denis Février.

"Un historique du mètre" (in French). Ministère de l'Economie, des Finances et de l'Industrie . Retrieved 2011-03-10 .

^ For example the engineering textbook, Stéphane Flachat (1835).

Traité élémentaire de méchanique industrielle . Paris . Retrieved 2011-02-17 .

^ Hallock, William; Wade, Herbert T (1906).

"Outlines of the evolution of weights and measures and the metric system" . London: The Macmillan Company. pp.

66– 69.

^ Thierry Sabot (1 October 2000).

"Les poids et mesures sous l'Ancien Régime" [The weights and measures of the Ancien Régime] (in French). histoire-genealogie . Retrieved 2011-02-10 .

^ a b Appell, Wolfgang (2009-09-16) [2002].

"Königreich Frankreich" [Kingdom of France].

Amtliche Maßeinheiten in Europa 1842 [Official units of measure in Europe 1842] (in German). Archived from the original on 2011-10-05 . Retrieved 2011-02-10 .

. (Website based on Alte Meß- und Währungssysteme aus dem deutschen Sprachgebiet , ISBN 3-7686-1036-5 .) v t e Systems of measurement Current General International System of Units (SI) UK imperial system US customary units (USCS/USC) Chinese Hong Kong Specific Apothecaries' Avoirdupois Troy Astronomical Electrical English Engineering Units (US) Natural Atomic Geometrised Heaviside–Lorentz Planck Quantum chromodynamical Stoney Background Metric Overview Outline History Metrication UK/US Overview Comparison Foot–pound–second (FPS) Historic Metric metre–kilogram–second (MKS) metre–tonne–second (MTS) centimetre–gram–second (CGS) gravitational Europe Cornish Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch English Winchester Exchequer Estonian Finnish French Traditional Mesures usuelles German Greek Byzantine Hungarian Icelandic Irish Italian Latvian Luxembourgian Maltese Norwegian Ottoman Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Scottish Serbian Slovak Spanish Swedish Swiss Welsh Asia Afghan Cambodian Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Mongolian Myanmar Nepalese Omani Pakistani Philippine Pegu Singaporean Sri Lankan Syrian Taiwanese Tatar Thai Vietnamese Africa Algerian Ethiopian Egyptian Eritrean Guinean Libyan Malagasy Mauritian Moroccan Seychellois Somali South African Tunisian Tanzanian North and Central America Costa Rican Cuban Haitian Honduran Mexican Nicaraguan Puerto Rican South America Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Paraguayan Peruvian Uruguayan Venezuelan Ancient Arabic Biblical and Talmudic Egyptian Greek Hindu Indian Mesopotamian Persian Roman List articles Humorous Obsolete Unusual Other Absolute scale N-body Modulor v t e Napoleon Napoleonic era timeline First French Empire Life and career Stay in Auxonne [ fr ] Coup of 18 Brumaire Consulate Assassination attempts Le souper de Beaucaire Constitutions 1799 1802 1804 1815 Napoleonic Wars Coronation Sale of Louisiana Planned invasion of the United Kingdom Holland Mesures usuelles Looting of art Tactics Weaponry and warfare 1st abdication 1st exile Route Napoléon 2nd abdication 2nd exile Death of Napoleon mask Battles and wars French Revolutionary Wars Siege of Toulon French Revolution 13 Vendémiaire Battle of Lodi Battle of Arcole Battle of Rivoli French campaign in Egypt and Syria Battle of the Pyramids Siege of Jaffa Battle of Marengo War of the Third Coalition Battle of Austerlitz War of the Fourth Coalition Battle of Jena War of the Fifth Coalition Battle of Wagram French invasion of Russia Battle of Borodino War of the Sixth Coalition Battle of Leipzig Battle of Vauchamps Battle of Arcis-sur-Aube Hundred Days Battle of Ligny Battle of Waterloo Views Catholic Church Concordat of 1801 Tiara Jewish people Grand Sanhedrin Infamous Decree Protestants Organic Articles Slavery Law of 20 May 1802 Saint-Domingue expedition Homes and honours Arc de Triomphe Hôtel Bonaparte Château de Malmaison Column of the Grande Armée Emperor Napoleon I Monument Equestrian statue Palace of Fontainebleau Hôtel des Invalides Longwood House Maison Bonaparte Napoleon as Mars the Peacemaker Milan Rue de la Victoire Vendôme Column Legacy and memory Bank of France Bonapartism Conseil d'État Cultural depictions "China is a sleeping giant" quote German Romanticism Memorial of Saint Helena Napoleonic Code Propaganda Tomb Retour des cendres Penis Studies Symphony No. 3 (Beethoven) Family Joséphine de Beauharnais (first wife) Marie Louise (second wife) Charles Léon (son) Alexandre Walewski (son) Napoleon II (son) Carlo Maria Buonaparte (father) Letizia Ramolino (mother) Joseph Bonaparte (brother) Lucien Bonaparte (brother) Louis Bonaparte (brother) Jérôme Bonaparte (brother) Caroline Bonaparte (sister) Pauline Bonaparte (sister) Elisa Bonaparte (sister) Category / Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mesures_usuelles&oldid=1260112883 " Categories : 1812 introductions Systems of units Science and technology in France Metrication in France Obsolete units of measurement Napoleon Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles containing German-language text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Pages with French IPA This page was last edited on 28 November 2024, at 22:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mesures usuelles 4 languages Add topic

