Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and contributions 2 Selected works Toggle Selected works subsection 2.1 Books 2.2 Articles and book chapters 3 References Toggle the table of contents Luc Anselin 3 languages Čeština Français مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American spatial econometrician This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This biography of a living person relies largely or entirely on a single source .

You can help by adding reliable sources to this article. Contentious material about living people that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately .

( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Luc E. Anselin (born December 1, 1953) is one of the developers of the field of spatial econometrics and the Stein-Freiler Distinguished Service Professor of Sociology and the College at the University of Chicago.

[ 1 ] Life and contributions [ edit ] Luc Anselin was previously the Regents' Professor, Walter Isard Chair and Director of the School of Geographical Sciences and Urban Planning at Arizona State University (ASU) where he attracted some of the leading spatial econometrics scholars. He also founded and directed the GeoDa Center for Geospatial Analysis and Computation at ASU to develop, implement, apply, and disseminate spatial analysis methods. In 2016, the GeoDa Center for Geospatial Analysis relocated to the University of Chicago.

[ 2 ] He held prior appointments at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign , University of Texas at Dallas , West Virginia University , the University of California, Santa Barbara and the Ohio State University . His joint appointments included a range of disciplines, including Geography, Urban and Regional Planning, Economics, Agricultural and Consumer Economics, Political Economy and Political Science.

In recent years, [ when?

] several national and international awards recognized Anselin's achievements, including his development of new spatial methodologies (e.g., local indicators of statistical association) and spatial software tools. The Regional Science Association International elected him as Fellow in 2004, and awarded him their Walter Isard Prize in 2005 and their William Alonso Memorial Prize in 2006. In 2008, Anselin was awarded one of the nation's highest academic honors by being elected to the National Academy of Sciences as well as to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 2012, Anselin was elected as a University Consortium for Geographic Information Science Fellow ( UCGIS ).

2008 marked the 20th anniversary of the book Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models that Anselin is best known for and that has been cited over 6,000 times. One of Anselin's achievements has been his contributions to moving the discipline of spatial econometrics from the margins in 1988 to current acceptance in mainstream econometrics, thereby advancing the econometric foundations of Geographic Information Science . His publications include several hundred articles and edited books (including New Directions in Spatial Econometrics in 1995 and Advances in Spatial Econometricsmin 2004) in the fields of Quantitative Geography, Regional Science, GIScience, Econometrics, Economics and Computer Science.

His development of spatial software further facilitated the establishment of spatial econometrics . Software tools include SpaceStat (spatial econometrics), GeoDa (exploratory spatial data analysis and spatial regression modeling), and collaborative efforts such as PySAL, an open source library of spatial analytic functions based on the Python programming language . GeoDa had over 56,000 users within six years of its creation.

A native of Belgium, Anselin graduated magna cum laude with a B.S. in economics in 1975 and summa cum laude with an M.S. in statistics, econometrics and operations in 1976, both from the Vrije Universiteit Brussel . Around this time, the origins of spatial econometrics began to take shape in economics departments in the Netherlands and geography/regional science departments in the UK. In 1977, he moved from Belgium to the U.S. to enroll in Cornell University 's interdisciplinary doctoral program in regional science. This provided the opportunity to work with Walter Isard and William Greene . He earned his doctorate in regional science in 1980.

Selected works [ edit ] Books [ edit ] L. Anselin, R. Florax and S. Rey (eds.), Advances in Spatial Econometrics. Methodology, Tools and Applications . Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2004.

L. Anselin and S. Rey (eds.), New Tools for Spatial Data Analysis: Proceedings of a Workshop . Center for Spatially Integrated Social Science, University of California, Santa Barbara, 2002 (CDROM).

S. Messner, L. Anselin, D. Hawkins, G. Deane, S. Tolnay, R. Baller, An Atlas of the Spatial Patterning of County-Level Homicide, 1960-1990 . Pittsburgh: NCOVR, 2000.

L. Anselin and R. Florax (eds.), New Directions in Spatial Econometrics . Berlin: Springer-Verlag,1995.

L. Anselin and M. Madden (eds.), New Directions in Regional Analysis: Integrated and Multiregional Approaches . London: Belhaven Press, 1990 (paperback edition, 1993).

L. Anselin, Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models . Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988.

Articles and book chapters [ edit ] L. Anselin, J. Le Gallo and H. Jayet. “Spatial Panel Econometrics,” In L. Matyas and P. Sevestre (Eds.), The Econometrics of Panel Data, Fundamentals and Recent Developments in Theory and Practice (3rd Edition). Dordrecht, Kluwer (2008).

L. Anselin, S. Sridharan and S. Gholston. “Using Exploratory Spatial Data Analysis to Leverage Social Indicator Databases: The Discovery of Interesting Patterns,” Social Indicators Research (2007).

L. Anselin and J. Le Gallo. “Interpolation of Air Quality Measures in Hedonic House Price Models: Spatial Aspects,” Spatial Economic Analysis 1(1), 2006: 31–52.

L. Anselin. “Spatial Econometrics,” In T.C. Mills and K. Patterson (Eds.), Palgrave Handbook of Econometrics: Volume 1, Econometric Theory . Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2006: 901–969.

L Anselin, I. Syabri and Y. Kho. “GeoDa: An Introduction to Spatial Data Analysis,” Geographical Analysis 38 (1), 2006: 5-22.

S. Rey and L. Anselin. “Recent Advances in Software for Spatial Analysis in the Social Sciences,” Geographical Analysis 38 (1), 2006: 1–4.

L. Anselin. “How (not) to Lie with Spatial Statistics,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 30 (2), 2006: S3-S6.

L. Mobley, E. Root, L. Anselin, N. Lozano, J. Koschinsky. “Spatial Analysis of Elderly Access to Primary Care Services,” International Journal of Health Geographics 5 (19), 2006.

L. Anselin. “Spatial Dependence,” In B. Warff (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Human Geography.

Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage Publications, 2006: 451–452.

L. Anselin. “Spatial Heterogeneity,” In B. Warff (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Human Geography.

Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage Publications, 2006: 452–453.

S. Messner, G. Deane, L. Anselin and B. Pearson-Nelson. “Locating the Vanguard in Rising and Falling Homicide Rates among U.S. Cities,” Criminology 43 (3), 2005: 661–696.

L. Anselin. “Spatial Statistical Modeling in a GIS Environment,” In D. Maguire, M. Goodchild and M. Batty (Eds.), GIS, Spatial Analysis and Modeling.

Redlands, CA, ESRI Press, 2005: 93–111.

A. Varga, L. Anselin and Z. Acs. “Regional Innovation in the U.S. over Space and Time,” In G. Maier and S. Sedlacek (Eds.), Spillovers and Innovation: Space, Environment and the Economy.

Vienna, Springer-Verlag, 2005: 93–104.

References [ edit ] ^ "Stein-Freiler Distinguished Service Professor of Sociology and the College; Director, Center for Spatial Data Science; Committee on Quantitative Methods in Social, Behavioral, and Health Science; Senior Fellow, NORC" .

The University of Chicago . University of Chicago Department of Sociology.

^ spatial.uchicago.edu.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus Google Scholar MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Luc_Anselin&oldid=1292669901 " Categories : Regional economists American geographers Belgian geographers Cornell University alumni Belgian statisticians 1953 births Living people Ohio State University faculty University of California, Santa Barbara faculty West Virginia University faculty University of Texas at Dallas faculty University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign faculty Arizona State University faculty Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Geographic information scientists American econometricians Economists from Arizona 21st-century American economists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations BLP articles lacking sources from August 2021 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from August 2022 This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 05:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Luc Anselin 3 languages Add topic

