Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Indigenous Women Stereotypes and Misconceptions 3 Issues and Crises Native American Woman Face 4 How Native Women Influenced the Women’s Rights Movement 5 Native American Feminists 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Native American feminism 3 languages فارسی Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of feminism Part of a series on Indigenous rights Rights Ancestral domain Cultural rights Intellectual property Land rights Language Traditional knowledge Treaty rights Water and sanitation Protection Governmental organizations ACHPR AID Arctic Council BIA CIP CIRNAC DTA FUNAI INPI JAKOA NCIP NIAA MCHTA TPK UNPFII United Nations initiatives 9 August UNPFII WIPO IGC BBNJ ABS Committee Indigenous Caucus International Treaties ILO 107 ILO 169 United Nations Declaration (UNDRIP) GRATK Anti-Biopiracy Treaty NGOs and political groups AFN Amazon Conservation Team Amazon Watch CAP COICA CONAECDA CONAIE Cultural Survival EZLN fPcN IPACC IPCB IWGIA Land Back NARF ONIC Survival International The Red Nation UNPO KAFFED more ...

Issues Aboriginal titles Biopiracy Civilizing mission Climate change Co-governance Discovery doctrine Discrimination Ecocide Genocide MMIW Indigenous decolonization Inhabited lands Indigenism Settler colonialism Truth commissions Uncontacted peoples Countries Argentina Australia Brazil Denmark Finland Malaysia Mexico Namibia New Zealand Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Suriname Tanzania Taiwan Venezuela United States Category v t e Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Native American feminism or Native feminism is, at its root, understanding how gender plays an important role in indigenous communities both historically and in modern-day. As well, Native American feminism deconstructs the racial and broader stereotypes of indigenous peoples, gender, sexuality, while also focusing on decolonization and breaking down the patriarchy and pro-capitalist ideology.

[ 1 ] As a branch of the broader Indigenous feminism , it similarly prioritizes decolonization , indigenous sovereignty , and the empowerment of indigenous women and girls in the context of Native American and First Nations cultural values and priorities, rather than white, mainstream ones.

[ 2 ] A central and urgent issue for Native feminists is the Missing and murdered Indigenous women crisis.

[ 3 ] Overview [ edit ] Native feminist Renya K. Ramirez, writes that, [ 2 ] [T]he word Native in the term "Native feminisms" [is used] in order to concentrate on our similar experiences as Native women all over the Americas. But whether one utilizes a tribal name, "indigenous," "Native," "First Nations" or another term, highlighting the heterogeneity is essential for appreciating the varied experiences Indigenous women experience. Indeed, similar to other women of color feminists, this diversity encourages individuals to argue for the development of multiple feminisms rather than a singular feminism.

Ramirez sees a goal of Native feminism as redefining and establishing the struggles of Native women in a field where "feminism" is generally assumed to mean " white feminism ".

[ 2 ] In her view, Native feminism is intersectional , and relationships between race, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, class and nations in North America from colonialism onward are to be reexamined as a means of understanding and identifying feminist praxis.

[ 2 ] Indigenous Women Stereotypes and Misconceptions [ edit ] Native American women continue to face racial and ethnic stereotypes due to the discourse caused by colonialism in the 15th century. Because of this, many misconceptions continue to permeate today that can cause extreme harm to indigenous women. One major stereotype of Native American women is the idea that they are promiscuous. Ideas of the “Indian Princess”, such as the story of Pocahontas, cause these ideas as it is built off of the idea that these women are submissive, but instead Native American women are powerful self-thinkers.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] With these misconceptions and stereotypes can cause much harm, such as rape and assault which only increase the statistics of the violence against Native American women”. In one piece written by Renya Ramirez, she states “one cannot be both Native and a feminist, because feminism is ultimately derived from white culture.” This statement exemplifies the term feminism in connection to the natives, representing the difference between mainstream feminism and Native feminism.

[ 6 ] Issues and Crises Native American Woman Face [ edit ] Historically and in present day, Native American women have faced and continue to face oppression and violence. Statistics show that Native American women are the most likely demographic among women to be killed due to domestic violence. Indigenous women continue to be harmed by being more likely to experience assault and stalking. Native American feminists are facing violence from the patriarchy, both within and outside of their communities. As well as this, these women face being victims to forced sterilization and abuse to their reproductive rights.

[ 7 ] A core issue in Native American Feminism is the missing and murdered Indigenous women (MMIW) crisis. The MMIW, “Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women”, movement advocates for the end of indigenous women that continue to be killed, assaulted, and stolen. Some statistics reveal that in 2016 alone, there were 5,712 cases of missing Native women. In accordance to these numbers, only 116 of these cases were logged into a database.

[ 8 ] Through this movement, Native American feminists are looking to amplify the rates in which indigenous women are being attacked and murdered in hopes to bring awareness to the injustice that they are facing. A red hand painted over one’s mouth has become the symbol of this movement to exemplify the violence and blood shed from the violence against indigenous women.

[ 9 ] Pressure from victims' families and their FNIM Indigenous communities finally led to the Canadian National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls , which concluded that there is an ongoing genocide against Indigenous women in Canada.

[ 10 ] Jennifer Brant and D. Memee Lavell-Harvard have written that the MMIW issues is often overlooked and not taken seriously [ by whom?

] because Indigenous women face systemic racial and gender oppression.

[ 11 ] Indigenous decolonization , as seen through the lens of Native American feminism, can involve the revitalization and reclamation of Indigenous matriarchal cultural traditions.

[ 12 ] Maile Arvin writes that during colonization white settlers imposed their heteropatriarchal practices onto Indigenous communities. Arvin states that Native American Feminists are reinforcing matriarchal processes through education and activism.

[ 12 ] Cultural baggage associated with the words "feminist" and "feminism" has led to some disagreement about what to call "Native feminism". Kate Shanley, an Assiniboine feminist, believes that most Native women see "feminism" as solely a white women's movement, and therefore do not want to be associated with the word.

[ 13 ] She goes on to say that feminism as a concept, however, by whatever name, has a special meaning to Native women, including the idea of promoting the continuity of tradition, and consequently, pursuing the recognition of Tribal sovereignty .

[ 13 ] [ 2 ] Tribal sovereignty is central to Indigenous feminism, as well a pivotal political concern in Indian country , with Native American self-determination considered foundational to both cultural and material survival.

[ 2 ] In Ramirez's view, in order to accomplish this, tribal sovereignty must be re-conceptualized from Native women's perspectives.

[ 2 ] Crystal Ecohawk writes, [ 14 ] Sovereignty is an active, living process within this knot of human, material and spiritual relationships bound together by mutual responsibilities and obligations. From that knot of relationships is born our histories, our identity, the traditional ways in which we govern ourselves, our beliefs, our relationship to the land, and how we feed, clothe, house and take care of our families, communities and Nations.

How Native Women Influenced the Women’s Rights Movement [ edit ] Before the modern feminist movement was apparent in society, indigenous communities had long before that been practicing female power. Indigenous communities often were inspired by the women in their tribes, and usually went to seek knowledge from them. Matriarchal views were more than typical in Native American communities, but as well focused on equality between genders. Additionally, indigenous communities recognized the idea of more than two genders long before it became recognized in modern society. Using inherent cultural practices, indigenous communities celebrated feminism before the term “feminism” was even used. During the 15th century, colonialism washed over the states and brought about many patriarchal ideas, which also included heteronormativity. With this came the attempt to persuade indigenous communities to instill this thinking, and this caused in emergence in feminism in later years.

[ 15 ] The modern term for feminism that most know today was brought about by white feminists in the 19th century. While at its core, feminism celebrates ideas of gender equality, Native feminists essentially started the ideas of society celebrating women. While these white feminists were fighting for their rights, Native American women were already being celebrated in their communities. Looking at the earliest modern feminist movements, Native American women were a major influence. Some of the most influential women in this movement were Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Matilda Joslyn Gage. These women noted many ways in which indigenous culture influenced their ideas of feminism, specifically giving note to the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) women who were observed living free lives in which they could do things such as own their own property or even play sports.

[ 16 ] Native American Feminists [ edit ] Leanne Simpson : Leanne Simpson is Mississauga Nishnaabeg activist and scholar. Simpson is also a writer and a poet, and she wrote many poems and books, including “A Short History of the Blockade”. In her writing, she talks about topics such as decolonization and recognizing the gender violence that indigenous women face. Throughout her life, she has been majorly involved in Native American feminist movements, such as the “Idle No More Movement” which is dedicated to creating awareness around the environmental justice and broken treaties that indigenous people are facing.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Audra Simpson : Audra Simpson is Mohawk scholar who is primarily focusing on issues of indigenous recognition in politics. She as well has written a book titled “Mohawk Interruptus: Political Life Across the Borders of Settler States” which explores how the Kahnawà:ke Mohawks fought to keep their sovereignty in response to the US and Canadian governments.

[ 20 ] Chrystos : Chrystos is a Menominee activist who is also a poet. Their poetry is defined through shared ideas of colonialism, genocide, and sexuality. One piece they wrote is titled “This Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical Women of Color”, and in this Chrystos is often seen calling back on spoken word and oral tradition.

[ 21 ] Sarah Deer : Sarah Deer is a Muscogee (Creek) lawyer and professor who continues to advocate for Native American women that have fall victim to violence and assault. She was a major influence to the reauthorization of the 2013 Violence Against Women’s Act which allows for easier prosecution of non-Native assaulters.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Cutcha Risling Baldy : Cutcha Risling Baldy is a Native American Associate Professor and Department Chair of Native American Studies at Cal Poly Humboldt. Risling Baldy's research focuses on indigenous feminisms, environmental justice, and decolonization. She has greatly impacted the advancement of Native culture through co-founding the Native Women's Collective. Her book on Native Feminisms and coming of age ceremonies has revitalized the Hupa tribe's coming of age ceremony.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Indigenous peoples of the Americas portal Feminism portal Indigenous feminism Missing and murdered Indigenous women Native Americans and women's suffrage in the United States Sexual victimization of Native American women Sterilization of Native American women References [ edit ] ^ "Indigenous Feminism Is Our Culture (SSIR)" .

ssir.org . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ a b c d e f g Ramirez, Renya (1 March 2007). "Race, Tribal Nation, and Gender".

Meridians .

7 (2): 22– 40.

doi : 10.2979/MER.2007.7.2.22 .

JSTOR 40314242 .

S2CID 146691825 .

Project MUSE 217600 .

^ McKenna, Cara (2 Dec 2016).

"Indigenous feminists strategize before MMIW inquiry - Advocates in Vancouver to hold last of three public meetings this weekend" .

Metro Toronto . Archived from the original on 16 October 2017 . Retrieved 15 Oct 2017 .

^ "It's Time To Bust Stereotypes of Native American Women as Princesses and Squaws" .

Bitch Media . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ Green, Rayna (1975).

"The Pocahontas Perplex: The Image of Indian Women in American Culture" .

The Massachusetts Review .

16 (4): 698– 714.

ISSN 0025-4878 .

JSTOR 25088595 .

^ Ramirez, Renya (2007).

"Race, Tribal Nation, and Gender: A Native Feminist Approach to Belonging" .

Meridians .

7 (2): 22– 40.

doi : 10.2979/MER.2007.7.2.22 .

ISSN 1536-6936 .

JSTOR 40314242 .

S2CID 146691825 .

^ "Native American Women and Coerced Sterilization" . Archived from the original on 2019-10-28 . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ "Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls Report" (PDF) .

^ "What is the MMIW Movement?" .

We R Native . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ Christina Maxouris (3 June 2019).

"Thousands of killed or missing Indigenous women and girls are victims of a 'Canadian genocide,' report says" .

CNN . Retrieved 2019-10-07 .

^ Brant, Jennifer; Lavell-Harvard, D.Memee (2016).

Forever Loved: Exposing the Hidden Crisis of Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls in Canada . Bradford, ON: Demeter Press. p. 35.

ISBN 978-1-77258-020-4 .

^ a b Arvin, Maile; Tuck, Eve; Morrill, Angie (2013). "Decolonizing Feminism: Challenging Connections between Settler Colonialism and Heteropatriarchy".

Feminist Formations .

25 (1): 8– 34.

doi : 10.1353/ff.2013.0006 .

JSTOR 43860665 .

S2CID 145588292 .

Project MUSE 504601 .

^ a b Shanley, Kate (1984). "Thoughts on Indian Feminism". In Brant, Beth (ed.).

A Gathering of Spirit: Writing and Art by North American Indian Women . Sinister Wisdom Books. pp.

213– 215.

ISBN 978-0-931103-00-1 .

^ Ecohawk, Crystal (1999). "Reflections on Sovereignty".

Indigenous Woman .

3 (1): 21– 22.

^ "How Native American Women Inspired the Women's Rights Movement (U.S. National Park Service)" .

www.nps.gov . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ "The Indigenous Roots of Modern Feminism" .

^ Simpson, Leanne.

A Short History of the Blockade: Giant Beavers, Diplomacy, and Regeneration in Nishnaabewin . University of Alberta Press.

^ Simpson, Leanne.

As We Have Always Done: Indigenous Freedom through Radical Resistance . Univ. of Minnesota Press.

^ Simpson, Leanne.

Dancing on Our Turtle's Back: Stories of Nishnaabeg Re-Creation, Resurgence and a New Emergence . Simon Fraser University Library.

^ Simpson, Audra.

Mohawk Interruptus: Political Life across the Borders of Settler States . Duke University Press.

^ Chrystos.

This Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical Women of Color . SUNY Press.

^ "15 Indigenous Feminists You Should Know" .

Bitch Media . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ Deer, Sarah.

The Beginning and End of Rape: Confronting Sexual Violence in Native America . University of Minnesota Press.

^ Risling Baldy, Cutcha (2018).

We are dancing for you : native feminisms and the revitalization of women's coming-of-age ceremonies . Seattle.

ISBN 978-0-295-74345-5 .

OCLC 1032289446 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Native_American_feminism&oldid=1305768673 " Categories : Native American feminism Indigenous Canadian feminism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2019 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 00:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Native American feminism 3 languages Add topic

