Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Cold-cathode devices Toggle Cold-cathode devices subsection 1.1 Lamps 2 Details 3 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 3.1 Effects of internal heating 4 References and notes Toggle References and notes subsection 4.1 Notes 4.2 Citations Toggle the table of contents Cold cathode 16 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский Simple English Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of electrode and part of cold cathode fluorescent lamp This article is about light sources and indicators. For cold cathode ion sources, see Ion source .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Cold cathode" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A set of cold cathode discharge tubes A cold cathode [ 1 ] is a cathode that is not electrically heated by a filament .

[ note 1 ] A cathode may be considered "cold" if it emits more electrons than can be supplied by thermionic emission alone. It is used in gas-discharge lamps , such as neon lamps , discharge tubes , and some types of vacuum tube . The other type of cathode is a hot cathode , which is heated by electric current passing through a filament . A cold cathode does not necessarily operate at a low temperature: it is often heated to its operating temperature by other methods, such as the current passing from the cathode into the gas.

Cold-cathode devices [ edit ] The stacked digit arrangement in a Nixie tube is visible here.

A cold-cathode vacuum tube does not rely on external heating of an electrode to provide thermionic emission of electrons. Early cold-cathode devices included the Geissler tube and Plucker tube , and early cathode-ray tubes .  Study of the phenomena in these devices led to the discovery of the electron.

Neon lamps are used both to produce light as indicators and for special-purpose illumination, and also as circuit elements displaying negative resistance . Addition of a trigger electrode to a device allowed the glow discharge to be initiated by an external control circuit; Bell Laboratories developed a "trigger tube" cold-cathode device in 1936.

[ 2 ] Many types of cold-cathode switching tube were developed, including various types of thyratron , the krytron , cold-cathode displays ( Nixie tube ) and others.

Voltage regulator tubes rely on the relatively constant voltage of a glow discharge over a range of current and were used to stabilize power-supply voltages in tube-based instruments. A Dekatron is a cold-cathode tube with multiple electrodes that is used for counting.  Each time a pulse is applied to a control electrode, a glow discharge moves to a step electrode; by providing ten electrodes in each tube and cascading the tubes, a counter system can be developed and the count observed by the position of the glow discharges. Counter tubes were used widely before development of integrated circuit counter devices.

The flash tube is a cold-cathode device filled with xenon gas, used to produce an intense short pulse of light for photography or to act as a stroboscope to examine the motion of moving parts.

Lamps [ edit ] Cold-cathode lamps include cold-cathode fluorescent lamps (CCFLs) and neon lamps . Neon lamps primarily rely on excitation of gas molecules to emit light; CCFLs use a discharge in mercury vapor to develop ultraviolet light, which in turn causes a fluorescent coating on the inside of the lamp to emit visible light.

Cold-cathode fluorescent lamps were used for backlighting of LCDs , for example computer monitors and television screens.

In the lighting industry, “cold cathode” historically refers to luminous tubing larger than 20 mm in diameter and operating on a current of 120 to 240 milliamperes. This larger-diameter tubing is often used for interior alcove and general lighting.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The term "neon lamp" refers to tubing that is smaller than 15 mm in diameter [ citation needed ] and typically operates at approximately 40 milliamperes.  These lamps are commonly used for neon signs.

Details [ edit ] The cathode is the negative electrode. Any gas-discharge lamp has a positive (anode) and a negative electrode. Both electrodes alternate between acting as an anode and a cathode when these devices run with alternating current .

A standard computer case fitted with blue and green cold-cathode tubes Cold-cathode fluorescent lamp backlight A cold cathode is distinguished from a hot cathode that is heated to induce thermionic emission of electrons . Discharge tubes with hot cathodes have an envelope filled with low-pressure gas and containing two electrodes. Hot cathode devices include common vacuum tubes , fluorescent lamps , high-pressure discharge lamps and vacuum fluorescent displays .

The surface of cold cathodes can emit secondary electrons at a ratio greater than unity (breakdown).  An electron that leaves the cathode will collide with neutral gas molecules.  The collision may just excite the molecule, but sometimes it will knock an electron free to create a positive ion.  The original electron and the freed electron continue toward the anode and may create more positive ions (see Townsend avalanche ). The result is for each electron that leaves the cathode, several positive ions are generated that eventually crash onto the cathode. Some crashing positive ions may generate a secondary electron. The discharge is self-sustaining when for each electron that leaves the cathode, enough positive ions hit the cathode to free, on average, another electron. External circuitry limits the discharge current.  Cold-cathode discharge lamps use higher voltages than hot-cathode ones. The resulting strong electric field near the cathode accelerates ions to a sufficient velocity to create free electrons from the cathode material.

Another mechanism to generate free electrons from a cold metallic surface is field electron emission . It is used in some x-ray tubes , the field-electron microscope (FEM), and field-emission displays (FEDs).

Cold cathodes sometimes have a rare-earth coating to enhance electron emission. Some types contain a source of beta radiation to start ionization of the gas that fills the tube.

[ 5 ] In some tubes, glow discharge around the cathode is usually minimized; instead there is a so-called positive column, filling the tube.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ note 2 ] Examples are the neon lamp and nixie tubes . Nixie tubes too are cold-cathode neon displays that are in-line, but not in-plane, display devices.

Cold-cathode devices typically use a complex high-voltage power supply with some mechanism for limiting current. Although creating the initial space charge and the first arc of current through the tube may require a very high voltage, once the tube begins to heat up, the electrical resistance drops, thus increasing the electric current through the lamp. To offset this effect and maintain normal operation, the supply voltage is gradually lowered. In the case of tubes with an ionizing gas, the gas can become a very hot plasma , and electrical resistance is greatly reduced. If operated from a simple power supply without current limiting, this reduction in resistance would lead to damage to the power supply and overheating of the tube electrodes.

Applications [ edit ] A photo of an illuminated compact fluorescent lamp (CFL) of the cold-cathode variety An illuminated cold-cathode CFL Cold cathodes are used in cold-cathode rectifiers , such as the crossatron and mercury-arc valves , and cold-cathode amplifiers , such as in automatic message accounting and other pseudospark switching applications. Other examples include the thyratron , krytron , sprytron , and ignitron tubes.

A common cold-cathode application is in neon signs and other locations where the ambient temperature is likely to drop well below freezing, The Clock Tower, Palace of Westminster (Big Ben) uses cold-cathode lighting behind the clock faces where continual striking and failure to strike in cold weather would be undesirable. Large cold-cathode fluorescent lamps (CCFLs) have been produced in the past and are still used today when shaped, long-life linear light sources are required. As of 2011 [update] , miniature CCFLs were extensively used as backlights for computer and television liquid-crystal displays . CCFL lifespans vary in LCD televisions depending on transient voltage surges and temperature levels in usage environments.

Due to its efficiency, CCFL technology has expanded into room lighting. Costs are similar to those of traditional fluorescent lighting , [ clarification needed ] but with several advantages: it has a long life, the light emitted is easier on the eyes [ clarify ] , bulbs turn on instantly to full output and are also dimmable.

[ 8 ] Effects of internal heating [ edit ] In systems using alternating current but without separate anode structures, the electrodes alternate as anodes and cathodes, and the impinging electrons can cause substantial localized heating, often to red heat . The electrode may take advantage of this heating to facilitate the thermionic emission of electrons when it is acting as a cathode. ( Instant-start fluorescent lamps employ this aspect; they start as cold-cathode devices, but soon localized heating of the fine tungsten -wire cathodes causes them to operate in the same mode as hot-cathode lamps.) This aspect is problematic in the case of backlights used for LCD TV displays. New energy-efficiency regulations being proposed in many countries will require variable backlighting; variable backlighting also improves the perceived contrast range, which is desirable for LCD TV sets. However, CCFLs are strictly limited in the degree to which they can be dimmed, both because a lower plasma current will lower the temperature of the cathode, causing erratic operation, and because running the cathode at too low a temperature drastically shortens the life of the lamps.

[ citation needed ] Much research is being directed to this problem, but high-end manufacturers are now turning to high-efficiency white LEDs as a better solution.

[ citation needed ] References and notes [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ A negatively charged electrode emits electrons or is the positively charged terminal. For more, see field emission .

^ Positive column is part of a glow discharge, such as in the Moore lamp .

Citations [ edit ] ^ U.S. patent 1,993,187 , Cold cathode discharge tube ^ D. M. Neale, Cold Cathode Tube Circuit Design , Francis and Taylor, 1964. pp. 1–7.

^ "Ifay guide info electric discharge lighting systems, cold cathode" .

^ "EGL lighting products" . Archived from the original on October 26, 2010 . Retrieved 9 February 2011 .

^ U.S. patent 1,860,149 , Discharge tube.

^ U.S. patent 2,103,033 , Electron emissive electrode.

^ U.S. patent 1,316,967 , Gaseous-conduction lamp.

^ Solé Lighting (commercial site advocating CCFLs).

v t e Lighting Concepts Accent lighting Color rendering index Color temperature Electric light Glare Light fixture Light pollution Hawaii Hong Kong Lightbulb socket Bi-pin lamp base Edison screw Luminous efficacy Task lighting Methods of generation Incandescent Regular Edison Halogen Nernst Luminescent Cathodoluminescent Electron-stimulated Chemiluminescent Electrochemiluminescence Electroluminescent field-induced polymer Fluorescent Fluorescent lamp ( compact ) Fluorescent induction Photoluminescent Laser headlamp Radioluminescence Solid-state LED lamp Combustion Acetylene/Carbide Argand Campfire Candle Carcel Diya Flare Gas Kerosene Petromax Lantern Fanous Paper Limelight Luchina Magnesium torch Oil Qulliq Rushlight Safety Tilley Torch Electric arc Carbon arc Klieg light Yablochkov candle Gas discharge Deuterium arc Neon Neon lamp Plasma Sulfur Xenon arc Xenon flash High-intensity discharge (HID) Mercury-vapor Metal-halide ceramic Hydrargyrum medium-arc iodide (HMI) Hydrargyrum quartz iodide (HQI) Sodium vapor Stationary Reflector Ellipsoidal reflector Multifaceted reflector Parabolic aluminized reflector (PAR) Aviation obstruction Balanced-arm lamp Chandelier Emergency light Gas lighting Gooseneck lamp Intelligent street lighting Light tube Marine aid to navigation light Nightlight Neon lighting Pendant light Recessed light Sconce Street light in the US Torchère Track lighting Troffer Portable Bicycle lighting Flashlight Mechanically powered Tactical Glow stick Headlamp outdoor Lantern Laser pointer Navigation light Searchlight Solar lamp Automotive Automotive light bulb types Daytime running lamp Headlamp hidden high-intensity discharge sealed beam Rear position lights Reversing lights Safety reflector retroreflector Stop lights Turn signals trafficators Display Decorative Aroma lamp Blacklight Bubble light Christmas lights Crackle tube DJ lighting Electroluminescent wire Lava lamp Marquee Plasma globe Strobe light Theatrical Cinematic Floodlight Footlight Gobo Scoop Spotlight ellipsoidal reflector Stage lighting instrument Industrial Scientific Germicidal Grow light Infrared lamp Stroboscope Tanning Related topics Battlefield illumination Bioluminescence Laser Light art Luminous gemstones Signal lamp Sources Reflected v t e Electronic components Semiconductor devices MOS transistors Transistor NMOS PMOS BiCMOS BioFET Chemical field-effect transistor (ChemFET) Complementary MOS (CMOS) Depletion-load NMOS Fin field-effect transistor (FinFET) Floating-gate MOSFET (FGMOS) Insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGBT) ISFET LDMOS MOS field-effect transistor (MOSFET) Multi-gate field-effect transistor (MuGFET) Power MOSFET Thin-film transistor (TFT) VMOS UMOS Other transistors Bipolar junction transistor (BJT) Darlington transistor Diffused junction transistor Field-effect transistor (FET) Junction Gate FET (JFET) Organic FET (OFET) Light-emitting transistor (LET) Organic LET (OLET) Pentode transistor Point-contact transistor Programmable unijunction transistor (PUT) Static induction transistor (SIT) Tetrode transistor Unijunction transistor (UJT) Diodes Avalanche diode Constant-current diode (CLD, CRD) Gunn diode Laser diode (LD) Light-emitting diode (LED) Organic light-emitting diode (OLED) Photodiode PIN diode Schottky diode Step recovery diode Zener diode Other devices Printed electronics Printed circuit board DIAC Heterostructure barrier varactor Integrated circuit (IC) Hybrid integrated circuit Light emitting capacitor (LEC) Memistor Memristor Memtransistor Memory cell Metal-oxide varistor (MOV) Mixed-signal integrated circuit MOS integrated circuit (MOS IC) Organic semiconductor Photodetector Quantum circuit RF CMOS Silicon controlled rectifier (SCR) Solaristor Static induction thyristor (SITh) Three-dimensional integrated circuit (3D IC) Thyristor Trancitor TRIAC Varicap Voltage regulators Linear regulator Low-dropout regulator Switching regulator Buck Boost Buck–boost Split-pi Ćuk SEPIC Charge pump Switched capacitor Vacuum tubes Acorn tube Audion Beam tetrode Barretter Compactron Diode Fleming valve Neutron tube Nonode Nuvistor Pentagrid (Hexode, Heptode, Octode) Pentode Photomultiplier Phototube Tetrode Triode Vacuum tubes ( RF ) Backward-wave oscillator (BWO) Cavity magnetron Crossed-field amplifier (CFA) Gyrotron Inductive output tube (IOT) Klystron Maser Sutton tube Traveling-wave tube (TWT) X-ray tube Cathode-ray tubes Beam deflection tube Charactron Iconoscope Magic eye tube Monoscope Selectron tube Storage tube Trochotron Video camera tube Williams tube Gas-filled tubes Cold cathode Crossatron Dekatron Ignitron Krytron Mercury-arc valve Neon lamp Nixie tube Thyratron Trigatron Voltage-regulator tube Adjustable Potentiometer digital Variable capacitor Varicap Passive Connector audio and video electrical power RF Electrolytic detector Ferrite Antifuse Fuse resettable eFUSE Resistor Switch Thermistor Transformer Varistor Wire Wollaston wire Reactive Capacitor types Ceramic resonator Crystal oscillator Inductor Parametron Relay reed relay mercury relay Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐tr2m7
Cached time: 20250812024801
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.366 seconds
Real time usage: 0.518 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2477/1000000
Revision size: 12083/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 99138/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4480/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 44368/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.206/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6841701/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  399.916      1 -total
 22.96%   91.803      2 Template:Reflist
 21.80%   87.166      4 Template:Navbox
 19.42%   77.649      1 Template:Artificial_light_sources
 16.83%   67.298      2 Template:Cite_web
 15.29%   61.140      1 Template:Short_description
 13.17%   52.677      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 11.73%   46.926      1 Template:Ambox
  8.76%   35.023      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.82%   27.272      3 Template:Hlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:169146:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812024801 and revision id 1297205140. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cold_cathode&oldid=1297205140 " Categories : Electrodes Gas discharge lamps Types of lamp Vacuum Vacuum tubes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2008 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2011 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 19:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cold cathode 16 languages Add topic

