Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General 2 Ecological factors influencing soil formation 3 Biorhexistasy theory 4 Perturbations of the balance of a soil 5 Influence of human activity 6 Consequences of soil regression and degradation 7 Soil enhancement, rebuilding, and regeneration 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Soil retrogression and degradation 18 languages Afrikaans العربية Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Nederlands Português Српски / srpski தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Two processes associated with loss of stable soil equilibrium Soil retrogression and degradation are two regressive evolution processes associated with the loss of equilibrium of a stable soil . Retrogression is primarily due to soil erosion and corresponds to a phenomenon where succession reverts the land to its natural physical state.  Degradation or pedolysis is an evolution, different from natural evolution, related to the local climate and vegetation .

[ 1 ] It is due to the replacement of primary plant communities (known as climax vegetation ) by the secondary communities. This replacement modifies the humus composition and amount, and affects the formation of the soil . It is directly related to human activity. Soil degradation may also be viewed as any change or ecological disturbance to the soil perceived to be deleterious or undesirable.

[ 2 ] According to the Center for Development Research at the University of Bonn and the International Food Policy Research Institute in Washington, the quality of 33% of pastureland, 25% of arable land and 23% of forests has deteriorated globally over the last 30 years. 3.2 billion people are dependent on this land.

[ 3 ] General [ edit ] At the beginning of soil formation, the bare rock outcrops are gradually colonized by pioneer species ( lichens and mosses ).

[ 4 ] They are succeeded by herbaceous vegetation, shrubs, and finally forest . In parallel, the first humus -bearing horizon is formed (the A horizon), followed by some mineral horizons (B horizons). Each successive stage is characterized by a certain association of soil/vegetation and environment, which defines an ecosystem .

Intensive tillage result on soil degradation Willow hedge strengthened with fascines for the limitation of runoff, northern France After a certain time of parallel evolution between the ground and the vegetation, a state of steady balance is reached. This stage of development is called climax by some ecologists and "natural potential" by others. Succession is the evolution towards climax.

[ 5 ] Regardless of its name, the equilibrium stage of primary succession is the highest natural form of development that the environmental factors are capable of producing.

The cycles of evolution of soils have very variable durations, between tens, hundreds, or thousands of years for quickly evolving soils (A horizon only) to more than a million years for slowly developing soils. The same soil may achieve several successive steady state conditions during its existence, as exhibited by the Pygmy forest sequence in Mendocino County, California. Soils naturally reach a state of high productivity , from which they naturally degrade as mineral nutrients are removed from the soil system. Thus older soils are more vulnerable to the effects of induced retrogression and degradation.

[ 6 ] Ecological factors influencing soil formation [ edit ] There are two types of ecological factors influencing the evolution of a soil (through alteration and humification ). These two factors are extremely significant to explain the evolution of soils of short development.

A first type of factor is the average climate of an area and the vegetation which is associated ( biome ).

A second type of factor is more local, and is related to the original rock and local drainage . This type of factor explains appearance of specialized associations (ex peat bogs).

Biorhexistasy theory [ edit ] Main article: biorhexistasy The destruction of the vegetation implies the destruction of evoluted soils, or a regressive evolution. Cycles of succession-regression of soils follow one another within short intervals of time (human actions) or long intervals of time (climate variations).

The climate role in the deterioration of the rocks and the formation of soils lead to the formulation of the theory of the biorhexistasy.

In wet climate, the conditions are favorable to the deterioration of the rocks (mostly chemically), the development of the vegetation and the formation of soils;  this period favorable to life is called biostasy.

In dry climate, the rocks exposed are mostly subjected to mechanical disintegration which produces coarse detrital materials: this is referred to as rhexistasy.

Perturbations of the balance of a soil [ edit ] When the state of balance, characterized by the ecosystem climax is reached, it tends to be maintained stable in the course of time. The vegetation installed on the ground provides the humus and ensures the ascending circulation of the matters. It protects the ground from erosion by playing the role of barrier (for example, protection from water and wind ). Plants can also reduce erosion by binding the particles of the ground to their roots.

A disturbance of climax will cause retrogression, but often, secondary succession will start to guide the evolution of the system after that disturbance. Secondary succession is much faster than primary because the soil is already formed, although deteriorated and needing restoration as well.

However, when a significant destruction of the vegetation takes place (of natural origin such as an avalanche or human origin), the disturbance undergone by the ecosystem is too important. In this latter case, erosion is responsible for the destruction of the upper horizons of the ground, and is at the origin of a phenomenon of reversion to pioneer conditions. The phenomenon is called retrogression and can be partial or total (in this case, nothing remains beside bare rock). For example, the clearing of an inclined ground, subjected to violent rains, can lead to the complete destruction of the soil. Man can deeply modify the evolution of the soils by direct and brutal action, such as clearing, abusive cuts , forest pasture, litters raking. The climax vegetation is gradually replaced and the soil modified (example: replacement of leafy tree forests by moors or pines plantations). Retrogression is often related to very old human practices.

Influence of human activity [ edit ] Soil erosion is the main factor for soil degradation and is due to several mechanisms: water erosion, wind erosion , chemical degradation and physical degradation.

Erosion can be influenced by human activity. For example, roads which increase impermeable surfaces lead to streaming and ground loss. Improper agriculture practices can also accelerate soil erosion, including by way of: Overgrazing of animals Monoculture planting Row cropping Tilling or plowing Crop removal Land-use conversion See also: soil contamination , soil salination , soil compaction , soil pollution , and soil health Consequences of soil regression and degradation [ edit ] Main article: land degradation Here are a few of the consequences of soil regression and degradation: Yields impact: Recent increases in the human population have placed a great strain on the world's soil systems. More than 6 billion people are now using about 38% of the land area of the Earth to raise crops and livestock.

[ 7 ] Many soils suffer from various types of degradation, that can ultimately reduce their ability to produce food resources. This reduces the food security, which many countries facing soil degradation already do not have.

[ 8 ] Slight degradation refers to land where yield potential has been reduced by 10%, moderate degradation refers to a yield decrease of 10–50%. Severely degraded soils have lost more than 50% of their potential. Most severely degraded soils are located in developing countries. In Africa, yield reduction is 2–40%, with an average loss of 8.2% of the continent.

[ 8 ] Natural disasters : natural disasters such as mud flows, floods are responsible for the death of many living beings each year. This causes a cycle as floods can degrade soil, and soil degradation can cause floods.

Deterioration of the water quality :  the increase in the turbidity of water and the contribution of nitrogen and of phosphorus can result in eutrophication . Soils particles in surface waters are also accompanied by agricultural inputs and by some pollutants of industrial, urban and road origin (such as heavy metals ). The run-off with pesticides and fertilizers make water quality dangerous. The ecological impact of agricultural inputs (such as weed killer) is known but difficult to evaluate because of the multiplicity of the products and their broad spectrum of action.

Biological diversity: soil degradation may involve perturbation of microbial communities, disappearance of the climax vegetation and decrease in animal habitat, thus leading to a biodiversity loss and animal extinction .

[ 9 ] Economic loss: the estimated costs for land degradation are US$44 billion per year. Globally, the annual loss of 76 billion tons of soil costs the world about US$400 billion per year. In Canada, on-farm effects of land degradation were estimated to range from US$700 to US$915 million in 1984. The economic impact of land degradation is extremely severe in densely populated South Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa.

[ 8 ] Soil enhancement, rebuilding, and regeneration [ edit ] Problems of soil erosion can be fought, and certain practices can lead to soil enhancement and rebuilding. Even though simple, methods for reducing erosion are often not chosen because these practices outweigh the short-term benefits. Rebuilding is especially possible through the improvement of soil structure, addition of organic matter and limitation of runoff. 
However, these techniques will never totally succeed to restore a soil (and the fauna and flora associated to it) that took more than a 1000 years to build up.

Soil regeneration is the reformation of degraded soil through biological, chemical, and or physical processes.

[ 2 ] When productivity declined in the low-clay soils of northern Thailand, farmers initially responded by adding organic matter from termite mounds , but this was unsustainable in the long-term. Scientists experimented with adding bentonite , one of the smectite family of clays, to the soil. In field trials, conducted by scientists from the International Water Management Institute (IWMI) in cooperation with Khon Kaen University and local farmers, this had the effect of helping retain water and nutrients. Supplementing the farmer's usual practice with a single application of 200 kg bentonite per rai (6.26 rai = 1 hectare) resulted in an average yield increase of 73%. More work showed that applying bentonite to degraded sandy soils reduced the risk of crop failure during drought years.

In 2008, three years after the initial trials, IWMI scientists conducted a survey among 250 farmers in northeast Thailand, half who had applying bentonite to their fields and half who had not. The average output for those using the clay addition was 18% higher than for non-clay users. Using the clay had enabled some farmers to switch to growing vegetables, which need more fertile soil. This helped to increase their income. The researchers estimated that 200 farmers in northeast Thailand and 400 in Cambodia had adopted the use of clays, and that a further 20,000 farmers were introduced to the new technique.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Soil § Degradation Acid sulfate soil Alkaline soil Hardpan Land degradation Environmental impact of irrigation Land reclamation Land improvement Planetary boundaries Plant growth Soil biodiversity Soil nutrient Artificialization References [ edit ] ^ Sims, Gerald K. (2023).

"Soil degradation" . Access Science. McGraw Hill.

doi : 10.1036/1097-8542.757375 .

^ a b Johnson, D.L., S.H. Ambrose, T.J. Bassett, M.L. Bowen, D.E. Crummey, J.S. Isaacson, D.N. Johnson, P. Lamb, M. Saul, and A.E. Winter-Nelson.  1997.  Meanings of environmental terms.  Journal of Environmental Quality 26: 581-589.

^ Scheub, Ute; Schwarzer, Stefan (2017).

Die Humusrevolution: wie wir den Boden heilen, das Klima retten und die Ernährungswende schaffen (in German). München: oekom verlag. p. 45.

ISBN 978-3-86581-838-6 .

^ "Plant Production and Protection Division: How is soil formed?" .

www.fao.org . Retrieved 2020-03-09 .

^ "Succession: A Closer Look | Learn Science at Scitable" .

www.nature.com . Retrieved 2020-03-09 .

^ "Why soil is disappearing from farms" .

www.bbc.com . Retrieved 2020-03-09 .

^ FAO Database, 2003 ^ a b c ESWARA, H.

"Land Degradation: An overview" .

USDA . Retrieved 3 November 2020 .

[ dead link ] ^ Sims, G. K.  1989. Biological degradation of soils.  Advances in Soil Science.  11:285-326.

^ Improving soils and boosting yields in Thailand Success stories, Issue 2, 2010, IWMI v t e Soil science History Index Main fields Pedology Edaphology Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil zoology Soil ecology Soil physics Soil mechanics Soil chemistry Environmental soil science Agricultural soil science Soil topics Soil Pedosphere Soil morphology Pedodiversity Soil formation Soil erosion Soil contamination Soil retrogression and degradation Soil compaction Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil sealing Soil salinity Alkali soil Soil pH Soil acidification Soil health Soil life Soil biodiversity Soil quality Soil value Soil fertility Soil resilience Soil color Soil texture Soil structure Pore space in soil Pore water pressure Soil crust Soil horizon Soil biomantle Soil carbon Soil gas Soil respiration Soil organic matter Soil moisture Soil water (retention) Soil type v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Applications Soil conservation Soil management Soil guideline value Soil survey Soil test Soil governance Soil value Soil salinity control Erosion control Agroecology Liming (soil) Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Geomorphology Geotechnical engineering Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Societies, Initiatives Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated Canadian Society of Soil Science Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (India) German Soil Science Society Indian Institute of Soil Science International Union of Soil Sciences International Year of Soil National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (US) OPAL Soil Centre (UK) Soil Science Society of Poland Soil and Water Conservation Society (US) Soil Science Society of America World Congress of Soil Science Scientific journals Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica B Journal of Soil and Water Conservation Plant and Soil Pochvovedenie Soil Research Soil Science Society of America Journal See also Land use Land conversion Land management Vegetation Infiltration (hydrology) Groundwater Crust (geology) Impervious surface / Surface runoff Petrichor Wikipedia:WikiProject Soil Category soil Category soil science List of soil scientists v t e Deforestation and desertification Deforestation Assarting Deforestation Deforestation and climate change Deforestation by region Illegal logging Mountaintop removal Slash-and-burn Slash-and-char Desertification Aridification Historic desertification Moisture recycling Soil retrogression and degradation Water scarcity By region: China Gobi Desert Lebanon Libya Mali Mauritania Mongolia Sahel Yemen Mitigation Afforestation Arid Lands Information Network Biochar Conservation grazing Desert greening Ecoforestry Ecological engineering Farmer-managed regeneration Flexible Mechanisms Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) Managed intensive rotational grazing Oasification Reforestation United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification Related articles Forest Landscape Integrity Index Forestry Intact forest landscape Land surface effects on climate Land use, land-use change and forestry List of global issues Natural landscape Terra preta Wilderness Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐5rdt6
Cached time: 20250812002955
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.379 seconds
Real time usage: 0.488 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1222/1000000
Revision size: 14597/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 73413/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2086/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 56441/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.227/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6093028/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  389.658      1 -total
 38.29%  149.193      3 Template:Navbox
 37.62%  146.606      1 Template:Reflist
 24.00%   93.512      1 Template:Soil_science_topics
 23.60%   91.968      5 Template:Cite_web
 15.42%   60.080      1 Template:Short_description
 14.32%   55.813      1 Template:Soil_type
  9.19%   35.816      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.43%   28.940      1 Template:Dead_link
  6.29%   24.513      1 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:57885:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812002955 and revision id 1297850644. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soil_retrogression_and_degradation&oldid=1297850644 " Category : Environmental issues with soil Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with manual scaled images This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 22:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Soil retrogression and degradation 18 languages Add topic

