Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Personal life 3 ENIAC career 4 Legacy 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Frances Spence 24 languages العربية Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American physicist and computer scientist Frances Spence Spence in 1946 Born Frances V. Bilas ( 1922-03-02 ) March 2, 1922 Philadelphia, Pennsylvania , U.S.

Died July 18, 2012 (2012-07-18) (aged 90) Alma mater Temple University Chestnut Hill College Occupation Computer programmer Employer(s) Moore School of Electrical Engineering , University of Pennsylvania Spouse Homer W. Spence (1947-death) Children 3 Awards Women in Technology International Hall of Fame Frances V. Spence ( née Bilas; March 2, 1922 – July 18, 2012 [ 1 ] ) was an American physicist and computer scientist. She was one of the original programmers for the ENIAC (the first electronic digital computer). She is considered one of the first computer programmers in history.

[ 2 ] The other five ENIAC programmers were Betty Holberton , Ruth Teitelbaum , Kathleen Antonelli , Marlyn Meltzer , and Jean Bartik .

Early life [ edit ] She was born Frances V. Bilas in Philadelphia in 1922 and was the second of five sisters.

[ 2 ] Her parents both held jobs in the education sector, her father as an engineer for the Philadelphia Public School System and her mother as a teacher.

[ 2 ] Bilas attended the South Philadelphia High School for Girls and graduated in 1938.

[ 2 ] She originally attended Temple University , but switched to Chestnut Hill College after being awarded a scholarship. She majored in mathematics with a minor in physics and graduated in 1942. While there, she met Kathleen Antonelli , who later also became an ENIAC programmer.

[ citation needed ] Personal life [ edit ] In 1947, she married Homer W. Spence, an Army electrical engineer from the Aberdeen Proving Grounds who had been assigned to the ENIAC project and later became head of the Computer Research Branch. They had three sons (Joseph, Richard, and William).

Frances Spence had continued working on the ENIAC in the years after the war, but shortly after her marriage, she resigned to raise a family.

[ 2 ] She died in 2012 and is buried at the Cemetery of the Holy Rood in Westbury, Nassau County, New York , USA ENIAC career [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Frances Spence" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Programmers Betty Jean Jennings (left) and Frances Bilas (right) operate the ENIAC's main control panel.

The ENIAC project was a classified project by the US Army to construct the first all-electronic digital computer.

[ 2 ] While its hardware was primarily built by a team of men, [ 3 ] its computational development was led by a team of six programmers (called " Computers "), all women from similar backgrounds as Spence. Despite her importance as one of the original programmers of the ENIAC, the role that she and the other female programmers took on was largely downplayed at the time due to the stigma that women were not interested in technology.

[ citation needed ] Photos of the women working on the computer often went without credit in newspapers at the time, and when the ENIAC was completed and unveiled to the public on February 15, 1946, the US Army failed to mention the names of the female programmers who had programmed the machine to run such sophisticated calculations.

[ 4 ] This further contributed to the perceived disconnect between women and computing.

[ citation needed ] Frances Bilas and the other women were originally hired by the University of Pennsylvania 's Moore School of Engineering to create the ENIAC, which was needed to compute ballistics trajectories as part of a team of eighty women. The Moore School of Engineering was funded by the US Army, and at the time they were hiring female programmers in particular due to the fact that many young American men were fighting overseas in World War II .

[ 2 ] Bilas and her Chestnut Hill College classmate Kathleen Antonelli were part of a smaller team within the ENIAC team. In addition to their larger programming duties, they were also assigned to the operation of an analog computing machine known as a Differential Analyzer , which was used to calculate ballistics equations (something which all the women on the ENIAC team were proficient at doing by hand). When the War ended, both Spence and Antonelli continued working with the ENIAC and they collaborated with other leading mathematicians.

[ 5 ] Legacy [ edit ] In 1997, Spence was inducted into the Women in Technology International Hall of Fame , [ 6 ] along with the other original ENIAC programmers. Their work paved the way for the electronic computers of the future, and their innovation kick-started the rise of electronic computing and computer programming in the Post-World War II era.

[ 7 ] In 2010, a documentary called, " Top Secret Rosies: The Female "Computers" of WWII " was released.  The film centered around in-depth interviews of three of the six women programmers, focusing on the commendable patriotic contributions they made during World War II.

The ENIAC Programmers (As Told By U.S. Chief Technology Officer Megan Smith) Problems playing this file? See media help .

The ENIAC team is the inspiration behind the award-winning 2013 documentary The Computers .

[ 8 ] This documentary, created by Kathy Kleiman and the ENIAC Programmers Project, combines actual footage of the ENIAC team from the 1940s with interviews with the female team members as they reflect on their time working together on the ENIAC.

[ 9 ] It is the first documentary of a series of three, and parts two and three will be entitled The Coders and The Future-Maker , respectively.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Kathleen Antonelli Jean Bartik Betty Holberton Adele Goldstine Ruth Teitelbaum Marlyn Meltzer Timeline of women in science References [ edit ] ^ "Frances B. Spence" . genealogybank . Retrieved December 1, 2013 .

(subscription required) ^ a b c d e f g "Frances V. Spence profile" .

Frances Spence . IEEE Global History Network . Retrieved October 30, 2014 .

^ "The Forgotten Female Programmers Who Created Modern Tech" .

NPR.org . NPR . Retrieved November 1, 2014 .

^ "Programming the ENIAC" . Columbia University . Retrieved November 2, 2014 .

^ "Famous Women in Computing" . LinuxChix Magazine. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved November 1, 2014 .

^ "WITI Hall of Fame" .

WITI - Women in Technology International . Retrieved October 27, 2013 .

^ "Penn Library Exhibitions" .

University of Pennsylvania . Penn Library . Retrieved January 15, 2017 .

^ "ENIAC Programmers Project - Documentary Info" .

ENIAC Programmers Project . Retrieved 2020-05-24 .

^ "The Computers Documentary" . The ENIAC Programmers Project . Retrieved November 2, 2014 .

^ "History's Female Programmers Will No Longer Be Forgotten" . ReadWrite. 6 September 2014 . Retrieved November 2, 2014 .

External links [ edit ] The Women of ENIAC The Women of ENIAC Hall of Fame 1997 on YouTube v t e Timelines of computing Computing Before 1950 1950–1979 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s 2020s Scientific Women in computing Computer science Algorithms Artificial intelligence Binary prefixes Cryptography Machine learning Quantum computing and communication Software Free and open-source software Hypertext technology Operating systems DOS family Windows Linux Programming languages Virtualization development Malware Internet Internet conflicts Web browsers Web search engines Notable people Kathleen Antonelli John Vincent Atanasoff Charles Babbage John Backus Jean Bartik George Boole Vint Cerf John Cocke Stephen Cook Edsger W. Dijkstra J. Presper Eckert Douglas Engelbart Adele Goldstine Lois Haibt Betty Holberton Margaret Hamilton Grace Hopper David A. Huffman Bob Kahn Alan Kay Brian Kernighan Andrew Koenig Semyon Korsakov Donald Knuth Joseph Kruskal Nancy Leveson Ada Lovelace Douglas McIlroy Marlyn Meltzer John von Neumann Klára Dán von Neumann Dennis Ritchie Guido van Rossum Claude Shannon Frances Spence Bjarne Stroustrup Ruth Teitelbaum Ken Thompson Linus Torvalds Alan Turing Paul Vixie Larry Wall Stephen Wolfram Niklaus Wirth Steve Wozniak Konrad Zuse Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frances_Spence&oldid=1280846135 " Categories : 1922 births 2012 deaths Chestnut Hill College alumni Scientists from Philadelphia American women computer scientists American computer scientists Human computers Temple University alumni 21st-century American women Hidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using infobox person with multiple employers Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Articles needing additional references from August 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles with hAudio microformats Place of death missing This page was last edited on 16 March 2025, at 19:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Frances Spence 24 languages Add topic

