Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organ theft 2 State-sanctioned organ transplants from criminals 3 Organ transplants from victims raised to be organ donors 4 Organ repossession 5 Self-sacrificial organ donation 6 Xenotransplantation 7 Comedy 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Organ transplantation in fiction 1 language Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Organ transplantation in fiction" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Organ transplantation in fiction" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( April 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Organ transplantation is a common theme in science fiction and horror fiction , appearing as early as 1925, in Russian short story Professor Dowell's Head .

[ 1 ] It may be used as a device to examine identity, power and loss of power, [ 2 ] current medical systems; explore themes of bodily autonomy ; or simply as a vehicle for body horror or other fantastical plots.

Organ transplantation in fiction is often used as horror and something that harms the people involved, in contrast to how organ donation is presented in real life, as something hopefully good for those involved.

[ 3 ] The circumstances of organ transplantation in fiction can vary widely. Numerous horror movies feature the theme of transplanted body parts that are evil or give supernatural powers, such as in the films Body Parts , Hands of a Stranger , and The Eye . Organ transplants from donors who are unwilling, or incapable of objecting, to having their organs removed are a recurring theme in dystopian fiction . In contrast to unwilling organ donors, there is the theme of individuals who want to donate their own life-critical organs, such as a brain or heart, at the cost of their own life.

As is common in science fiction, writing about organ donation can be a way to speculate on the future of science, medicine, and autonomy, based on what occurs in the present.

[ 4 ] Narratives about organ transplants in science fiction are so widely known in public consciousness that they are occasionally referenced alongside actual medical technology developments. Explaining the advancements of his company, Revivicor, into xenotransplantation technology, David Ayares told NPR that, "[I]t's no longer a science fiction experiment. [...] It's actually a reality." [ 5 ] Examples of casually referring to science fiction while talking about actual transplant technology can also be seen in articles such as "Beyond Science Fiction: Xenotransplantation Becoming Clinical Reality"; [ 6 ] "Kidney xenotransplantation: Future clinical reality or science fiction?"; [ 7 ] and "Science Fiction Comes Alive as Researchers Grow Organs in Lab".

[ 8 ] Organ theft [ edit ] Main article: Organ theft The term " organlegging " was coined by Larry Niven in a series of short stories set in his Known Space future universe originally published in a 1976 collection called The Long ARM of Gil Hamilton , later expanded and re-released as Flatlander .  The story The Patchwork Girl was also published alone as a novel in 1986.

In Robin Cook 's 1978 novel Coma , set in the present day, the organ thieves operate in a hospital, removing the organs from patients in a facility for the long-term care of patients in a vegetative state . The story was also made into a film, Coma in 1978, and later into a two-part television miniseries aired in 2012 on the A&E television network.

Organ theft is a theme in a number of horror movies, including Turistas , and also (in a less overtly horrific manner) as a theme in realistic dramas such as Dirty Pretty Things and Inhale .

In the TV series Trigun , the protagonist's severed left arm had been transplanted without his knowledge onto an antagonist's left shoulder.

Theft of organs, with different variations, appears in urban legends around the world. One such story, about sacaojos , or eye thieves, was popular in Latin America in the 1990s. In this story, children are kidnapped by foreigners and their eyes are removed, then the children are returned. This led to several instances in real life of foreigners being distrusted on suspicion of being kidnappers.

[ 9 ] Another common urban legend about organ theft is that of the stolen kidney. This story began in Europe in the 1990s. The basic structure, whether reported orally or by media, is that a businessperson is traveling abroad, and is then abducted or seduced, and wakes up later with their kidneys having been removed, maybe noticing a dramatic scar on their lower back. This attracted real-world action, with some countries such as Germany warning their citizens to be cautious abroad. No real evidence was found for the stories that initially powered this legend. This story works as a cautionary tale to be aware of strangers, or as a tragedy of exploitation if the victims were children or had minimal agency, and fueled xenophobia .

[ 10 ] State-sanctioned organ transplants from criminals [ edit ] As organ transplants became more feasible in real life, the issue of not having enough donor organs for all those who needed them became apparent. Some themes across organ transplant fiction involve various ways that the organ supply can be boosted and this problem can be solved, such as through state-organized systems that make more organs available.

[ 11 ] The same series of Larry Niven stories also contains the theme of organ donation from criminals becoming institutionalized within society to the point where even minor crimes are punished by death, in order to ensure the supply of new organs to an aging population. Niven originally developed this theme in his novel A Gift From Earth , first published in 1968 and also set in his Known Space universe. In A Gift From Earth , the descendants of colonists from an interstellar colonization mission are preyed upon by the descendants of the crew, who enact laws that make even the most minor offences carry the death penalty to allow their organs to be "harvested" and stored in "organ banks" for later use.

The theme had previously been explored by Frederik Pohl and Jack Williamson in their 1964 novel The Reefs of Space , the first novel of their Starchild Trilogy , in which mankind labours under the "Plan of Man", enforced by computers within a surveillance state . Unlike in Niven's novels, donors are kept alive for as long as possible to enable more organs to be removed for transplant until they eventually succumb from their injuries. The novel also features a Frankenstein -like theme of a man assembled entirely from the body parts of others.

In Sui Ishida 's 2014 dark fantasy manga series, Tokyo Ghoul , a state sanctioned organ transplant is performed between an unwilling donor and the main character of the series. It was the subject of much controversy in the series itself. Unbeknown to the surgeons however, the unwilling donor was a ghoul, a monster who eats human flesh, causing the main character to have ghoul-like characteristics.

Organ transplants from victims raised to be organ donors [ edit ] The idea of state-sanctioned involuntary organ transplants is taken one step further by the concept of creating people solely for the purpose of acting as organ donors. Generally, these donors are clones of their eventual organ recipients. This idea has been explored by several writers, and is another way that fiction explores various solutions to the problem of not having enough donor organs for those that need them.

The 1979 science fiction horror film Parts: The Clonus Horror , written by Bob Sullivan and Ron Smith, is set in an isolated community in a remote desert area, where clones are bred to serve as a source of replacement organs for the wealthy and powerful. The clones are kept in a seemingly idyllic environment of apparent leisure and luxury, right up to the point where they are killed for their organs.

Michael Marshall Smith 's novel Spares has a similar premise. Unlike the clones in Parts: The Clonus Horror , the clones are kept in conditions resembling those of farm animals or a concentration camp.

The central character of Alfred Slote 's 1982 children's book Clone Catcher pursues clones who seek to escape their fate of being harvested for their organs.

The 2005 American science fiction action thriller film The Island continues the theme, where clones live in a highly structured environment isolated in a compound. The hero escapes after learning that the inhabitants are clones used for organ harvesting and surrogate motherhood for wealthy people in the outside world.

Kazuo Ishiguro 's 2005 dystopian novel Never Let Me Go also has a similar theme to its predecessors, but lacks the action-adventure theme of the previous works, concentrating on the characters' feelings and personal stories and the development of psychological horror at their plight. It was later made into a 2010 British drama film of the same name . Author Jay Clayton noted that the in-universe portrayal of the public reaction to the discovery of a school where clones are raised to be organ donors draws comparisons to retrospective reactions to real-world situations such as enslavement in the United States, Tuskegee Syphilis Study , and medical experimentation by Nazis.

[ 12 ] Another author reviewing Never Let Me Go argued that it follows a similar structure to boarding school novels , where a youth grows up to fully realize their purpose, traditionally being a vocation and here being to become an organ donor. With this comparison, idea of building one's identity around their vocation is criticized.

[ 13 ] The commissioned four-part radio play Jefferson 37 by Jenny Stephens also explores the same theme, and was first broadcast on BBC Radio 4 Extra in 2006.

[ 14 ] The whole plot takes place within Abbotsville, a free range laboratory, where the clones are deliberately dehumanised. The story culminates with their humanity resisting the desire to quash it.

The plot of Unwind , a 2007 science fiction novel by young adult literature author Neal Shusterman , takes place in the United States, after a civil war somewhere in the near future. After a civil war is fought over abortion , a compromise was reached, allowing parents to sign an order for their children between the ages of 13 and 18 years old to be "unwound"—taken to "harvest camps" and having their body parts harvested for later use. The reasoning was that, since all their organs were required to be used, unwinds did not technically die, because their individual body parts lived on.

In 1968, the Indian author Kottayam Pushpanath published Chuvanna Manushyan , his literary debut. It was published in the Malayalam Manorajyam weekly . It is a story that a famous professor Jane, a surgeon that was famous for her experiments trying to keep organs from recent corpses alive.

Organ repossession [ edit ] The idea of the repossession of transplanted organs has also been used in fiction, in the films Repo Men , and Repo! The Genetic Opera .

Self-sacrificial organ donation [ edit ] In the film John Q.

, the character played by Denzel Washington takes a hospital hostage in hopes to force the surgical staff to transplant his heart into his dying son. In the TV series Psycho-Pass , the antagonist is given the opportunity to donate his brain to help power a system that determines if an someone is likely to perform a crime.

Xenotransplantation [ edit ] Xenotransplantation, the practive of transplanting organs across species, has also been featured in fiction.

Activist Carol J. Adams has said that the beliefs that lead to xenotransplantation are often rooted in the idea that human life is more valuable than animal lives and therefore animals can be treated differently. Author Cat Yampbell contrasts this with the character of Dr. Franklin of Ann Halam's Dr. Franklin's Island , where the experimenter shows disregard for both human and animal life. In these ways, xenotransplantation fiction can explore animal rights.

[ 15 ] Yampbell argues again that in another book with a xenotransplantation plot, Eva by Peter Dickinson, the recipient's experience reveals to her how comparatively few rights nonhuman animals get, when she is treated as an nonhuman animal due to her received chimpanzee body parts.

[ 16 ] Xenotransplantation narratives, when they show the perspective of a non-human animal or a human with parts of a non-human animal, can give a "subjecthood" to non-human animals that is not often granted.

[ 17 ] Comedy [ edit ] Organ transplantation has also been used as a major plot element in a number of comedies, including Przekładaniec (1968, Poland), The Thing with Two Heads (1972) and The Man With Two Brains (1983).

See also [ edit ] Organ trade Organ transplantation in China , for a real-world counterpart of some of the themes here Organ theft in Kosovo Brain transplant Cyborgs in fiction References [ edit ] ^ Duran, Xavier (2018).

"A science fiction implant: Organ transplants in literature" .

Mètode Science Studies Journal .

8 : 231– 237.

doi : 10.7203/metode.8.10498 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ Wohlman, Antia; Steinberg, Ruth (2016).

"Rewinding Frankenstein and the body-machine: organ transplantation in the dystopian young adult fiction series Unwind" .

Science fiction and medical humanities .

42 (4) . Retrieved 21 July 2024 .

^ Wohlman, Anita; Steinberg, Ruth (2016).

"Rewinding Frankenstein and the body-machine: organ transplantation in the dystopian young adult fiction series Unwind" .

Medical Humanities .

42 (4): e26 – e30 .

doi : 10.1136/medhum-2016-010918 .

PMID 27482055 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 .

^ Gehrmann, Ruth (July 2024).

Future T/Issues: Organ Transplantation in Literary and Medical Narratives . Berlin / Boston: Walter de Gruyter.

ISBN 9783111413259 .

^ Stein, Rob.

"How genetically modified pigs could end the shortage of organs for transplants" .

NPR.org . National Public Radio . Retrieved 9 July 2024 .

^ Negin Hashemi Dougaheh, Seyedeh (November 2023).

"Beyond Science Fiction: Xenotransplantation Becoming Clinical Reality" .

Translational Research in Urology .

5 (4).

doi : 10.22034/tru.2023.421973.1163 . Retrieved 14 July 2024 .

^ Rodger, Daniel; Cooper, David C K (March 2023).

"Kidney xenotransplantation: Future clinical reality or science fiction?" .

Nurs Health Sci .

25 (1): 161– 170.

doi : 10.1111/nhs.12994 .

PMC 10124775 .

PMID 36335558 .

^ Naik, Gautam.

"Science Fiction Comes Alive as Researchers Grow Organs in Lab" .

Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 18 July 2024 .

^ Campion-Vincent, Véronique (Winter 1997).

"Organ Theft Narratives" .

Western Folklore .

56 (1): 1– 37.

doi : 10.2307/1500384 .

JSTOR 1500384 . Retrieved 20 July 2024 .

^ Campion-Vincent, Véronique (Winter 1997).

"Organ Theft Narratives" .

Western Folklore .

56 (1): 1– 37.

doi : 10.2307/1500384 .

JSTOR 1500384 . Retrieved 20 July 2024 .

^ Duran, Xavier (2018).

"A science fiction implant: Organ transplants in literature" .

Mètode Science Studies Journal .

8 : 231– 237.

doi : 10.7203/metode.8.10498 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ Clayton, Jay (August 2023).

Literature, Science, and Public Policy (PDF) . Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781009263511 . Retrieved 8 July 2024 .

^ Clayton, Jay (3 August 2023).

Literature, Science, and Public Policy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-009-26352-8 . Retrieved 14 July 2023 .

^ "Jenny Stephens - Jefferson 37" .

BBC Programmes . BBC . Retrieved 4 September 2021 .

^ Yampbell, Cat (July 2008).

"When Science Blurs the Boundaries: The Commodification of the Animal in Young Adult Science Fiction" .

Science Fiction Studies .

35 (2): 207– 222.

JSTOR 25475139 .

^ Yampbell, Cat (July 2008).

"When Science Blurs the Boundaries: The Commodification of the Animal in Young Adult Science Fiction" .

Science Fiction Studies .

35 (2): 207– 222.

JSTOR 25475139 .

^ Yampbell, Cat (July 2008).

"When Science Blurs the Boundaries: The Commodification of the Animal in Young Adult Science Fiction" .

Science Fiction Studies .

35 (2): 207– 222.

JSTOR 25475139 .

Further reading [ edit ] "Transplant Medicine and Narrative", in Squier, Susan Merrill.

Liminal Lives: Imagining the Human at the Frontiers of Biomedicine . Durham: Duke University Press, 2004, ISBN 978-0-8223-3366-1 McCormack, D. (2012). "Intimate Borders: The Ethics of Human Organ Transplantation in Contemporary Film".

Review of Education, Pedagogy, and Cultural Studies .

34 ( 3– 4): 170– 183.

doi : 10.1080/10714413.2012.687290 .

S2CID 145707966 .

Badley, Linda.

Film, Horror and the Body Fantastic (Greenwood Press, 1995) ISBN 978-0313275234 Helman, Cecil (June 1988). "Dr Frankenstein and the Industrial Body: Reflections on 'Spare Part' Surgery".

Anthropology Today .

4 (3): 14– 16.

doi : 10.2307/3032641 .

ISSN 0268-540X .

JSTOR 3032641 .

PMID 11650913 .

v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal v t e Horror fiction Speculative fiction Media Anime Comics Creepypasta List Films History Magazines Podcasts Television programs Video games List Types Analog Art Black Body Cannibal Christmas Comedy Zombie Creepypasta Cosmic Dark fantasy Dark Romanticism Faustian Grimdark Splatterpunk Erotic Guro Monster erotica Zombie pornography Folk Found footage Ghost Giallo List of films Gothic American Southern Southern Ontario Suburban Tasmanian Urban Japanese Korean Lovecraftian Monsters Jiangshi Vampire Werewolf Occult detective Organ transplantation Penny dreadful Postmodern horror Psychological Survival Techno Weird fiction New weird Weird menace Weird West Zombie apocalypse Monsters Demons Devils Ghouls Div Evil clowns Extraterrestrials Fire-breathing monsters Chimera Dragons Gargoyles Kaiju Killer toy Mutants Ogres Sea monster Piranha Therianthropes Werecats Werewolves Undead Death Ghosts Mummies Skeletons Vampires Zombies Witches Related genres Black comedy Fantastique Fantasy fiction Mystery Paranormal Science fiction Shenmo Supernatural Thriller Tokusatsu Urban legend Other Conventions Deathrock Grand Guignol Horror host Horror punk Horrorcore Macabre LGBTQ themes characters Vulgar auteurism Writers Related Bram Stoker Award Internet Speculative Fiction Database Pulp magazine Video nasties Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Organ_transplantation_in_fiction&oldid=1292289094 " Categories : Fiction about organ transplantation Science fiction themes Horror genres Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2015 All articles lacking reliable references Wikipedia articles with style issues from April 2015 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 05:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Organ transplantation in fiction 1 language Add topic

