Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Physical building 3 Notable alumni 4 Notes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Dunster House 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′07″N 71°06′58″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3686°N 71.1162°W ﻿ / 42.3686; -71.1162 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Residential house of Harvard College Dunster House Harvard University The central tower of Dunster House Shield Location 945 Memorial Drive Coordinates 42°22′07″N 71°06′58″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3686°N 71.1162°W ﻿ / 42.3686; -71.1162 Full name Henry Dunster House Established 1930 Named for Henry Dunster Sister college Berkeley College Faculty Deans Taeku and Shirley Lee Dean Gregory Davis HoCo chairs Ellie Cassidy and Spencer Lee Tutors 19 Website dunster .harvard .edu Dunster House is one of 12 undergraduate residential houses at Harvard University . Built in 1930, it is one of the first two Harvard dormitories constructed under President Abbott Lawrence Lowell 's House Plan and one of the seven Houses given to Harvard by Edward Harkness . In the early days, room rents varied based on the floor and the size of the room. Dunster was unique among Harvard dormitories for its sixth-story walk-up (it had no elevators); these rooms were originally rented by poorer students, such as Norman Mailer .

The House was named in honor of Henry Dunster , Harvard's first president .

History [ edit ] Dunster House's tower is inspired by, but somewhat smaller than, Tom Tower of Christ Church, Oxford . Above the east wing is the Dunster family coat of arms , and above the west wing is the coat of arms of Magdalene College, Cambridge , where Henry Dunster matriculated in 1627.

[ 1 ] Magdalene College commemorated the relationship between the two universities by sending medieval tracery stones from the First Court of Magdalene ; these are now set in the wall near the doors to J-entry of Dunster House.

[ 2 ] Dunster is on the banks of the Charles River next to the John W. Weeks Footbridge , which links Harvard's Allston and Cambridge campuses. From above, its architectural shape, unusual among the River Houses, resembles a branching flowchart due to the odd trapezoidal footprint of the land on which it was built.  Dunster underwent a "full House renewal", a comprehensive renovation, that was completed in 2016.

[ 3 ] It was the first of Harvard's residential houses to undergo such a renewal.

[ 4 ] Like many of Harvard's Houses, Dunster has many yearly traditions, including Keg Races in the fall, a Messiah singalong in the winter, [ 5 ] a Goat Roast in the spring, and the yearly Dunster House Opera.

[ 6 ] It is known as one of the more social houses, with Stein Clubs and formals in either the dining hall or courtyard.

Dunster's Faculty Deans (formerly known as "house masters") are Taeku and Shirley Lee.

[ 7 ] The House's first master was Chester N. Greenough (Harvard class of 1898), an English professor and former dean of Harvard College. Former faculty deans/house masters include Sean Kelly and Cheryl Chen, Roger Porter and Ann Porter, Raoul Bott , and Sally Falk Moore and Cresap Moore. Gregory Davis currently serves as the Allston Burr Resident Dean.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Dunster's mascot is the moose , inspired by the three golden elk on the Dunster family crest .

Physical building [ edit ] Dunster House opened in 1930, and contains student rooms, a faculty dean residence, and a dining hall with views of the Charles River.

[ 10 ] Notable alumni [ edit ] Al Gore Darren Aronofsky Caspar Weinberger Susan Faludi Roger Ferguson Al Franken David Halberstam Tommy Lee Jones Norman Mailer Deval Patrick Lisa Randall Roger Rosenblatt Danielle Sassoon Alan Garber Al Gore and Tommy Lee Jones were roommates at Dunster House in the late 1960s. Other notable Dunster alumni include Tatyana Ali , Christopher Durang , Lindsay Hyde , Dan Wilson , Michael Mainelli , Jean Kwok , Alan Garber , and Danielle Sassoon .

[ 11 ] In 1995, resident Sinedu Tadesse killed her roommate Trang Ho in Dunster before dying by suicide in a closet.

[ 12 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "Dunstor, Henry (DNSR627H)" .

A Cambridge Alumni Database . University of Cambridge.

^ "Dunster House: History" . The President and Fellows of Harvard College . Retrieved 3 February 2014 .

^ "Dunster House renewed" .

Harvard Gazette . 2016-03-31 . Retrieved 2018-02-08 .

^ Manning, Colin (30 January 2014).

"Dunster Reimagined" .

Harvard Gazette . The President and Fellows of Harvard College . Retrieved 3 February 2014 .

^ "Inside the annual 'Messiah' sing" .

Harvard Gazette . 2013-12-16 . Retrieved 2018-02-08 .

^ "A look inside: Dunster House" .

Harvard Gazette . 2011-02-17 . Retrieved 2018-02-08 .

^ "Government Professor Taeku Lee, Education Specialist Shirley Lee Named Next Dunster Faculty Deans | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved 2025-06-14 .

^ "Allston Burr Resident Deans and Assistant Deans of Harvard College" . Archived from the original on 2018-04-16 . Retrieved 2018-02-08 .

^ "Dunster, Mather House Faculty Deans Settle Into New Positions | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved 2018-02-08 .

^ "History" .

dunster.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-10-14 .

^ "Jewish Center names prize winners," The Harvard Gazette , May 22, 2008.

^ Thernstrom, Melanie.

Halfway Heaven: Diary of a Harvard Murder . Plume Books, September 1998.  ( ISBN 0-452-28007-9 ) External links [ edit ] Dunster House official site v t e Residential houses of Harvard Adams House Cabot House Currier House Dudley House Dunster House Eliot House Kirkland House Leverett House Lowell House Mather House Pforzheimer House Quincy House Winthrop House v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dunster_House&oldid=1295487911 " Categories : Harvard Houses Houses completed in 1930 Clock towers in Massachusetts 1930 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 02:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dunster House 1 language Add topic

