Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ethical value system Toggle Ethical value system subsection 1.1 Franklin D. Roosevelt 1.2 Lyndon Johnson 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 1930s and 1940s 2.2 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s 2.3 1980s and 1990s 2.4 Since 9/11 3 In U.S. law 4 Responses 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Judeo-Christian ethics 4 languages Esperanto فارسی Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American concept of common shared values This article is about the 20th-century American concept of common values shared between the two religions. For other uses, see Judeo-Christian (disambiguation) .

This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Judaeo-Christian ethics (or Judeo-Christian values ) is a supposed value system common to Jews and Christians. It was first described in print in 1941 by English writer George Orwell . The idea that Judaeo-Christian ethics underpin American politics, law and morals has been part of the  " American civil religion " since the 1940s. In recent years, the phrase has been associated with American conservatism , but the concept—though not always the exact phrase—has frequently featured in the rhetoric of leaders across the political spectrum, including that of Franklin D. Roosevelt and Lyndon B. Johnson .

Ethical value system [ edit ] See also: Christian ethics and Jewish ethics The current American use of "Judeo-Christian" — to refer to a value system common to Jews and Christians — first appeared in print on 11 July 1939 in a book review by the English writer George Orwell , with the phrase "… incapable of acting meanly , a thing that carries no weight the Judaeo-Christian scheme of morals." [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Orwell repeated the term in his 1941 essay: "It was the idea of human equality—the "Jewish" or "Judeo-Christian" idea of equality—that Hitler came into the world to destroy." [ 3 ] Orwell's usage of the term followed at least a decade of efforts by Jewish and Christian leaders, through such groups as the U.S.

National Conference of Christians and Jews (founded in 1927), to emphasize common ground. The term continued to gain currency in the 1940s. In part, it was a way of countering antisemitism , with the idea that the foundation of morals and law in the United States was a shared one between Jews and Christians.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Orwell was not the first to publicly speak about the moral commonality of Jewish and Christian traditions. On May 19, 1939, Albert Einstein , in a speech at Princeton Theological Seminary, explaining the importance of moral principles for modern science, emphasized: "The highest principles for our aspirations and judgments are given to us in the Jewish-Christian religious tradition." [ 6 ] And back in 1884, three years after a large-scale wave of anti-Jewish pogroms in Russia, Vladimir Solovyov (Soloviev), a prominent Russian philosopher and Christian writer, wrote in his essay "The Jews and the Christian Question": "Our religion begins with a personal relationship between God and man in the ancient covenant of Abraham and Moses, and is confirmed in the closest personal unity of God and man in the New Testament of Jesus Christ, in which both natures exist inseparably, but unmerged as well. These two covenants are not two different religions, but only two stages of one and the same Divine-human religion, or speaking in the language of the German school, two moments of one and the same God-human process. This single and true Divine-human Judeo-Christian religion proceeds by a direct and magisterial path amid the two extreme errors of paganism, in which first man is absorbed by Divinity (in India), and then Divinity itself is transformed into a shadow of man (in Greece and Rome)." [ 7 ] Franklin D. Roosevelt [ edit ] The first inaugural address of Franklin D. Roosevelt (FDR), in 1933, the famous speech in which FDR declared that "the only thing we have to fear is fear itself", had numerous religious references, which was widely commented upon at the time.  Although it did not use the term "Judeo-Christian", it has come to be seen by scholars as in tune with the emerging view of a Judeo-Christian tradition.  Historian Mary Stuckey emphasizes "Roosevelt's use of the shared values grounded in the Judeo-Christian tradition" as a way to unify the American nation, and justify his own role as its chief policymaker.

[ 8 ] In the speech, FDR attacked the bankers and promised a reform in an echo of the gospels: "The money changers have fled from their high seats in the temple of our civilization. We may now restore that temple to the ancient truths. The measure of the restoration lies in the extent to which we apply social values more noble than mere monetary profit." [ 9 ] Houck and Nocasian, examining the flood of responses to the First Inaugural, and commenting on this passage, argue: The nation's overwhelmingly Judeo-Christian response to the address thus had both textual and extratextual warrants. For those inclined to see the Divine Hand of Providence at work, Roosevelt's miraculous escape [from assassination] in Miami was a sign—perhaps The Sign—that God had sent another Washington or Lincoln at the appointed hour. ... Many others could not resist the subject position that Roosevelt ... had cultivated throughout the address—that of savior.  After all, it was Christ who had expelled the moneychangers from the Temple. ... [Many listeners saw] a composite sign that their new president had a godly mandate to lead.

[ 10 ] Gary Scott Smith stresses that Roosevelt believed his welfare programs were "wholly in accord with the social teachings of Christianity."  He saw the achievement of social justice through government action as morally superior to the old laissez-faire approach.  He proclaimed, "The thing we are seeking is justice," as guided by the precept of "Do unto your neighbor as you would be done by." [ 11 ] Roosevelt saw the moral issue as religiosity versus anti-religion.  According to Smith, "He pleaded with Protestants, Catholics, and Jews to transcend their sectarian creeds and 'unite in good works' whenever they could 'find common cause.'" [ 12 ] Atalia Omer and  Jason A. Springs point to Roosevelt's 1939 State of the Union Address , which called upon Americans to "defend, not their homes alone, but the tenets of faith and humanity on with which their churches, their governments and their very civilization are founded." They state that, "This familiar rhetoric invoked a conception of the sanctity of the United States' Judeo-Christian values as a basis for war." [ 13 ] Timothy Wyatt notes that in the coming of World War II Roosevelt's isolationist opponents said he was calling for a "holy war."  Wyatt says: Often in his Fireside Chats or speeches to the houses of Congress, FDR argued for the entrance of America into the war by using both blatant and subtle religious rhetoric. Roosevelt portrayed the conflict in the light of good versus evil , the religious against the irreligious.  In doing so, he pitted the Christian ideals of democracy against the atheism of National Socialism.

[ 14 ] Lyndon Johnson [ edit ] Biographer Randall B. Woods has argued that President Lyndon B. Johnson effectively used appeals to the Judeo-Christian ethical tradition to garner support for the civil rights law of 1965. Woods writes that Johnson undermined the Southern filibuster against the bill: LBJ wrapped white America in a moral straight jacket. How could individuals who fervently, continuously, and overwhelmingly identified themselves with a merciful and just God continue to condone racial discrimination, police brutality, and segregation? Where in the Judeo-Christian ethic was there justification for killing young girls in a church in Alabama, denying an equal education to black children, barring fathers and mothers from competing for jobs that would feed and clothe their families? Was Jim Crow to be America's response to "Godless Communism"?

[ 15 ] Woods went on to assess the role of Judeo-Christian ethics among the nation's political elite: Johnson's decision to define civil rights as a moral issue, and to wield the nation's self-professed Judeo-Christian ethic as a sword in its behalf, constituted something of a watershed in twentieth-century political history. All presidents were fond of invoking the deity, and some conservatives like Dwight Eisenhower had flirted with employing Judeo-Christian teachings to justify their actions, but modern-day liberals, both politicians and the intellectuals who challenged and nourished them, had shunned spiritual witness. Most liberal intellectuals were secular humanists. Academics in particular had historically been deeply distrustful of organized religion, which they identified with small-mindedness, bigotry, and anti-intellectualism. Like his role model, FDR, Johnson equated liberal values with religious values, insisting freedom and social justice served the ends of both god and man. And he was not loath to say so.

[ 16 ] Woods notes that Johnson's religiosity ran deep: "At 15 he joined the Disciples of Christ, or Christian, church and would forever believe that it was the duty of the rich to care for the poor, the strong to assist the weak, and the educated to speak for the inarticulate." [ 17 ] History [ edit ] 1930s and 1940s [ edit ] Promoting the concept of the United States as a Judeo-Christian nation first became a political program in the 1940s, in response to the growth of anti-Semitism in America. The rise of Nazi anti-semitism in the 1930s led concerned Protestants, Catholics, and Jews to take steps to increase understanding and tolerance.

[ 18 ] In this effort, precursors of the National Conference of Christians and Jews created teams consisting of a priest, a rabbi, and a minister, to run programs across the country, and fashion a more pluralistic America, no longer defined as a Christian land, but "one nurtured by three ennobling traditions: Protestantism, Catholicism and Judaism. ... The phrase 'Judeo-Christian' entered the contemporary lexicon as the standard liberal term for the idea that Western values rest on a religious consensus that included Jews." [ 19 ] In the 1930s, "In the face of worldwide antisemitic efforts to stigmatize and destroy Judaism, influential Christians and Jews in America labored to uphold it, pushing Judaism from the margins of American religious life towards its very center." [ 20 ] During World War II, Jewish chaplains worked with Catholic priests and Protestant ministers to promote goodwill, addressing servicemen who, "in many cases had never seen, much less heard a Rabbi speak before." At funerals for the unknown soldier, rabbis stood alongside the other chaplains and recited prayers in Hebrew. In a much publicized wartime tragedy, the sinking of the Dorchester , the ship's multi-faith chaplains gave up their lifebelts to evacuating seamen and stood together "arm in arm in prayer" as the ship went down. A 1948 postage stamp commemorated their heroism with the words: "interfaith in action." [ 19 ] 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s [ edit ] In December 1952, then-President-elect Dwight Eisenhower , speaking extemporaneously a month before his inauguration, said, in what may be the first direct public reference by a U.S. president to the Judeo-Christian concept: [The Founding Fathers said] 'we hold that all men are endowed by their Creator ... ' In other words, our form of government has no sense unless it is founded in a deeply felt religious faith, and I don't care what it is .  With us of course it is the Judeo-Christian concept, but it must be a religion with all men created equal.

[ 21 ] By the 1950s, many early modern conservatives emphasized the Judeo-Christian roots of their values.

[ 22 ] In 1958, economist Elgin Groseclose claimed that it was ideas "drawn from Judeo-Christian Scriptures that have made possible the economic strength and industrial power of this country." [ 23 ] Senator Barry Goldwater noted that conservatives "believed the communist projection of man as a producing, consuming animal to be used and discarded was antithetical to all the Judeo-Christian  understandings which are the foundations upon which the Republic stands." [ 24 ] Belief in the superiority of Western Judeo-Christian traditions led conservatives to downplay the aspirations of the Third World to free themselves from colonial rule.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] The emergence of the " Christian right " as a political force and part of the conservative coalition dates from the 1970s. According to Cambridge University historian Andrew Preston, the emergence of "conservative ecumenism." bringing together Catholics, Mormons, and conservative Protestants into the religious right coalition, was facilitated "by the rise of a Judeo-Christian ethic." These groups "began to mobilize together on cultural-political issues such as abortion and the proposed Equal Rights Amendment for women." [ 27 ] As Wilcox and Robinson conclude: The Christian Right is an attempt to restore Judeo-Christian values to a country that is in deep moral decline. ... [They] believe that society suffers from the lack of a firm basis of Judeo-Christian values and they seek to write laws that embody those values.

[ 28 ] 1980s and 1990s [ edit ] By the 1980s and 1990s, favorable references to "Judeo-Christian values" were common, and the term was used by conservative Christians .

[ 29 ] President Ronald Reagan frequently emphasized Judeo-Christian values as necessary ingredients in the fight against Communism. He argued that the Bible contains "all the answers to the problems that face us." [ 30 ] Reagan disapproved of the growth of secularism and emphasized the need to take the idea of sin seriously.

[ 31 ] Tom Freiling , a Christian publisher and head of a conservative PAC, stated in his 2003 book, Reagan's God and Country , that "Reagan's core religious beliefs were always steeped in traditional Judeo-Christian heritage." [ 32 ] Religion—and the Judeo-Christian concept—was a major theme in Reagan's rhetoric by 1980.

[ 33 ] President Bill Clinton during his 1992 presidential campaign, likewise emphasized the role of religion in society, and in his personal life, having made references to the Judeo-Christian tradition.

[ 34 ] The term became especially significant in American politics, and, promoting "Judeo-Christian values" in the culture wars , usage surged in the 1990s.

[ 35 ] Since 9/11 [ edit ] According to Hartmann et al.

, usage shifted between 2001 and 2005, with the mainstream media using the term less, in order to characterize America as multicultural.  The study finds the term is now most likely to be used by liberals in connection with discussions of Muslim and Islamic inclusion in America , and renewed debate about the separation of church and state .

[ 35 ] The 2012 book Kosher Jesus by Orthodox rabbi Shmuley Boteach concludes with the statement that "the hyphen between Jewish and Christian values is Jesus himself." [ 36 ] In U.S. law [ edit ] In the case of Marsh v. Chambers , 463 U.S. 783 (1983), the Supreme Court of the United States held that a state legislature could constitutionally have a paid chaplain to conduct legislative prayers "in the Judeo-Christian tradition." In Simpson v.

Chesterfield County Board of Supervisors , [ 37 ] the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals held that the Supreme Court's holding in the Marsh case meant that the "Chesterfield County could constitutionally exclude Cynthia Simpson, a Wiccan priestess, from leading its legislative prayers, because her faith was not 'in the Judeo-Christian tradition.'" Chesterfield County's board included Jewish, Christian, and Muslim clergy in its invited list.

Responses [ edit ] Some theologians warn against the uncritical use of "Judeo-Christian" entirely, arguing that it can license mischief, such as opposition to secular humanism [ 38 ] with scant regard to modern Jewish, Catholic, or Christian traditions, including the liberal strains of different faiths, such as Reform Judaism and liberal Protestant Christianity .

Two notable books addressed the relations between contemporary Judaism and Christianity.

Abba Hillel Silver 's Where Judaism Differs and Leo Baeck 's Judaism and Christianity were both motivated by an impulse to clarify Judaism's distinctiveness "in a world where the term Judeo-Christian had obscured critical differences between the two faiths." [ 39 ] Reacting against the blurring of theological distinctions, Rabbi Eliezer Berkovits wrote that "Judaism is Judaism because it rejects Christianity, and Christianity is Christianity because it rejects Judaism." [ 40 ] Theologian and author Arthur A. Cohen , in The Myth of the Judeo-Christian Tradition , questioned the theological validity of the Judeo-Christian concept and suggested that it was essentially an invention of American politics , while Jacob Neusner , in Jews and Christians: The Myth of a Common Tradition , writes, "The two faiths stand for different people talking about different things to different people." [ 41 ] Law professor Stephen M. Feldman, looking at the period before 1950, chiefly in Europe, sees the concept of a Judeo-Christian tradition as supersessionism , which he characterizes as "dangerous Christian dogma (at least from a Jewish perspective)", and as a "myth" which "insidiously obscures the real and significant differences between Judaism and Christianity." [ 42 ] See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Judeo-Christian ethics .

Look up Judeo-Christian in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

American civil religion Abraham Accords Abrahamic religions Christian values Ressentiment Scheler on Ressentiment References [ edit ] ^ George Orwell; Sonia Orwell; Ian Angus (1968).

George Orwell: An age like this, 1920-1940 . Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc. p. 401.

^ Mark Silk (1984), Notes on the Judeo-Christian Tradition in America, American Quarterly 36(1), 66 ^ George Orwell (2013).

Complete Works of George Orwell . Delphi Classics].

^ Mark Silk (1984), Notes on the Judeo-Christian Tradition in America, American Quarterly 36(1), 65-85 ^ Sarna, 2004, p.266 ^ Albert Einstein (1950).

Out of My Later Years . Philosophical Library. p. 23].

^ V. S. Soloviev; Vladimir Wozniuk (2008).

Freedom, faith, and dogma: essays by V. S. Soloviev on Christianity and Judaism . State University of New York Press. p. 52].

^ Mary E. Stuckey (2013).

The Good Neighbor: Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Rhetoric of American Power . MSU Press. p. 55.

^ See Roosevelt, "'Only Thing We Have to Fear Is Fear Itself': FDR's First Inaugural Address" Archived 2022-06-04 at the Wayback Machine ^ Davis W. Houck and Mihaela Nocasian. "FDR's First Inaugural Address: Text, Context, and Reception." Rhetoric & Public Affairs 5#4 (2003): 649-678, quote p 669.

^ Gary Scott Smith (2006).

Faith and the Presidency From George Washington to George W. Bush . Oxford UP. p.

236 .

^ Smith, Faith and the Presidency p 194.

^ Atalia Omer and Jason A. Springs (2013).

Religious Nationalism: A Reference Handbook . ABC-CLIO. p. 72.

^ Timothy Wyatt, "America's Holy War: FDR, Civil Religion, and the Prelude to War" Memphis Theological Seminary Journal (2012) v. 50 online Archived 2022-06-18 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Randall B. Woods, "The Politics of Idealism: Lyndon Johnson, Civil Rights, and Vietnam." Diplomatic History 31#1 (2007): 1-18, quote p 5; The same text appears in Woods, Prisoners of Hope: Lyndon B. Johnson, the Great Society, and the Limits of Liberalism (2016) p 89.

^ Woods, Prisoners of Hope p 90.

^ Woods, "The Politics of Idealism" p 3.

^ Sarna, Jonathan.

American Judaism, A History (Yale University Press, 2004. p. 266) ^ a b Sarna, p. 267 ^ Sarna, p.267 ^ Patrick Henry, "'And I Don't Care What It Is': The Tradition-History of a Civil Religion Proof-Text," Journal of the American Academy of Religion, (1981), 49#1 pp 35-47 in JSTOR Archived 2022-06-15 at the Wayback Machine ^ Clinton Rossiter, Conservatism in America (1968) p. 268 ^ A. G. Heinsohn G. Jr., ed.

Anthology of Conservative Writing in the United States, 1932-1960 (Regnery Publishing, Inc., 1962) p. 256.

^ Barry Morris Goldwater.

With No Apologies (1979) ^ Lisa McGirr (2015).

Suburban Warriors: The Origins of the New American Right . Princeton UP. p. 173.

^ By the 1990s "Judeo-Christian" terminology was now mostly found among conservatives. Douglas Hartmann, et al., "One (Multicultural) Nation Under God? Changing Uses and Meanings of the Term "Judeo-Christian" in the American Media," Journal of Media & Religion, 2005, Vol. 4 Issue 4, pp. 207-234 ^ Andrew Preston (2012).

Sword of the Spirit, Shield of Faith: Religion in American War and Diplomacy . Knopf. pp.

546 –47.

^ Clyde Wilcox and Carin Robinson, Onward Christian Soldiers?: The Religious Right in American Politics (2010) p. 13 ^ Douglas Hartmann,  Xuefeng Zhang, and William Wischstadt. "One (Multicultural) Nation Under God? Changing Uses and Meanings of the Term" Judeo-Christian" in the American Media." Journal of Media and Religion 4.4 (2005): 207-234.

^ John Kenneth White, Still Seeing Red: How the Cold War Shapes the New American Politics (1998) p 138 ^ Steven F. Hayward (2010).

The Age of Reagan: The Conservative Counterrevolution, 1980-1989 . p. 290.

^ Tom Freiling (2003).

Reagan's God and Country: A President's Moral Compass . p. 19.

^ Brian T. Kaylor (2010).

Presidential Campaign Rhetoric in an Age of Confessional Politics . pp.

46– 48.

^ Brian T. Kaylor (2010).

Presidential Campaign Rhetoric in an Age of Confessional Politics . pp.

77– 78.

^ a b Douglas Hartmann, Xuefeng Zhang, William Wischstadt (2005). One (Multicultural) Nation Under God? Changing Uses and Meanings of the Term "Judeo-Christian" in the American Media.

Journal of Media and Religion 4(4) , 207-234 ^ Paul de Vries (March 23, 2012).

"Koshering Jesus More: An Evangelical Review of Shmuley Boteach's 'Kosher Jesus' " .

Christian Post .

Archived from the original on May 10, 2022 . Retrieved February 26, 2021 .

^ "Simpson v. Chesterfield County, No. 04-1045" (PDF) .

United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit . 2005.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2009-09-30 . Retrieved 2008-08-16 .

^ Martin E. Marty (1986), A Judeo-Christian Looks at the Judeo-Christian Tradition Archived 2017-07-06 at the Wayback Machine , in The Christian Century , October 5, 1986 ^ Sarna, p281 ^ Disputation and Dialogue: Readings in the Jewish Christian Encounter, Ed. F. E. Talmage, Ktav, 1975, p. 291.

^ Jacob Neusner (1990), Jews and Christians: The Myth of a Common Tradition . New York and London: Trinity Press International and SCM Press.  p. 28 ^ Stephen M. Feldman (1998), Please Don't Wish Me a Merry Christmas: A Critical History of the Separation of Church and State Further reading [ edit ] Coe, Kevin, and Sarah Chenoweth. "The Evolution of Christian America: Christianity in Presidential Discourse, 1981–2013." International Journal of Communication 9:753-73 (2015) online Cohen, Arthur A.

The Myth of the Judeo-Christian Tradition .

Harper & Row , New York, 1970.

Gelernter, David.

Americanism: The Fourth Great Western Religion .

Doubleday . 2007; ISBN 978-0385513128 Hartmann, Douglas, Xuefeng Zhang, and William Wischstadt. "One (Multicultural) Nation Under God? Changing Uses and Meanings of the Term 'Judeo-Christian' in the American Media." Journal of Media and Religion 4.4 (2005): 207–234.

Lillback, Peter A.

George Washington's Sacred Fire . (Providence Forum Press,2006.

ISBN 0978605268 ) Merino, Stephen M. "Religious diversity in a "Christian nation": The effects of theological exclusivity and interreligious contact on the acceptance of religious diversity." Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 49.2 (2010): 231-246.

Moore, Deborah Dash. "Jewish GIs and the Creation of the Judeo-Christian Tradition," Religion and American Culture: A Journal of Interpretation, Vol. 8, No. 1 (Winter, 1998), pp. 31–53 in JSTOR Novak, Michael.

On Two Wings: Humble Faith and Common Sense at the American Founding . Encounter Books, 2002.

ISBN 978-1893554344 Preston, Andrew. "A Judeo-Christian Foreign Policy," in Preston, Sword of the Spirit, Shield of Faith: Religion in American War and Diplomacy (2012) pp 559–74.

Schultz, Kevin M.

Tri-Faith America: How Catholics and Jews held postwar America to its Protestant promise (Oxford University Press, 2011).

Shaban, Fuad.

For Zion's sake: the Judeo-Christian tradition in American culture (Pluto Press, 2005).

online Silk, Mark . "Notes on the Judeo-Christian tradition in America," American Quarterly, (1984) 36:65–85, the standard history of the term in JSTOR Wall, Wendy L.

Inventing the "American Way": The politics of consensus from the New Deal to the Civil rights movement" . Oxford University Press, 2008.

ISBN 9780195329100 v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐x2xf5
Cached time: 20250815221700
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.499 seconds
Real time usage: 0.702 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2802/1000000
Revision size: 28232/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 116501/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4397/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 94585/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.261/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6838344/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  444.851      1 -total
 36.69%  163.218      1 Template:Reflist
 27.37%  121.771     13 Template:Cite_book
 25.12%  111.763      1 Template:Conservatism_US
 13.70%   60.936      1 Template:Short_description
  7.07%   31.436      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.95%   30.897      1 Template:Western_culture
  5.22%   23.227     27 Template:Main_other
  4.06%   18.061      2 Template:Sister_project
  3.99%   17.767      1 Template:Wikiquote Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:50562575:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815221700 and revision id 1296391350. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Judeo-Christian_ethics&oldid=1296391350 " Categories : Culture of the United States Judeo-Christian topics Religious ethics Jewish ethics Christian ethics Western culture Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 18:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Judeo-Christian ethics 4 languages Add topic

