Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Associated symbols 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents En (typography) 7 languages 한국어 Italiano Magyar 日本語 Српски / srpski 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "En" typography – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Typographic unit equal to half an em An en (from English en quadrat ) is a typographic unit , half of the width of an em .  By definition, it is equivalent to half of the body height of the typeface (e.g., in 16- point type it is 8 points).

[ 1 ] The en is sometimes referred to as the "nut", to avoid confusion with the similar-sounding "em".

[ 2 ] The en dash ( – ) and en space ( ) are each one en wide. In English, the en dash is commonly used for inclusive ranges (e.g., "pages 12–17" or "August 7, 1988 – November 26, 2005"), to connect prefixes to open compounds (e.g., "pre–World War II").

[ 3 ] The en-dash is also increasingly used to replace the long dash ("—", also called an em dash or em rule). When using it to replace a long dash, spaces are needed either side of it – like so. This is standard practice in the German language , where the hyphen is the only dash without spaces on either side ( line breaks are not spaces per se ).

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] Some sources claim the term "en" was derived from the letter "n", which is roughly half the width of the letter "m". This etymology, however, is disputed.

[ 4 ] Beginning in the late 18th century, compositors were frequently paid by the en, [ 1 ] rather than by the page. In the United Kingdom , a commonly cited "standard" rate was 1,000 ens per hour, although actual compositors' output varied widely. Many workers fell short of this figure, while skilled workers were known to set 2,000–3,000 ens per hour, and late-1900s typesetting competitions often saw participants reach a corrected rate of 4,000 ens per hour. After the introduction of the Linotype typesetters frequently reached rates of at least 6,000 ens per hour.

[ 5 ] Associated symbols [ edit ] en space : U+2002 EN SPACE ( &ensp; · &#8194; · &#x2002;) en dash : U+2013 – EN DASH ( &ndash; · &#8211; · &#x2013;) [ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Non-breaking space width variations Standard typographic symbols x-height References [ edit ] ^ a b Stokes, Roy Bishop (2001).

Esdaile's manual of bibliography . Scarecrow Press. p. 152.

ISBN 978-0-8108-3922-9 . Retrieved 18 March 2023 .

^ Southward, John (1911).

Practical Printing: A Handbook to the Art of Typography . Retrieved 18 March 2023 .

^ "Hyphens, En Dashes, Em Dashes" .

Chicago Manual of Style . Retrieved 18 March 2023 .

^ Blokland, Frank E.

"em and en squares" .

lettermodel.org . Retrieved 18 March 2023 .

^ Gaskell, Philip.

A New Introduction to Bibliography .

^ "General Punctuation" .

Codepoints.net . Retrieved 18 March 2023 .

v t e Typography Page Canons of page construction Column Even working Margin Page numbering Paper size Pagination Pull quote Recto and verso Intentionally blank page Paragraph Alignment Leading Line length River Runaround Widows and orphans runt Character Typeface anatomy Counter Diacritics Dingbat Glyph Ink trap Ligature Rotation Subscript and superscript Swash Text figures Tittle Capitalization All caps Camel case Initial Letter case Small caps Snake case Title case Visual distinction Blackboard bold Bold Color printing Italics Oblique Underline Whitespace Horizontal aspects Figure space Kerning Letter spacing Pitch Sentence spacing Thin space Word spacing Vertical aspects Ascender Baseline Body height Cap height Descender Mean line Overshoot x-height Typeface classifications Roman type Serif Antiqua Didone slab serif Sans-serif Blackletter type Fraktur Rotunda Schwabacher Gaelic type Insular Uncial Specialist Record type Display typeface script fat face reverse-contrast Punctuation ( List ) Bullet Dash Hanging punctuation Hyphen minus sign Interpunct Space Vertical bar Typesetting Etaoin shrdlu Font computer monospaced Font catalog For position only Letterpress Lorem ipsum Microprinting Microtypography Movable type Pangram Phototypesetting Punchcutting Reversing type Sort Type color Type design Typeface list Typographic units Agate Cicero Em En Metric units Pica Point traditional point-size names Twip Digital typography Character encoding Hinting Text shaping Rasterization Typographic features Web typography Bézier curves Desktop publishing Typography in other writing systems Arabic Cyrillic PT Fonts East Asian Thai National Fonts Related articles Penmanship Handwriting Handwriting script Calligraphy Style guide Type design Type foundry History of Western typography Intellectual property protection of typefaces Technical lettering Vox-ATypI classification Related template Punctuation and other typographic symbols Category This typography -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=En_(typography)&oldid=1262943253 " Categories : Typography Typography stubs Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 All stub articles This page was last edited on 13 December 2024, at 20:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents En (typography) 7 languages Add topic

