Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Haecceity vs. quiddity 3 Haecceity in scholasticism 4 Haecceity in anglophone philosophy 5 Haecceity in sociology and continental philosophy 6 Other uses 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Haecceity 14 languages Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano Latina Nederlands Polski Português کوردی Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term from medieval scholastic philosophy Part of a series on John Duns Scotus Scotism Scholasticism Univocity Haecceity Immaculate Conception Beatific vision Formal distinction Hylomorphism Scotistic realism Substance theory ( ousia ) Accident Substantial form Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Individuation Existence of God Christology Platonic realism Categories (Aristotle) Problem of universals Metaphysics Christianity and slavery Works Opus Oxoniense Tractatus de Primo Principio Quaestiones Quodlibetales Influences Aristotle ("The Philosopher") St. Paul ("The Apostle") Pseudo-Dionysius St. Augustine ("The Theologian") St. Boethius Avicenna Peter Lombard ("The Master") Averroes ("The Commentator") Maimonides ("Rabbi Moses") St. Albertus Magnus ("The Universal Doctor") St. Thomas Aquinas ("The Angelic Doctor") People Andreas Aureoli Balic Barnewall Baron Bonet Caracciolo Carletti Faber Ferchi Frassen Horan Mac Cathmhaoil Mastrius de Mayronis d'Orbellis Ó Fithcheallaigh Pelagius Punch Scotellus Scriptoris Thomae Sixtus IV Wadding Related Aristotelianism Franciscan Order Oxford University Catholic theology List of Franciscan theologians Empiricism Philosophy Portal Catholicism Portal v t e Haecceity ( / h ɛ k ˈ s iː ɪ t i , h iː k -/ ; from the Latin haecceitas , 'thisness') is a term from medieval scholastic philosophy , first coined by followers of Duns Scotus to denote a concept that he seems to have originated: the irreducible determination of a thing that makes it this particular thing. Haecceity is a person's or object's thisness , the individualising difference between the concept "a person" and the concept "Socrates" ( i.e.

, a specific person).

[ 1 ] In modern philosophy of physics , it is sometimes referred to as primitive thisness .

[ 2 ] Etymology [ edit ] Haecceity is a Latin neologism formed as an abstract noun derived from the demonstrative pronoun haec(ce) , meaning 'this (very)' (feminine singular) or 'these (very)' (feminine or neuter plural). It is apparently formed on the model of another (much older) neologism qui(d)ditas ('whatness'), which is a calque of Aristotle 's Greek to ti esti ( τὸ τί ἐστι ) [ 3 ] or 'the what (it) is'.

Haecceity vs. quiddity [ edit ] Haecceity may be defined in some dictionaries as simply the "essence" of a thing, or as a simple synonym for quiddity or hypokeimenon . However, in proper philosophical usage these terms have not only distinct but opposite meanings. Whereas haecceity refers to aspects of a thing that make it a particular thing, quiddity refers to the universal qualities of a thing, its "whatness", or the aspects of a thing it may share with other things and by which it may form part of a genus of things.

[ 4 ] Haecceity in scholasticism [ edit ] Duns Scotus makes the following distinction: Because there is among beings something indivisible into subjective parts—that is, such that it is formally incompatible for it to be divided into several parts each of which is it—the question is not what it is by which such a division is formally incompatible with it (because it is formally incompatible by incompatibility), but rather what it is by which, as by a proximate and intrinsic foundation, this incompatibility is in it. Therefore, the sense of the questions on this topic [viz. of individuation] is: What is it in [ e.g.

] this stone, by which as by a proximate foundation it is absolutely incompatible with the stone for it to be divided into several parts each of which is this stone, the kind of division that is proper to a universal whole as divided into its subjective parts?

— Duns Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1. q. 2, n. 48 In Scotism and the scholastic usage in general, therefore, "haecceity" properly means the irreducible individuating differentia that together with the specific essence (i.e. quiddity) constitute the individual (or the individual essence), much as specific differentia combined with the genus (or generic essence) constitute the species (or specific essence). But haecceity differs from the specific differentia by not having any conceptually specifiable content: it adds no further specification to the whatness of a thing but merely determines it to be a particular unrepeatable instance of the kind specified by the quiddity. This is connected with Aristotle's notion that an individual cannot be defined.

According to Scotism, individuals are more perfect than the specific essence and thus have not only a higher degree of unity, but also a greater degree of truth and goodness. God multiplied individuals to communicate to them His goodness and beatitude.

[ 5 ] Haecceity in anglophone philosophy [ edit ] In analytical philosophy, the meaning of "haecceity" shifted somewhat.

Charles Sanders Peirce used the term as a non-descriptive reference to an individual.

[ 6 ] Alvin Plantinga and other analytical philosophers used "haecceity" in the sense of "individual essence". The "haecceity" of analytical philosophers thus comprises not only the individuating differentia (the scholastic haecceity) but the entire essential determination of an individual (i.e., including what the scholastics would call its quiddity).

Haecceity in sociology and continental philosophy [ edit ] Harold Garfinkel , the founder of ethnomethodology , used the term "haecceity", to emphasize the unavoidable and irremediable indexical character of any expression, behavior, or situation. For Garfinkel, indexicality was not a problem. He treated the haecceities and contingencies of social practices as a resource for making sense together. In contrast to theoretical generalizations, Garfinkel introduced "haecceities" in "Parson's Plenum" (1988) to indicate the importance of the infinite contingencies in both situations and practices for the local accomplishment of social order.

[ 7 ] According to Garfinkel, members display and produce the social order they refer to within the setting they contribute to. The study of practical action and situations in their "haecceities"—aimed at disclosing the ordinary, ongoing social order constructed by the members' practices [ 8 ] —is the work of ethnomethodology. Garfinkel called ethnomethodological studies investigations of "haecceities", i.e., just thisness: just here, just now, with just what is at hand, with just who is here, in just the time that just this local gang of us have, in and with just what the local gang of us can make of just the time we need, and therein, in, about, as, and over the course of the in vivo work, achieving and exhibiting everything that those great achievements of comparability, universality, transcendentality of results, indifference of methods to local parties who are using them, for what they consisted of, looked like, the "missing what" of formal analytic studies of practical action.

— Harold Garfinkel, Lawrence D. Wieder, Two Incommensurable, Asymmetrically Alternate Technologies of Social Analysis, 1992, p. 203 Gilles Deleuze uses the term in a different way to denote entities that exist on the plane of immanence . The usage was likely chosen in line with his esoteric concept of difference and individuation and his critique of object-centered metaphysics .

Michael Lynch (1991) described the ontological production of objects in the natural sciences as "assemblages of haecceities", thereby offering an alternate reading of Deleuze and Guattari's (1980) discussion of "memories of haecceity" in the light of Garfinkel's treatment of "haecceity".

[ 9 ] Other uses [ edit ] Gerard Manley Hopkins drew on Scotus, whom he called "of reality the rarest-veined unraveller", [ 10 ] to construct his poetic theory of inscape .

James Joyce made similar use of the concept of haecceitas to develop his idea of the secular epiphany .

[ 11 ] James Wood refers extensively to haecceitas (as "thisness") in developing an argument about conspicuous detail in aesthetic literary criticism .

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Entitativity Formal distinction Haecceitism Hypostasis Identity of indiscernibles Irreducibility Objective precision Open individualism Ostensive definition Personal identity Principle of individuation Quiddity Rigid designation Scotism Scotistic realism Ship of Theseus Sine qua non Tathātā Type-token distinction Vertiginous question References [ edit ] ^ Gardner, W. H.

, Gerard Manley Hopkins (1975), p. xxiii ^ French, Steven (2019), "Identity and Individuality in Quantum Theory" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2022-04-21 ^ Aristotle, Metaphysics , 1030a ^ Hicks, P.

, The Journey So Far (2003), p. 218 ^ Bettoni-Bonansea.

Duns Scotus- The Basic Principles of His Philosophy (PDF) . pp.

63– 64.

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 30, 2022.

^ Bertman, M. A., Humanities Insights (2007), p. 39 ^ Rawls, Anne W. (2003), "Harold Garfinkel", in Ritzer, George (ed.), The Blackwell companion to major contemporary social theorists , Malden, Massachusetts Oxford: Blackwell, ISBN 9781405105958 .

Also available as: Rawls, Anne W. (2003). "Harold Garfinkel".

Chapter 5. Harold Garfinkel . Wiley. pp.

122– 153.

doi : 10.1002/9780470999912.ch6 .

ISBN 9780470999912 .

Extract.

^ Button, G., ed., Ethnomethodology and the Human Sciences (1991), p. 10 ^ Lynch, Mike (1991), Button, Graham (ed.), "Method: measurement – ordinary and scientific measurement as ethnomethodological phenomena" , Ethnomethodology and the Human Sciences , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

77– 108, doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511611827.006 , ISBN 978-0-521-38952-5 , retrieved 2022-02-20 ^ Duns Scotus's Oxford quoted in Gardner, p. xxiv ^ Kearney, R.

, Navigations ( Syracuse : Syracuse University Press , 2006), pp. 133–134 .

^ Bartosch, R., EnvironMentality: Ecocriticism and the Event of Postcolonial Fiction ( Amsterdam & New York : Rodopi , 2013), p. 270 .

Further reading [ edit ] E. Gilson, The Philosophy of the Middle Ages (1955) A. Heuser, The Shaping Vision of Gerard Manley Hopkins (OUP 1955) E. Longpre, La Philosophie du B. Duns Scotus (Paris 1924) Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari . 1980.

A Thousand Plateaus . Trans.

Brian Massumi . London and New York: Continuum, 2004. Vol. 2 of Capitalism and Schizophrenia . 2 vols. 1972–1980. Trans. of Mille Plateaux . Paris: Les Editions de Minuit. ISBN Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari.  1991/1994. " What is Philosophy?

".  Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Gregory Burchell.  New York: Columbia University Press, 1994.

Harold Garfinkel, 'Evidence for Locally Produced, Naturally Accountable Phenomena of Order, Logic, Meaning, Method, etc., in and as of the Essentially Unavoidable and Irremediable Haecceity of Immortal Ordinary Society', Sociological Theory Spring 1988, (6)1:103-109 External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of haecceity at Wiktionary Singularity Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy article — "Medieval Theories of Haecceity" v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal v t e Gilles Deleuze – Félix Guattari Concepts and theories Affect Arborescent Assemblage Body without organs Desiring-production Deterritorialization Difference Erewhon Event Haecceity Immanent evaluation Individuation Line of flight Minority Molar configuration Multiplicity Plane of immanence Reterritorialization Rhizome Schizoanalysis Societies of control Socius Subjectification Transcendental empiricism Univocity of being Virtual Works by Deleuze and Guattari Capitalism and Schizophrenia Anti-Oedipus A Thousand Plateaus Kafka: Toward a Minor Literature Rhizome Nomadology: The War Machine What Is Philosophy?

Works by Deleuze Empiricism and Subjectivity Nietzsche and Philosophy Kant's Critical Philosophy Proust and Signs Nietzsche Bergsonism Masochism: Coldness and Cruelty Difference and Repetition Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza The Logic of Sense Spinoza: Practical Philosophy The Intellectuals and Power: A Discussion Between Gilles Deleuze and Michel Foucault Dialogues Superpositions Francis Bacon: The Logic of Sensation Cinema 1: The Movement Image Cinema 2: The Time-Image Foucault The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque Périclès et Verdi: La philosophie de Francois Châtelet Negotiations Essays Critical and Clinical Bartleby, la formula della creazione Pure Immanence: Essays on a Life Desert Islands and Other Texts 1953-1974 Two Regimes of Madness Works by Guattari Psychanalyse et transversalité Molecular Revolution Desire and Revolution L'inconscient machinique. Essais de Schizoanalyse L’intervention institutionnelle Les années d'hiver Pratique de l'institutionnel et politique Communists Like Us Molecular Revolution in Brazil The Three Ecologies Cartographies schizoanalytiques Chaosmose Chaosophy Soft Subversions The Guattari Reader The Anti-Oedipus Papers Chaos and Complexity Related topics L'Abécédaire de Gilles Deleuze La Borde Clinic Deleuze and Guattari A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and Social Complexity NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐d49c7db49‐kchlr
Cached time: 20250814234913
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.426 seconds
Real time usage: 0.522 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1526/1000000
Revision size: 12363/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 76214/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2599/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 9/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 49575/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.276/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16604449/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  425.742      1 -total
 22.45%   95.572      1 Template:Reflist
 20.81%   88.597      5 Template:Lang
 16.91%   72.003      3 Template:Citation
 16.87%   71.838      1 Template:Scotism
 16.45%   70.044      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.51%   57.519      1 Template:Short_description
 11.51%   48.988      3 Template:Navbox
 10.78%   45.916      1 Template:Catholic_philosophy_footer
  7.72%   32.875      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2967040:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814234913 and revision id 1292302510. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Haecceity&oldid=1292302510 " Categories : Essentialism Ontology Scotism Substance theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 07:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Haecceity 14 languages Add topic

