Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Major Works 2.2 Collected Editions 2.2.1 Sämtliche Werke 2.2.2 Gesammelte Schriften 2.2.3 Correspondence and Critical Editions 3 Notes 4 Further reading 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Christoph Martin Wieland 44 languages Alemannisch العربية Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German poet and writer (1733–1813) 1805 portrait of Christoph Martin Wieland by Ferdinand Jagemann Christoph Martin Wieland ( / ˈ v iː l ən d / ; German: [ˈviːlant] ; 5 September 1733 – 20 January 1813) was a German poet and writer, representative of literary Rococo . He is best-remembered for having written the first Bildungsroman ( Geschichte des Agathon ), [ 1 ] as well as the epic Oberon , which formed the basis for both Friederike Sophie Seyler 's opera of the same name and Carl Maria von Weber 's opera of the same name . His thought was representative of the cosmopolitanism of the German Enlightenment , exemplified in his remark: "Only a true cosmopolitan can be a good citizen." [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] He was a key figure of Weimar Classicism and a collaborator of Abel Seyler 's theatre company .

Biography [ edit ] Christoph Martin Wieland was born in Oberholzheim (now part of Achstetten ), half of which then belonged to the Free Imperial City of Biberach an der Riss and the other half to Gutenzell Abbey in the south-east of the modern-day state of Baden-Württemberg .

[ 5 ] His father, who was pastor in Oberholzheim and subsequently in Biberach, took great pains with his son's education.  From the town school of Biberach he passed on at the age of twelve to the Kloster Berge gymnasium , near Magdeburg . He was a precocious child, and when he left school in 1749 was widely read in the Latin classics and the leading contemporary French writers; amongst German poets his favourites were Brockes and Klopstock .

[ 6 ] During the summer of 1750, he fell in love with a cousin, Sophie Gutermann , and this love affair inspired him to plan his first ambitious work, Die Natur der Dinge (The Nature of Things, 1752), a didactic poem in six books. In 1750 he went to the University of Tübingen as a student of law , but his time was mainly taken up with literary studies. The poems he wrote at the university— Hermann , an epic (published by F. Muncker, 1886), Zwölf moralische Briefe in Versen (Twelve Moral Letters in Verse, 1752), Anti-Ovid (1752)—are pietistic in tone and dominated by the influence of Klopstock.

[ 6 ] Wieland's poetry attracted the attention of the Swiss literary reformer, J. J. Bodmer , who invited Wieland to visit him in Zürich in the summer of 1752. After a few months however, he felt little sympathy with Wieland as, two years earlier, he had felt himself with Klopstock, and the friends parted; but Wieland remained in Switzerland until 1760, spending the last year, at Bern where he obtained a position as private tutor. Here he became intimate with Jean-Jacques Rousseau 's friend Julie de Bondeli .

[ 6 ] Birthplace of Christoph Martin Wieland in Oberholzheim (1840) Wieland's tastes had changed; the writings of his early Swiss years— Der geprüfte Abraham (The Trial of Abraham's Faith, 1753), Sympathien (1756), Empfindungen eines Christen (1757)—were still in the manner of his earlier writings, but with the tragedies, Lady Johanna Gray (1758), and Clementina von Porretta (1760)—the latter based on Samuel Richardson 's Sir Charles Grandison —the epic fragment Cyrus (first five cantos, 1759), and the "moral story in dialogues", Araspes und Panthea (1760), Wieland, as Gotthold Lessing said, "forsook the ethereal spheres to wander again among the sons of men." [ 6 ] In Cyrus , he had been inspired by the deeds of Frederick the Great to write a poem exhibiting the ideal of a hero.

Araspes und Panthea is based on an episode from the Cyropaedia of Xenophon .

[ citation needed ] View of Schloss Warthausen by Johann Heinrich Tischbein (1781) Wieland's conversion was completed at Biberach, having returned in 1760 as director of the chancery. The monotony of his life here was relieved by the friendship of a Count Stadion , whose library in the castle of Warthausen, not far from Biberach, was well stocked with French and English literature. Wieland met again his early love Sophie Gutermann, who had become the wife of Hofrat La Roche, then manager of Count Stadion's estates.

[ 6 ] In Don Sylvio von Rosalva (1764), a romance in imitation of Don Quixote , he held his earlier faith up to ridicule [ 7 ] and in the Comische Erzählungen (1765) he gave his extravagant imagination only too free a rein.

[ 6 ] Former Komödienhaus in der Schlachtmetzig in Biberach an der Riss where in 1762, The Tempest ( Shakespeare ), translated by Christoph Martin Wieland, was performed for the first time in Germany More important is the novel Geschichte des Agathon (1766–1767), in which, under the guise of a Greek fiction, Wieland described his own spiritual and intellectual growth. This work, which Lessing recommended as "a novel of classic taste", marks an epoch in the development of the modern psychological novel . Of equal importance was Wieland's translation of twenty-two of Shakespeare 's plays into prose (8 vols., 1762–1766); it was the first attempt to present the English poet to the German people in something approaching entirety.

[ 8 ] With the poems Musarion oder die Philosophie der Grazien (1768), Idris (1768), Combabus (1770), Der neue Amadis (1771), Wieland opened the series of light and graceful romances in verse which appealed so irresistibly to his contemporaries and acted as an antidote to the sentimental excesses of the subsequent Sturm und Drang movement.

[ 6 ] Musarion advocates a rational unity of the sensual and spiritual; Amadis celebrates the triumph of intellectual over physical beauty.

[ 9 ] Wieland married Anna Dorothea von Hillenbrand (July 8, 1746 – November 9, 1801) on October 21, 1765. They had 14 children. Wieland's daughter Sophia Catharina Susanna Wieland (October 19, 1768 – September 1, 1837) married philosopher Karl Leonhard Reinhold (1757–1823) on May 18, 1785.

Between 1769 and 1772, Wieland was a professor of philosophy at the University of Erfurt .

[ 6 ] In his Verklagter Amor ("Cupid Accused") he defended amatory poetry; and in the Dialogen des Diogenes von Sinope (1770) he gave a general vindication of his philosophical views.

[ citation needed ] In 1772 he published Der goldene Spiegel oder die Könige van Scheschian , a pedagogic work in the form of oriental stories; this attracted the attention of Duchess Anna Amalia of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel , and resulted in his appointment as tutor to her two sons, the Duke Karl August and his brother Prince Constantin , at Weimar . With the exception of some years spent at Ossmannstedt, where in later life he bought an estate, Weimar remained Wieland's home until his death.

[ 6 ] Turning his attention to dramatic poetry, he wrote opera librettos such as Wahl des Hercules ("Choice of Hercules") and Alceste by Anton Schweitzer .

[ 10 ] In 1773, he founded Der teutsche Merkur , which under his editorship (1773–1789) became the most influential literary review in Germany.

[ 6 ] His views, as exhibited therein, however, showed so much of the narrow conventional spirit of French criticism, that he was attacked by Goethe in the satire Götter, Helden und Wieland ("Gods, Heroes and Wieland"). This Wieland answered with great good nature, recommending it to all who were fond of wit and sarcasm. Goethe and Johann Gottfried Herder were soon drawn to Weimar, where the Duchess Anna Amalia formed a circle of talent and genius, later also joined by Friedrich Schiller .

[ citation needed ] Politically, Wieland was a moderate liberal who advocated a constitutional monarchy, a free press, and a middle path between extremes of left and right.

[ 11 ] At least three of his works, Geschichte des Agathon , Der goldene Spiegel oder die Könige van Scheschian , and Beiträge zur geheimen Geschichte des menschlichen Verstandes und Herzens , found themselves on the official Bavarian Illuminati reading list.

[ 12 ] Wieland also explored the role of secret societies in Enlightenment thought in Das Geheimnis des Kosmopoliten-Ordens (1788). This work examines the political and philosophical implications of clandestine organizations, particularly their potential to form a "state within a state".

[ 13 ] A modern English edition, The Secret of the Order of Cosmopolitans , was published in 2025, making the text accessible to a wider audience.

[ 14 ] He was also a librettist for the Seyler theatrical company of Abel Seyler . Of his later writings the most important are the admirable satire on German provinciality — the most attractive of all his prose writings — Die Abderiten, eine sehr wahrscheinliche Geschichte (A very probable history of the Abderites, 1774), [ 15 ] (translated into French by Antoine Gilbert Griffet de Labaume ) and the charming poetic romances, Das Wintermärchen (1776), Das Sommermärchen (1777), Geron der Adelige (1777), Pervonte oder die Wünsche (1778), a series culminating with Wieland's poetic masterpiece, the romantic epic of Oberon (1780).

[ 6 ] In 1780 he created the singspiel Rosamunde with the composer Anton Schweitzer .

In Wieland's later novels, such as the Geheime Geschichte des Philosophen Peregrinus Proteus (1791) and Aristipp und einige seiner Zeitgenossen (1800–1802), a didactic and philosophic tendency obscures the small literary interest they possess. He also translated Horace 's Satires (1786), Lucian 's Works (1788–1789), Cicero 's Letters (1808 ff.), and from 1796 to 1803 he edited the Attisches Museum which did valuable service in popularizing Greek studies.

[ 6 ] Wieland was also strongly influenced by the French fairy-tale vogue of the 18th century, he published a collection of tales entitled Dschinnistan (1786–1789), which included three original tales, 'Der Stein der Weisen' ('The Philosopher's Stone'), 'Timander und Melissa', and 'Der Druide oder die Salamanderin und die Bildsäule' ('The Druid or the Salamander and the Painted Pillar'). Wieland had a strong influence on the German literature of his time.

[ 16 ] He died in Weimar.

Works [ edit ] Wieland was a prolific writer, publishing novels, poetry, plays, and philosophical treatises. His works contributed significantly to the literary and intellectual movements of the Enlightenment and Weimar Classicism.

Major Works [ edit ] Der geprüfte Abraham (1753) Geschichte des Agathon (1766–1767) Don Sylvio von Rosalva (1764) Musarion oder die Philosophie der Grazien (1768) Der neue Amadis (1771) Die Abderiten, eine sehr wahrscheinliche Geschichte (1774) Oberon (1780) Dschinnistan (1786–1789) Das Geheimnis des Kosmopoliten-Ordens (1788) → The Secret of the Order of Cosmopolitans Aristipp und einige seiner Zeitgenossen (1800–1802) Collected Editions [ edit ] Wieland’s complete works were widely republished in collected editions, some of which included critical annotations and commentary.

Sämtliche Werke [ edit ] Sämtliche Werke (1794–1802, 45 vols.) – Edited by Ludwig Wieland (1815) and H. Gessner (1815–1816) Later editions: 1818–1828, 53 vols.

1839–1840, 36 vols.

1853–1858, 36 vols.

1879–1882, 40 vols. (edited by H. Düntzer) Selected works published in Kürschner's Deutsche Nationalliteratur (vols. 51–56, 1883–1887), edited by Heinrich Pröhle Further selections by F. Muncker (6 vols., 1889) and W. Bolsche (4 vols., 1902) Gesammelte Schriften [ edit ] Edited by Deutsche Kommission der Königlich Preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (1909–1975) Two sections: Abt. I: Werke Abt. II: Übersetzungen Later edited by Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin (1945), Akademie der Wissenschaften der DDR (1969), Hans Werner Seiffert, and others.

Includes volumes with and without commentary.

Some volumes remain missing from the edition.

Correspondence and Critical Editions [ edit ] Wielands Briefwechsel (20 volumes, 1963–2007) – Edited by Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, later by Berlin-Brandenburgische Akademie der Wissenschaften Wielands Werke. Historisch-kritische Ausgabe (since 2008) – Edited by Klaus Manger and Jan Philipp Reemtsma, published in Berlin/New York.

Notes [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ^ Swales, Martin.

The German Bildungsroman from Wieland to Hesse . Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978. 38.

^ Rasmussen, Dennis C. (2014).

The Pragmatic Enlightenment . Cambridge University Press. p. 12.

^ Carter, April (2013).

The Political Theory of Global Citizenship . Routledge.

^ Wellbery, David E. (2004).

A New History of German Literature . Harvard University Press. pp.

382– 383.

ISBN 9780674015036 .

^ "Ortsteil Oberholzheim" (in German). Gemeinde Achstetten . Retrieved 23 February 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Robertson, John George (1911). " Wieland, Christoph Martin ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 28 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

621– 622.

^ Martens, A.

Untersuchungen über Wieland's Don Sylvio mit Berücksichtigung der übrigen Dichtungen der Biberacher Zeit (1901) ^ Meisnest, F. W.

Wieland's translation of Shakespeare (1914) ^ Ham, Edith M.

Wieland's "Neuer Amadis" (1919) ^ Lawrence, Richard (July 2008).

"Schweitzer, A Alceste" .

Gramophone . Retrieved 20 July 2017 .

^ Niekerk, Carl (2018).

The Radical Enlightenment in Germany: A Cultural Perspective . BRILL. p. 79.

^ Melanson, Terry: Some Original Writings of the Order of the Illuminati (pp. 26–43) ^ Wieland, Christoph Martin (1788).

"Das Geheimnis des Kosmopoliten-Ordens" .

Projekt Gutenberg-DE . Retrieved 2 March 2025 .

^ Wieland, Christoph Martin (2025). Terhorst, Bastian (ed.).

The Secret of the Order of Cosmopolitans . epubli.

ISBN 9783819044144 .

^ Seuffert, B.

Wielands Abderiten (1878) ^ Critique of Judgment , 5:309.

Further reading [ edit ] J. G. Gruber , C.M. Wielands Leben (4 vols., 1827–1828) Heinrich Doring , C.M. Wieland (1853); Christoph Martin Wieland, ein biographisches Denkmal (1840) J. W. Loebell, C.M. Wieland (1858) Heinrich Pröhle , Lessing, Wieland, Heinse (1877) L. F. Ofterdinger, Wielands Leben und Wirken in Schwaben und in der Schweiz (1877) R. Keil, Wieland und Reinhold (1885) F. Thalmeyr, Über Wielands Klassizität, Sprache und SM (1894) M. Doll, Wieland und die Antike (1896) K. Buchner, Wieland und die Weidmannsche Buchhandlung. Zur Geschichte deutscher Literatur und deutschen Buchhandels (1871) See also M. Koch's article in the Allgemeine deutsche Biographie (1897) C. A. Behmer, Sterne und Wieland (1899) J. M. R. Lenz , Vertheidigung des Herrn Wieland gegen die Wolken (1902) W. Lenz, Wielands Verhältnis zu Spenser, Pope und Swift (1903) L. Hirzel, Wielands Beziehungen zu den deutschen Romantikern (1904) E. Haman, Wielands Bildungsideal (1907) C. Elson, Wieland and Shaftesbury (1913) H. Behme, Heinrich von Kleist und C.M. Wieland (1914) V. Michel, C.M. Wieland, la formation et l'évolution de son esprit jusqu'en 1772 (1938) M. G. Bach Wieland's attitude toward woman and her cultural and social relations (1966) Jan Philipp Reemtsma , Das Buch vom Ich: Christoph Martin Wielands » Aristipp und einige seiner Zeitgenossen « (1993) Jan Philipp Reemtsma, Der Liebe Maskentanz: Aufsätze zum Werk Christoph Martin Wielands (1999) References [ edit ] Elizabeth Barnes: "Loving with a Vengeance: Wieland, Familicide and the Crisis of Masculinity in the Early Nation". In: Milette Shamir und Jennifer Travis: Boys Don’t Cry? Rethinking Narratives of Masculinity and Emotion in the U.S.

Columbia University Press: New York, 2002, S. 44–63.

Reynolds, Francis J., ed. (1921).

"Wieland, Christoph Martin" .

Collier's New Encyclopedia . New York: P. F. Collier & Son Company.

Rines, George Edwin, ed. (1920).

"Wieland, Christoph Martin" .

Encyclopedia Americana .

Giorgia Sogos: Christoph Martin Wieland alla corte della duchessa Anna Amalia. In: Ders. Stefan Zweig, der Kosmopolit. Studiensammlung über seine Werke und andere Beiträge. Eine kritische Analyse. Free Pen Verlag Bonn 2017, ISBN 978-3-945177-43-3.

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Christoph Martin Wieland at Wikiquote Media related to Christoph Martin Wieland at Wikimedia Commons Works by Christoph Martin Wieland at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Christoph Martin Wieland at the Internet Archive Works by Christoph Martin Wieland at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Der Teutsche Merkur , vols. 1773-89 are digitized (April 2003) Wieland, Christoph Martin (1887).

[Opere]. 1 . Berlin und Stüttgart: W. Spemann.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (1887).

Oberon und Erzahlungen und Marchen in Versen . Berlin und Stüttgart: W. Spemann.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (1887).

Geschichte der Abderiten . Berlin und Stüttgart: W. Spemann.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (1887).

Aristipp. 1 . Berlin und Stüttgart: W. Spemann.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (1887).

Aristipp. 2 . Berlin und Stüttgart: W. Spemann.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (1887).

[Opere]. 2 . Berlin und Stüttgart: W. Spemann.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (c. 1910).

Geschichte des Agathon. 1 . Berlin [etc.]: Bong & Co.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (c. 1910).

Aufsätze . Berlin [etc.]: Bong & Co.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (c. 1910).

Geschichte des Agathon. 2 . Berlin [etc.]: Bong & Co.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (c. 1910).

Geschichte des Agathon. 3 . Berlin [etc.]: Bong & Co.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (c. 1910).

Oberon . Berlin [etc.]: Bong & Co.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (c. 1910).

Verserzählungen. 1 . Berlin [etc.]: Bong & Co.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (c. 1910).

Verserzählungen. 2 . Berlin [etc.]: Bong & Co.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (c. 1910).

Gottergesprache. 1 . Berlin [etc.]: Bong & Co.

Wieland, Christoph Martin (c. 1910).

Nachlass des Diogenes von Sinope . Berlin [etc.]: Bong & Co.

v t e German-language literature Related articles German language History of Germany History of Austria History of Switzerland History of Liechtenstein Old High German literature Middle High German literature Early New High German literature Sturm und Drang Weimar Classicism Romanticism Literary realism Weimar culture Exilliteratur Pop literature Austrian literature Swiss literature German studies Related categories Austrian writers German writers Liechtenstein writers Swiss writers in German Category:Translators of William Shakespeare Reformation era literature Medieval Minnesang Courtly romance Der von Kürenberg Dietmar von Aist Reinmar von Hagenau Hartmann von Aue Walther von der Vogelweide Wolfram von Eschenbach Albrecht von Johansdorf Heinrich von Morungen Gottfried von Strassburg Dietrich von Bern Nibelungenlied Early modern Simon Dach Paul Fleming Hans Folz Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen Andreas Gryphius Christian Hoffmann von Hoffmannswaldau Johann Michael Moscherosch Martin Opitz Hans Sachs Angelus Silesius Anthony Ulrich, Duke of Brunswick Georg Wickram 18th century Barthold Heinrich Brockes Christian Gellert Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Johann Christoph Gottsched Johann Christian Günther Friedrich Hölderlin Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock Meta Klopstock Jakob Michael Reinhold Lenz Gotthold Ephraim Lessing Magnus Gottfried Lichtwer Novalis (Friedrich von Hardenberg) Jean Paul Friedrich Schiller Johann Gottfried Schnabel Christoph Martin Wieland 19th century Bettina von Arnim Achim von Arnim Clemens Brentano Georg Büchner Adelbert von Chamisso Annette von Droste-Hülshoff Marie von Ebner-Eschenbach Joseph von Eichendorff Theodor Fontane Gustav Freytag Jeremias Gotthelf Franz Grillparzer Jacob Grimm Wilhelm Grimm Gerhart Hauptmann Christian Friedrich Hebbel Johann Peter Hebel Heinrich Heine Georg Herwegh Paul Heyse E. T. A. Hoffmann Friedrich Hölderlin Gottfried Keller Heinrich von Kleist Nikolaus Lenau Karl May Conrad Ferdinand Meyer Eduard Mörike Johann Nestroy Wilhelm Raabe Adalbert Stifter Theodor Storm Ludwig Tieck Ludwig Uhland 20th century Ilse Aichinger May Ayim Ingeborg Bachmann Hermann Bahr Vicki Baum Johannes R. Becher Gottfried Benn Thomas Bernhard Hugo Bettauer Heinrich Böll Thomas Brasch Volker Braun Bertolt Brecht Rolf Dieter Brinkmann Hermann Broch Arnolt Bronnen Hermann Burger Elias Canetti Paul Celan Alfred Döblin Heimito von Doderer Friedrich Dürrenmatt Lion Feuchtwanger Marieluise Fleißer Erich Fried Max Frisch Stefan George Günter Grass Peter Handke Marlen Haushofer Hermann Hesse Georg Heym Wolfgang Hilbig Hugo von Hofmannsthal Ödön von Horváth Ricarda Huch Peter Huchel Ernst Jandl Uwe Johnson Ernst Jünger Franz Kafka Marie Luise Kaschnitz Erich Kästner Bernhard Kellermann Hermann Kesten Irmgard Keun Sarah Kirsch Egon Erwin Kisch Siegfried Kracauer Karl Kraus Else Lasker-Schüler Kurd Laßwitz Gert Ledig Siegfried Lenz Heinrich Mann Klaus Mann Thomas Mann Friederike Mayröcker Christian Morgenstern Erich Mühsam Heiner Müller Adolf Muschg Robert Musil Erich Maria Remarque Rainer Maria Rilke Joseph Roth Nelly Sachs Ernst von Salomon Paul Scheerbart Arthur Schnitzler Helga Schubert Kurt Schwitters W. G. Sebald Anna Seghers Bertha von Suttner Ernst Toller Georg Trakl Kurt Tucholsky Robert Walser Josef Weinheber Peter Weiss Franz Werfel Christa Wolf Stefan Zweig Contemporary writers Zsuzsa Bánk Thomas Brussig Dietmar Dath Jenny Erpenbeck Rainald Goetz Durs Grünbein Peter Handke Judith Hermann Elfriede Jelinek Reinhard Jirgl Wladimir Kaminer Daniel Kehlmann Esther Kinsky Alexander Kluge Barbara Köhler Christian Kracht Monika Maron Clemens Meyer Terézia Mora Herta Müller Sharon Dodua Otoo Emine Sevgi Özdamar Teresa Präauer Julya Rabinowich Rafik Schami Ingo Schulze Lutz Seiler Clemens J. Setz Botho Strauss Yoko Tawada Uwe Timm Ilija Trojanow Jan Wagner Martin Walser Peter Wawerzinek Wolf Wondratschek Feridun Zaimoğlu Juli Zeh German-language Nobel laureates Theodor Mommsen Rudolf Christoph Eucken Paul Heyse Gerhart Hauptmann Carl Spitteler Thomas Mann Hermann Hesse Nelly Sachs Heinrich Böll Elias Canetti Günter Grass Elfriede Jelinek Herta Müller Peter Handke German-language literary awards Ingeborg Bachmann Prize Georg Büchner Prize Sigmund Freud Prize Adelbert von Chamisso Prize Hans Fallada Prize Goethe Prize Heinrich Heine Prize Kleist Prize Leipzig Book Fair Prize Nelly Sachs Prize Kurd Laßwitz Award v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz ADK FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christoph_Martin_Wieland&oldid=1278572881 " Categories : 1733 births 1813 deaths People from Biberach an der Riss 18th-century German male writers 18th-century German poets 18th-century German translators People from Biberach (district) Achstetten German translators English–German translators Latin–German translators German satirists German satirical novelists Translators of William Shakespeare University of Tübingen alumni Members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences Corresponding members of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres Academic staff of the University of Erfurt German male non-fiction writers Enlightenment philosophers Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages with German IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015 Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Commons link is on Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 3 March 2025, at 07:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christoph Martin Wieland 44 languages Add topic

