Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Warning categories 2 Weather warnings Toggle Weather warnings subsection 2.1 Mesoscale/Summer severe weather 2.2 Hurricanes and other tropical systems 2.3 Winter weather 2.4 General warnings 2.5 Marine warnings 2.6 Tsunami 2.6.1 Areas covered by the Tsunami Alerts 3 Advisories and Special Weather Statements Toggle Advisories and Special Weather Statements subsection 3.1 Advisories 3.2 Special Weather Statements 3.3 Tropical Cyclone Information Statements 3.4 Thunderstorm Outlooks 4 Related weather scales as defined by Environment Canada Toggle Related weather scales as defined by Environment Canada subsection 4.1 Enhanced Fujita Scale 4.2 Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Severe weather terminology (Canada) 2 languages Français Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Severe weather-related terminology used by the Meteorological Service of Canada This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Severe weather terminology" Canada – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( April 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Weather Temperate and polar seasons Winter Spring Summer Autumn Tropical seasons Dry season Harmattan Wet season Storms Cloud Cumulonimbus cloud Arcus cloud Downburst Microburst Heat burst Derecho Lightning Volcanic lightning Thunderstorm Air-mass thunderstorm Thundersnow Dry thunderstorm Mesocyclone Supercell Tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Dust devil Fire whirl Anticyclone Cyclone Polar low Extratropical cyclone European windstorm Nor'easter Subtropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Atlantic hurricane Typhoon Storm surge Dust storm Simoom Haboob Monsoon Amihan Gale Sirocco Firestorm Winter storm Ice storm Blizzard Ground blizzard Snow squall Precipitation Drizzle Freezing Graupel Hail Megacryometeor Ice pellets Diamond dust Rain Freezing Cloudburst Snow Rain and snow mixed Snow grains Snow roller Slush Topics Air pollution Atmosphere Chemistry Convection Physics River Climate Cloud Physics Fog Mist Season Cold wave Heat wave Jet stream Meteorology Severe weather List Extreme Severe weather terminology Canada Japan United States Weather forecasting Weather modification Glossaries Meteorology Climate change Tornado terms Tropical cyclone terms Weather portal v t e This article describes severe weather terminology used by the Meteorological Service of Canada , a branch within Environment and Climate Change Canada . The article primarily describes various weather warnings, and their criteria. Related weather scales and general weather terms are also addressed in this article. Some terms are specific to certain regions.

[ citation needed ] Warning categories [ edit ] Severe weather bulletins are issued as a watch or a warning, depending on the risk or severity of the event.

Watches are issued when conditions are favourable for the development of severe weather, but the occurrence, location, and/or timing is still too uncertain to issue a warning. The target lead time for severe thunderstorm watches is typically six hours before the event, whereas watches for winter events have a target lead time of 12 to 24 hours in advance. Watches are intended to raise awareness of the public to the potential for hazardous weather conditions, and typically serve as a lead-up to a warning.

[ 1 ] Warnings are issued when severe weather is either imminent or occurring. Warnings for synoptic scale events such as snowstorms are issued with an ideal lead time of at least six, and up to 24 hours. Severe thunderstorm warnings and tornado warnings, by their nature, will typically be issued with very little lead time. Weather warnings are usually issued for regular forecast regions affected. Severe thunderstorm and tornado warnings, however, might be issued specifically for smaller warning or "sub-regions" within the regular forecast area where available.

Advisories are issued in a similar format to that of an official warning. Unlike warnings, however, these types of bulletins describe exceptional weather events that are generally not considered hazardous, such as frost.

[ 1 ] Special Weather Statements are free form statements that are typically used to describe weather hazards that cannot be described by another watch, warning, or advisory; is not hazardous enough to warrant issuing a watch or warning; or to warn the public of a potentially hazardous weather event in the long term forecast.

[ 1 ] Alerts are typically updated every six hours, except for mesoscale/summer severe weather alerts which are updated when necessary.

Weather warnings [ edit ] Weather watches and warnings are issued when potentially hazardous weather is occurring or is forecast for the short term period.

[ 2 ] Note: Nunavik , Quebec only participates in two types of weather warnings: Extreme Cold Warnings and Wind Warnings. No other types of watches or warnings are issued in this region of the country.

Mesoscale/Summer severe weather [ edit ] Severe Thunderstorm Watch ( SAME event code: SVA ) – Issued when the potential exists for the development of severe thunderstorms, which are capable of producing one or more of the following: Large hail (2 cm or more in diameter) Damaging winds (Gusts 90 km/h (56 mph) or greater) Heavy rain ( Alberta to Southern Quebec : 50 mm (2.0 in) or more per hour. Pacific, Northern and Maritime provinces: 25 mm (0.98 in) per hour) Severe Thunderstorm Warning ( SVR ) – Issued when a severe thunderstorm is detected on radar or are observed by those in the immediate area. A warning is issued when one or more of the following has been detected or highly possible: Large hail (2 cm or more in diameter) Damaging winds (Gusts 90 km/h (56 mph) or greater) Heavy rain (Alberta to Southern Quebec: 50 mm (2.0 in) or more per hour. Pacific, Northern and Maritime provinces: 25 mm (0.98 in) per hour) Public bulletins will often mention the possibility of tornadoes; if a tornado is spotted or conditions are favourable enough for tornado development, the warning will be upgraded accordingly.

[ 2 ] Tornado Watch ( TOA ) – Issued when conditions are favourable for the development of severe thunderstorms with one or more tornadoes. Tornado Watches are also issued when cold core funnel clouds are possible and pose a threat to people on the ground. If cold core funnel clouds are not expected to touch down, a weather advisory will be issued instead. If there is a landspout on the ground, a Tornado Warning will be issued.

Tornado Warning ( TOR ) – Issued when one or more tornadoes are occurring in the area specified or rotation is detected on Doppler weather radar , or when someone spots a supercell tornado or a landspout on the ground. The exact location of the tornado or storm will be given in the statement.

Hurricanes and other tropical systems [ edit ] See also: Tropical cyclone warnings and watches Tropical Storm Watch ( TRA ) – Issued when a tropical storm or tropical storm conditions pose a threat to coastal areas generally within 36 hours. A watch will generally cover a larger threat area than a warning, as the uncertainty on the track of the storm is greater.

Tropical Storm Warning ( TRW ) – Issued when winds of 63 to 117 km/h (39 to 73 mph; 34 to 63 kn) are expected. Warnings are not issued more than 24 hours in advance.

Hurricane Watch ( HUA ) – Issued when a hurricane approaches the mainland and is considered a threat to coastal and inland regions.

Hurricane Warning ( HUW ) – Issued when winds greater than 117 km/h (73 mph; 63 kn) are expected to occur for coastal or inland regions. It may also include areas where storm surge or exceptionally high waves are predicted, even though winds may be less than hurricane force. Warnings are not issued more than 24 hours in advance. If the path is erratic or if the hurricane undergoes a transition into a post-tropical system, the warning may only be issued a few hours in advance. Almost always accompanied by a Wind Warning.

Storm Surge Warning – Issued when a storm surge and/or high waves may result in significant flooding in coastal areas. Sometimes issued during strong Nor'easters or other non-tropical storms.

Winter weather [ edit ] Winter Storm Watch ( WSA ) – Issued when conditions are favourable for the development of hazardous winter conditions, including: a blizzard .

a major snowfall of 25 cm (9.8 in) or more in a 24-hour period.

a significant snowfall (snowfall warning criteria) combined with another winter hazard such as freezing rain, strong winds, blowing snow and/or extreme cold.

Winter Storm Warning ( WSW ) – Issued when hazardous winter conditions are expected or occurring, including: a major snowfall of 25 cm (9.8 in) or more in a 24-hour period.

a significant snowfall (snowfall warning criteria) combined with another winter hazard such as freezing rain, strong winds, blowing snow and/or extreme cold.

Blizzard Warning ( BZW ) – Issued when winds of 40 km/h (25 mph) or more, are expected to cause widespread reductions in visibilities to less than 400 m (0.25 mi), due to blowing snow, for at least four hours (except six hours north of the tree line ).

Snowfall Warning ( WSW ) – Issued when significant amounts of snow are expected to fall over a 12-hour period. These amounts vary across the country due to topographical and climatic considerations. Criteria ranges from 10 to 15 cm (3.9 to 5.9 in) in a 12-hour period, with local exceptions for southwestern British Columbia (5 cm (2.0 in) in a 6-hour period) and Haines Skagway roads in British Columbia/Yukon (20 cm (7.9 in) in a 24-hour period).

Snow Squall Watch – There are two types of snow squalls of which alerts are issued for: Open-Water – Issued when, down wind of a large body of water, conditions are favourable for the development of snow squalls with one or more of the following conditions: Local, intense snowfall resulting in accumulations of 15 cm (5.9 in) or more in 12 hours or less.

Reduced visibility less than 400 m (0.25 mi), caused by snowfall, with or without blowing snow, for 3 hours or more.

Frontal – Issued when conditions are favourable for the development of snow squalls that produce brief periods of very poor visibilities caused by heavy snow and blowing snow caused by the passage of a cold front.

Snow Squall Warning ( WSW ) – There are two types of snow squalls of which alerts are issued for: Open-Water – Issued when, down wind of a large body of water, snow squalls are imminent or occurring with one or more of the following conditions: Local, intense snowfall resulting in accumulations of 15 cm (5.9 in) or more in 12 hours or less.

Reduced visibility less than 400 m (0.25 mi), caused by snowfall, with or without blowing snow, for 3 hours or more.

Frontal – Issued when a brief period (less than one hour) of poor visibility of 400 m (0.25 mi) or less caused by heavy snow and blowing snow, accompanied by strong, gusty winds of 45 km/h (28 mph) or more, is expected or occurring with the passage of a cold front.

Freezing Rain Warning ( WSW ) – Issued when freezing rain is expected to create a hazard to transportation and property, or when freezing rain is expected to persist for at least 2 hours (criteria is 4 hours in Atlantic Canada and Magdalen Islands ).

Flash Freeze Warning ( FSW ) – Issued when significant ice is expected to form due to a rapid drop in temperatures, causing freezing of residual water on roads, and sidewalks to quickly build up.

General warnings [ edit ] Wind Warning ( HWW ) – Varies based on climatology across the country.

The national criteria, before exceptions, is when sustained winds of 70 km/h (43 mph) or greater, or wind gusts of 90 km/h (56 mph) or greater, are expected or occurring.

Les Suêtes ( Cape Breton ) or Wreckhouse (Southwest Newfoundland) wind warnings are issued for local wind effects using the national criteria.

Wind warning criteria for Southwestern Alberta, Dempster Highway ( Yukon ), Western Vancouver Island , and Newfoundland and Labrador is when sustained winds of 80 km/h (50 mph) or greater, or wind gusts of 100 km/h (62 mph) or greater, are expected or occurring.

Wind warning criteria for North Vancouver Island, North Coast (British Columbia), Central Coast (British Columbia), and Haida Gwaii , is when sustained winds of 90 km/h (56 mph) or greater, or wind gusts of 110 km/h (68 mph) or greater, is expected or occurring.

Rainfall Warning – Local rainfall thresholds vary considerably across Canada and reflect a potential for regional flooding. Seasonal variations of the warning exist to accommodate flooding potential due to the frozen ground’s reduced ability to absorb rainfall and snow melt. The national criteria during the winter is 25 mm (0.98 in) or more in 24 hours. The national criteria in the summer is 50 mm (2.0 in) or more in 24 hours or 75 mm (3.0 in) or more in 48 hours. Regional exceptions apply to different parts of British Columbia, with higher criteria for coastal areas and lower criteria for interior dry regions.

Heat Warning – Criteria varies considerably across the country and considers combinations of expected maximum temperatures, minimum temperatures, and humidex values. Warnings will be issued when criteria is expected to be met for at least two consecutive days (except Quebec , where criteria only needs to be met for at least one hour).

Extreme Cold Warning – Criteria varies across the country, ranging from −55 °C (−67 °F) in some Arctic regions to −30 °C (−22 °F) in southwestern Ontario . Warnings will be issued when the air temperature or wind chill is expected to meet the regional criteria for at least two hours.

Arctic Outflow Warning – An Arctic Outflow Warning is based on a combination of wind speed and temperatures which produce wind chills of at least −20 °C (−4 °F) for at least six hours during the winter when very cold Arctic air breaks from the interior mainland of British Columbia and spills out through mountain gaps and fjords .

Dust Storm Warning ( DSW ) – Issued only in the Prairie Provinces when blowing dust caused by high winds is expected to reduce visibility to 800 m (0.50 mi) or less for one hour or more.

Storm Surge Warning – Issued for abnormally high water levels and high waves caused by storms, which have the potential to cause coastal flooding . This usually occurs when astronomical tides are at their maximum.

Weather Warning – A generic weather warning may be issued for extreme weather events for which there is no suitable warning type, because they rarely occur. For example, for 50 km/h winds following an ice storm which could cause structural wind damage, even if the wind warning criteria of 90 km/h (56 mph) is not expected to be reached.

Marine warnings [ edit ] Strong Wind (Small Craft) Warning – Issued if winds of 20 to 33 kn (37 to 61 km/h) are forecast.

Gale Warning – Issued if winds of 34 to 47 kn (63 to 87 km/h) are forecast.

Storm Warning – Issued if winds of 48 to 63 kn (89 to 117 km/h) are forecast.

Hurricane Force Wind Warning – Issued for winds of 64 kn (119 km/h) or greater.

Squall Warning – Issued for forecast or observed wind gusts of 34 kn (63 km/h) or greater that are associated with a line, or an organized area, of thunderstorms.

Freezing Spray Warning – Freezing spray occurs when a combination of low temperatures and strong winds cause sea spray to freeze on a ship's superstructure or on other structures either in the sea or near the water's edge. A weather warning is issued whenever moderate or heavy ship icing is expected.

Waterspout Warning/Alert – Issued commonly for Atlantic provinces (usually M-IS). Issued when a waterspout is detected on radar or is observed by trained spotters. The warning is commonly issued to warn persons on water. A waterspout warning can be sometimes issued for an area on land, if it is anticipated that the waterspout or funnel cloud will travel inland.

Tsunami [ edit ] Tsunami Advisory – This advisory indicates a tsunami could produce strong currents and waves are imminent, expected, or occurring. Mainly dangerous to those close to water. Uses messages/alerts from the National Tsunami Warning Center .

Tsunami Warning – This warning indicates a tsunami is imminent, expected, or occurring. Coastal regions should expect flooding. Uses messages/alerts from the National Tsunami Warning Center.

Tsunami Watch – Issued for areas which may be affected by an incoming tsunami. Uses messages/alerts from the National Tsunami Warning Center.

Areas covered by the Tsunami Alerts [ edit ] East Coast – Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland and Labrador, areas of Quebec next to the Saint Lawrence River estuary, and Gulf of St. Lawrence.

West Coast – British Columbia coast and inlets.

Advisories and Special Weather Statements [ edit ] Advisories [ edit ] Advisories are issued in a similar format to that of an official warning. Unlike warnings, however, these types of bulletins describe exceptional weather events that are generally not considered hazardous, but could be a potential concern to the public (for example, frost that can damage crops during the growing season).

Advisories are not issued in Nunavik , Quebec.

Commonly issued advisories as of March 23, 2022 include: [ 2 ] Blowing Snow Advisory – Issued when blowing snow caused by winds of at least 30 km/h (19 mph) is expected to reduce visibility to 800 m (0.50 mi) or less for at least 3 hours. This advisory is only issued south of the tree line.

Fog Advisory – Issued when low visibility caused by fog is expected for at least six hours. Advisory criteria for Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island is low visibility caused by fog that lasts at least eighteen hours.

Freezing Drizzle Advisory – Issued when freezing drizzle is expected to last for at least eight hours.

Frost Advisory – Issued during the growing season in southern portions of Canada (except British Columbia) where formation of frost is expected due to surface temperatures falling to near 0 °C (32 °F) in the overnight hours.

Weather Advisory – A message that can be used for any situation for which there is no other alert that effectively describes the conditions expected. Typically used to alert the public about conditions favourable for cold-core funnel clouds .

Special Weather Statements [ edit ] A Special Weather Statement is usually issued in two circumstances: A warning or watch is not warranted because the expected conditions are less menacing than those necessary to meet warning criteria.

A warning or watch is not yet practical to be issued, usually due to a high degree of uncertainty of timing, occurrence and/or location of the hazardous conditions.

[ 1 ] Special Weather Statements are typically used to make the public aware of a potentially high impact weather event in the long range and so a watch or warning is not yet necessary.

Unlike watches, warnings, and advisories, Special Weather Statements are more free form and have no formal requirement to be issued, updated, or ended.

Tropical Cyclone Information Statements [ edit ] Issued when a tropical cyclone that is producing tropical storm-force winds (63–117km/h; 39–73 mph; 34–63 kn) is expected to enter Canadian coastal waters or land in the next three days. The statements are in plain language and provide non-technical storm-specific information that is meant for the general public and media.

[ 3 ] A Tropical Cyclone Information Statement consists of three sections: Section 1 – The storm’s current position, strength, motion, and central pressure.

Section 2 – Reported severe weather threats, expected impacts (rainfall, wind, storm surge), and a summary of land watches and warnings issued by the Canadian Hurricane Centre or regional Storm Prediction Centres.

Section 3 – Summary of marine warnings issued by regional Storm Prediction Centres, reported severe weather and expected impacts.

Thunderstorm Outlooks [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Thunderstorm Outlooks are issued by each regional Storm Prediction Centre for their respective regions, typically starting in May and ending in September. Thunderstorm Outlooks are issued for every province and territory except Nunavut .

This product remains experimental, and as such, there is no official spot to find the product. They are typically found on official Environment and Climate Change Canada Twitter accounts for the respective provinces.

Related weather scales as defined by Environment Canada [ edit ] Enhanced Fujita Scale [ edit ] Main article: Enhanced Fujita Scale The Enhanced Fujita Scale (EF) is a scale for rating tornado intensity based on the damage on human-built structures and vegetation. While the United States adopted the Enhanced Fujita Scale in 2007, Environment Canada continued to use the original Fujita Scale to assess tornado intensity until April 18, 2013, when the agency adopted the Enhanced Fujita Scale.

[ 4 ] Tornadoes exceeding F2/EF2 intensity are rare in Canada, although some tornadoes, such as the Edmonton Tornado in 1987, have been as strong as F4. The only F5/EF5 tornado recorded in Canada to date was the Elie, Manitoba tornado in 2007.

[ citation needed ] Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale [ edit ] Main article: Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale The Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale is used by the Canadian Hurricane Centre for hurricanes affecting the East Coast of Canada. The Scale ranges from Category 1, the weakest, to Category 5, the strongest with sustained winds exceeding 250 km/h (160 mph; 130 kn).

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] List of severe weather phenomena Environment and Climate Change Canada Meteorological Service of Canada Severe weather terminology (Japan) Severe weather terminology (United States) References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Canada, Environment and Climate Change (2009-07-10).

"Weather and meteorology glossary" .

www.canada.ca . Retrieved 2022-03-24 .

^ a b c Meteorological Service of Canada (26 July 2010).

"Public Alerting Criteria" . Retrieved 2022-03-23 .

^ Canada, Environment and Climate Change (2009-06-16).

"Tropical cyclone information statements and technical discussions" .

www.canada.ca . Retrieved 2022-03-24 .

^ Assessing tornado damage: EF-scale vs. F-scale. Retrieved from "Weather News - the Weather Network" . Archived from the original on April 27, 2013 . Retrieved April 4, 2014 .

.

External links [ edit ] Land warning definitions by Meteorological Service of Canada Marine warning definitions in Canada Canadian Weather warnings in real time NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cfb6f7b64‐c7d6m
Cached time: 20250812181827
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.433 seconds
Real time usage: 0.542 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2166/1000000
Revision size: 23926/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 73980/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11713/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 34594/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.280/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6896516/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  465.493      1 -total
 22.25%  103.555      1 Template:Reflist
 19.76%   91.998      1 Template:Weather
 19.50%   90.782      4 Template:Cite_web
 19.30%   89.846      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 16.67%   77.584      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 12.99%   60.477     45 Template:Convert
 12.87%   59.917      1 Template:Short_description
 11.20%   52.124      3 Template:Ambox
 11.10%   51.677      1 Template:Refimprove Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7837152:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812181827 and revision id 1302491942. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Severe_weather_terminology_(Canada)&oldid=1302491942 " Categories : Meteorological Service of Canada Severe weather and convection Weather warnings and advisories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from April 2016 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016 Articles needing additional references from July 2025 This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 19:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Severe weather terminology (Canada) 2 languages Add topic

