Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Eighteenth-century use 3 Nineteenth-century use 4 Modern use 5 See also 6 Notes Toggle the table of contents More Irish than the Irish themselves 6 languages Català Español Euskara Français Gaeilge Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Irish phrase describing cultural assimilation of Norman invaders into Gaelic society " More Irish than the Irish themselves " ( Irish : Níos Gaelaí ná na Gaeil féin ; Latin : Hiberniores Hibernis ipsis ) is a phrase used in Irish historiography to describe a phenomenon of cultural assimilation in late medieval Norman Ireland .

History [ edit ] The descendants of Anglo-Norman lords who had settled in Ireland in the 12th century had been significantly Gaelicised by the end of the Middle Ages, forming septs and clans after the indigenous Gaelic pattern, and became known as the Gall or " Old English " (contrasting with the "New English" arriving with the Tudor conquest of Ireland ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The Statutes of Kilkenny , 1366, complained that
" ... now many English of the said land, forsaking the English language, manners, mode of riding, laws and usages, live and govern themselves according to the manners, fashion, and language of the Irish enemies".

[ 3 ] In 1596 the Elizabethan poet Edmund Spenser (c. 1552–13 January 1599) whilst employed  as part of the English administration in Ireland, [ 4 ] paraphrased the saying in his controversial treatise, A View of the Present State of Irelande . In the treatise, the characters Eudoxus and Irenius discuss how those sent over by King Henry II of England to colonise Ireland, eventually became more Irish in outlook than the Irish themselves .......

"Eudoxus: What is that you say, of so many as remayne Englishe of them? Why are, not they that were once English, abydinge Englishe still?

Irenius: No, for the most parte of them are degenerated and growen almost meare Irishe, yea, and more malicious to the Englishe then the very Irish them selves" [ 5 ] .....

The phrase (in Latin) was used by the Irish priest and historian John Lynch (c1599–1677) in his work Cambrensis Eversus .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] He was strongly influenced by the writings of the historian Geoffrey Keating (1569 – c. 1644), whose History of Ireland he translated into Latin.

[ 8 ] Cambrensis Eversus was translated from the Latin, with notes and observations, by Theophilus O'Flanagan, Dublin, 1795.

Eighteenth-century use [ edit ] John Henry Wilson, in his Sketch of Jonathan Swift (1804), wrote that Swift used the phrase ( Hiberniores Hibernis ipsis ) in a discussion with his landlord.

[ 9 ] Nineteenth-century use [ edit ] Relief of coat of arms of the FitzGerald of Desmond in Buttevant Friary .

The 3rd Earl of Desmond (known in Irish as Gearóid Iarla ) was a prime example of the Gaelicisation of the 'Hiberno-Normans'.

The phrase remained in use by romantic nineteenth-century nationalists to promote the common Irishness of 'Planter and Gael'. An example is found in the 1844 poem by the Young Irelander , Thomas Davis , called 'The Geraldines', which concerns the FitzGerald dynasty : [ 10 ] .......

These Geraldines! These Geraldines! -not long our air they breathed; Not long they fed on venison, in Irish water seethed; Not often had their children been by Irish mothers nursed; when from their full and genial hearts an Irish feeling burst!

The English monarch strove in vain, by law, and force, and bribe, To win from Irish thoughts and ways this 'more than Irish' tribe; For still they clung to fosterage, to breitheamh, cloak and bard: What king dare say to Geraldine, 'Your Irish wife discard'?

.....

Modern use [ edit ] The phrase remains in common use, both colloquially and in the media, in reference to recent immigration and assimilation in Ireland, and to some degree about some of the Irish diaspora (for example in The Irish Times , [ 11 ] Senator Jim Walsh , [ 12 ] Liam Twomey , [ 13 ] or Irish Emigrant [ 14 ] ) or in conversation discussing the relationship between the cultural heritage of the Irish diaspora and the Irish in Ireland.

[ 15 ] While still echoing its original meaning, contemporary usage of the phrase usually takes a more open interpretation of assimilation or, in the case of the diaspora, the maintenance of Irish heritage.

Debates of the Oireachtas demonstrate the age and range of contemporary applications of the phrase. Either when discussing the diaspora: I do not think this country will afford sufficient allurements to the citizens of other States ... The children of Irish parents born abroad are sometimes more Irish than the Irish themselves, and they would come with added experience and knowledge to our country....

[ 16 ] Or, more light-heartedly, on assimilation: ... [As] in olden times the attractiveness of Irish life made the Norman invaders ... 'Hiberniores Hibernicis ipsis', 'more Irish than the Irish themselves', so the charms of Galway, experienced through 25 happy years, have made a woman, born in one of the severed counties, feel entitled to describe herself as 'Galviensior Galviensibus ipsis' – 'more Galwegian than the Galwegians themselves'.

[ 17 ] However, S. J. Connolly has written, "The descendants of the English conquerors, it was confidently proclaimed, had become 'more Irish than the Irish themselves'. Today it is recognized that the supposedly contemporary phrase dates only from the late eighteenth century, the Latin form ( Hiberniores ipsis Hibernis ) sometimes used to give it an authentic medieval ring from later still." [ 18 ] See also [ edit ] More German than the Germans Plastic Paddy West Brit – a somewhat opposite expression Notes [ edit ] ^ MacLysaght, Edward (1982).

More Irish Families . Irish Academic Press.

ISBN 0-7165-0126-0 . Retrieved 20 November 2006 .

Some became completely integrated, giving rise to the well known phrase 'Hiberniores Hibernis ipsis' (more Irish than the Irish themselves). These formed septs on the Gaelic-Irish pattern, headed by a chief. The Gall & Gael became virtually indistinguishable.

^ Palmer, Patricia (2001).

Language and Conquest in Early Modern Ireland: English Renaissance Literature and Elizabethan Imperial Expansion . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 41.

ISBN 9781139430371 .

^ The introduction to the text of the Statutes of Kilkenny, 1366, (pp.4–7) ^ "Spenser, Edmund | Dictionary of Irish Biography" .

www.dib.ie . Retrieved 4 October 2022 .

^ "A View of the present State of Ireland" .

celt.ucc.ie . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

^ Seán O'Faoláin, The Irish (Penguin 1947), p. 59 ^ Kuch, Peter (2003).

Irelands in the Asia-Pacific . Colin Smythe.

^ Ohlmeyer, Jane (2002).

Ireland from Independence to Occupation 1641–1660 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 122.

ISBN 9780521522755 .

^ Wilson, John Henry (1804).

Swiftiana Vol. 1 and 2 . R. Phillips. p. 60.

ISBN 9780841405950 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "The Geraldines" . UCC ^ LookWest.

"More Irish Than the Irish Themselves?" . Archived from the original on 15 July 2006 . Retrieved 20 November 2006 .

^ "Dáil Éireann" . Archived from the original on 27 April 2006 . Retrieved 20 November 2006 .

^ "Dáil Éireann" . Archived from the original on 18 June 2008 . Retrieved 20 November 2006 .

^ MacConnell, Cormac.

"The Pull of the City of the Tribes" . Archived from the original on 27 September 2007 . Retrieved 20 November 2006 .

^ "have you heard of this" . 2 November 2003 . Retrieved 20 November 2006 .

^ Kenny, Patrick.

"Seanad Éireann – Volume 2 – 15 January 1924" . Archived from the original on 7 June 2011 . Retrieved 21 November 2006 .

^ Concannon, Helena.

"Dáil Éireann – Volume 68 – 9 June 1937" . Archived from the original on 7 June 2011 . Retrieved 21 November 2006 .

^ Connolly, S. J. (2009).

Contested Island: Ireland 1460–1630 (1st ed.). London: Oxford University Press. pp.

34– 35.

ISBN 9780199563715 .

v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐kjfmz
Cached time: 20250814234635
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.653 seconds
Real time usage: 0.794 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6862/1000000
Revision size: 10979/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 333873/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11761/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 41/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 72843/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.333/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25998914/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  632.376      1 -total
 40.66%  257.105      1 Template:Historiography
 40.19%  254.176      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 34.99%  221.239     16 Template:Navbox
 25.09%  158.638      1 Template:Reflist
 17.41%  110.103     36 Template:Ill
 16.40%  103.737      2 Template:Langx
 15.28%   96.610      6 Template:Cite_book
 10.23%   64.676      1 Template:Short_description
  6.82%   43.100     36 Template:Separated_entries Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:244230:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814234635 and revision id 1261549185. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=More_Irish_than_the_Irish_themselves&oldid=1261549185 " Categories : Lordship of Ireland Culture of Ireland Immigrants to Ireland Cultural assimilation English phrases Historiography of Ireland 17th-century neologisms 17th-century quotations Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Hiberno-English from July 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in Hiberno-English Use dmy dates from July 2016 Articles containing Irish-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 6 December 2024, at 17:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents More Irish than the Irish themselves 6 languages Add topic

