Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The movement 2 Gallery 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Macchiaioli 20 languages Asturianu Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית ქართული 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 19th century Italian art movement Hay Stacks by Giovanni Fattori , a leading artist in the Macchiaioli movement The Macchiaioli ( Italian pronunciation: [makkjaˈjɔːli] ) were a group of Italian painters active in Tuscany in the second half of the nineteenth century.  They strayed from antiquated conventions taught by the Italian art academies, and did much of their painting outdoors in order to capture natural light, shade, and colour. This practice relates the Macchiaioli to the French Impressionists who came to prominence a few years later, although the Macchiaioli pursued somewhat different purposes. The most notable artists of this movement were Giuseppe Abbati , Cristiano Banti , Odoardo Borrani , Vincenzo Cabianca , Adriano Cecioni , Vito D'Ancona , Serafino De Tivoli , Giovanni Fattori , Raffaello Sernesi , Silvestro Lega , and Telemaco Signorini .

The movement [ edit ] Telemaco Signorini , Leith , 1881, Galleria d'Arte Moderna, Florence Macchiaioli at the Caffè Michelangiolo c. 1856 The movement originated with a small group of artists, many of whom had been revolutionaries in the uprisings of 1848 .  In the late 1850s, the artists met regularly at the Caffè Michelangiolo in Florence to discuss art and politics.

[ 1 ] These idealistic young men, dissatisfied with the art of the academies, shared a wish to reinvigorate Italian art by emulating the bold tonal structure they admired in such old masters as Rembrandt , Caravaggio and Tintoretto .

[ 2 ] In addition, they found inspiration in the paintings of their French contemporaries of the Barbizon school thanks to Serafino De Tivoli (referred to as the father of the Macchiaioli's technique by his friend Telemaco Signorini [ 3 ] ), who brought those influences to the Caffe' Michelangiolo after his trip to Paris for the Exposition Universelle in 1855.

Castiglioncello : the Macchiaioli art-movement had one focus in the "school of Castiglioncello" (Etruscan Coast).

The Macchiaioli's group believed that areas of light and shadow, or " macchie " (literally patches or spots) were the chief components of a work of art. Their procedure juxtaposed spots of different colors (even relatively large at times) in such a way to contrast light and shade. Such a representation of light becomes the main way of shaping the painted subject, whose finer details become irrelevant and often neglected. The word macchia was commonly used by Italian artists and critics in the nineteenth century to describe the sparkling quality of a drawing or painting, whether due to a sketchy and spontaneous execution or to the harmonious breadth of its overall effect.

[ 4 ] In its early years the new movement was ridiculed. A hostile review published on November 3, 1862, in the journal Gazzetta del Popolo marks the first appearance in print of the term Macchiaioli.

[ 5 ] The term carried several connotations: it mockingly implied that the artists' finished works were no more than sketches, and recalled the phrase  "darsi alla macchia", meaning, idiomatically, to hide in the bushes or scrubland. The artists did, in fact, paint much of their work in these wild areas. This sense of the name also identified the artists with outlaws, reflecting the traditionalists' view that new school of artists was working outside the rules of art, according to the strict laws defining artistic expression at the time.

The Macchiaioli group were the first independent group of artists who developed a style of painting essentially based on the investigation and representation of light. For this reason, they have often been compared to the Impressionists, whose movement started in Paris roughly fifteen years after the Macchiaioli. However, the Macchiaioli did not go as far as their younger French colleagues in the pursuit of optical effects. Erich Steingräber says that the Macchiaioli "declined to divide up their palette into the components of the colour-spectrum, and did not paint blue shadows. This is why their pictures lack the all-penetrating light that eclipses colours and contours and gives rise to the 'vibrism' peculiar to Impressionist painting. The independent identity of the individual figures is unimpaired." [ 6 ] Giovanni Fattori , Silvestro Lega painting at Riva al Mare , 1866–67, Oil on panel, 12.5 x 21 cm.

The Macchiaioli did not follow the Impressionists' practice of finishing relatively large paintings entirely en plein air , but rather they painted small sketches out-of-doors and used them as the basis for works eventually finished in the studio.

[ 7 ] Sketches painted on relatively small board panels (often fitting into standard cigar boxes), and where the "macchia" technique is mostly exemplified, represent a sort of trademark of the  Macchiaioli's movement.

The verdict that the Macchiaioli were "failed impressionists" has been countered by an alternative view which places the Macchiaioli in a category of their own, a decade or so ahead of the Parisian impressionists. This interpretation views the Macchiaioli as early modernists , with their broad theories of painting capturing the essence of subsequent movements that would not see the light of day for another decade or more. In this view the Macchiaioli emerge as being very much embedded in their social fabric and context, literally fighting alongside Giuseppe Garibaldi on behalf of the Risorgimento and its ideals.  As such, their works provide comments on various socio-political topics, including Jewish emancipation , prisons and hospitals, and women's conditions , including the plight of war widows and life behind the lines.

[ 8 ] Many of the artists of the Macchiaioli died in penury, achieving fame only towards the end of the 19th century. Today the work of the Macchiaioli is much better known in Italy than elsewhere; much of the work is held, outside the public record, in private collections there.

[ 9 ] Other painters, such as Luigi and Flavio Bertelli and Antonino Sartini , were influenced by this movement, without being a full part of it.

[ 10 ] The Macchiaioli were the subject of an exhibition at the Chiostro del Bramante in Rome, October 11, 2007 – February 24, 2008,  which traveled to the Villa Bardini in Florence, March 19 – June 22, 2008. An exhibition in Venice, at the Istituto Veneto di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti showed the capolavori della collezione Mario Taragoni from March 8 - July 27, 2008. Another exhibition of the Macchiaioli was held at the Terme Tamerici in Montecatini Terme , August 12, 2009 – March 18, 2010. The Musée de l'Orangerie in Paris mounted an exhibition of the Macchiaioli April 10 – July 22, 2013.

Gallery [ edit ] Giuseppe Abbati , The Tower of the Palazzo del Podestà , 1865, oil on wood Vito D'Ancona , Lady in white , oil on canvas, Modern art gallery of Milan.

Giovanni Fattori , La Rotonda di Palmieri , 1866, oil on wood, Florence, Galleria d'Arte Moderna Giovanni Fattori, Prince Amadeo wounded at Custoza , 1870, oil on canvas Silvestro Lega , il Bindolo , 1863 Silvestro Lega, Girl of Crespina Telemaco Signorini , Via Torta , ca. 1870 Telemaco Signorini, Ghetto of Florence , 1882 Odoardo Borrani , Cucitrici di camicie rosse , 1863 Serafino De Tivoli , Una pastura , 1859 Serafino De Tivoli, Il ponte di legno , 1857-1859 Vincenzo Cabianca , The Nuns , 1861 See also [ edit ] Hudson River School Barbizon School Caffè Michelangiolo Notes [ edit ] ^ Broude, p. 1 ^ Broude, p. 3 ^ Steingräber, E., & Matteucci, G. 1984, p. 112.

^ Broude, p. 4 ^ Broude, p. 96 ^ Steingräber & Matteucci, p. 17 ^ Broude, pp. 5–10 ^ see Boime ^ Broude, pp. xxii, 10 ^ Azzolini, Marcello (24 October 1956). "Antonio Sartini al Circolo Artistico".

L'Unità .

References [ edit ] Boime, Albert (1993).

The Art of the Macchia and the Risorgimento . Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-06330-5 Broude, Norma (1987).

The Macchiaioli: Italian Painters of the Nineteenth Century . New Haven and London: Yale University Press.

ISBN 0-300-03547-0 Steingräber, E., & Matteucci, G. (1984).

The Macchiaioli: Tuscan Painters of the Sunlight : March 14-April 20, 1984 . New York: Stair Sainty Matthiesen in association with Matthiesen, London.

OCLC 70337478 Turner, J. (1996).

Grove Dictionary of Art . USA: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-517068-7 Further reading [ edit ] Piero Bargellini, Caffè Michelangiolo , Firenze, Vallecchi Editore, 1944.

Panconi, T. (1999).

Antologia dei Macchiaioli, La trasformazione sociale e artica nella Toscana di metà 800 . Pisa (Italy): Pacini Editore.

Panconi, T. (2009).

I Macchiaioli, Il Nuovo dopo la Macchia . Pisa (Italy): Pacini Editore.

ISBN 978-88-6315-135-0 Durbe, Dario (1978).

I Macchiaioli . Rome: DeLuca Editore.

v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases International VIAF National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Artists ULAN RKD Artists Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Macchiaioli&oldid=1296931970 " Categories : Italian art movements Modern art Landscape art by school Painters from Tuscany Italian artist groups and collectives Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with Italian IPA This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 05:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Macchiaioli 20 languages Add topic

