Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General Structure of the Work 2 Summary 3 Influence 4 English translations 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Metaphysics of Morals 12 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית Македонски 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from The Metaphysics of Morals ) 1797 work on morals and politics by Immanuel Kant You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Die Metaphysik der Sitten]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Die Metaphysik der Sitten}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Metaphysics of Morals Cover of the first edition Author Immanuel Kant Original title Die Metaphysik der Sitten Translator Mary J. Gregor Language German Subject Ethics , Political philosophy Published 1797 Publisher F. Nicolovius Publication place Germany Media type Print Part of a series on Immanuel Kant Major works Critique of Pure Reason Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics " Answering the Question: What Is Enlightenment?

" Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals Critique of Practical Reason Critique of Judgment Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason Perpetual Peace The Metaphysics of Morals " On a Supposed Right to Tell Lies from Benevolent Motives " Opus Postumum Kantianism • Kantian ethics Transcendental idealism Critical philosophy Sapere aude Thing-in-itself Schema A priori and a posteriori Analytic–synthetic distinction Noumenon Category Categorical imperative Hypothetical imperative " Kingdom of Ends " Political philosophy Teleology People J. G. Fichte G. W. F. Hegel David Hume F. H. Jacobi Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Related topics German idealism Neo-Kantianism Category • Philosophy portal Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e The Metaphysics of Morals ( German : Die Metaphysik der Sitten ) is a 1797 work of political and moral philosophy by Immanuel Kant . It is also Kant's last major work in moral philosophy. The work is divided into two sections: the Doctrine of Right , dealing with political rights , and the Doctrine of Virtue , dealing with ethical virtues .

In this work, Kant develops the political and ethical philosophy for which the Groundwork and the Critique of Practical Reason provide the foundation.

The Doctrine of Right was first published separately around January 1797, and the Doctrine of Virtue in August of that year. Kant made a second edition with slight revisions in 1798, which include adding an appendix responding to a review of the Doctrine of Right by Friedrich Bouterwek .

[ 1 ] General Structure of the Work [ edit ] The work is divided into two main parts, the Rechtslehre and the Tugendlehre .

Mary J. Gregor 's translation (1991) explains these German terms as, respectively, the Doctrine of Right , [ 2 ] which deals with the rights that people have, and the Doctrine of Virtue , which deals with the virtues they ought to acquire. The Doctrine of Right also deals with required actions concerning the external relationships between people and the Doctrine of Virtue also deals with the internal requirements that characterize moral action and duty.

Summary [ edit ] The Doctrine of Right is grounded in republican interpretation of origins of political community as civil society and establishment of positive law . Published separately in 1797, the Doctrine of Right is one of the last examples of classical republicanism in political philosophy.

[ 3 ] It contains the most mature of Kant's statements on the peace project and a system of law to ensure individual and public rights.

[ 4 ] It expounds fundamental and coercively enforceable principles of external conduct between people, foremost among them being the universal principle of right which states: Any action is right if it can coexist with everyone's freedom in accordance with a universal law, or if on its maxim the freedom of choice of each can coexist with everyone's freedom in accordance with a universal law.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Thus, according to Kant, the task of right is to bring the exercise of individual freedom into harmony with the freedom of everyone according to a universal law . The Doctrine of Right also discusses property rights, punitive justice, as well as state and cosmopolitan rights.

The Doctrine of Virtue further develops Kant's ethical theory, which he had already laid the foundation in the Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) and the Critique of Practical Reason . It develops Kant’s conception of virtue and expositions of particular ethical duties we have as rational human beings. Kant particularly emphasizes treating humanity as an end in itself. The duties are analytically treated by Kant, who distinguishes duties towards ourselves from duties towards others. The duties are further classified as perfect duties and imperfect duties. Kant thinks imperfect duties allow a latitudo , i.e., the possibility of choosing maxims. The perfect duties instead do not allow any latitudo . Kant uses this distinction in discussing some of the duties that were shown as examples in the Groundwork in more detail (viz., not lying, not committing suicide, cultivating one's talents, and being beneficent toward others). He also discusses particular duties that were not mentioned in the Groundwork such as the duties of gratitude [ 7 ] and not being servile (falsely humble).

[ 8 ] Thus, Kant distinguishes "Virtue" and "Right": the "Doctrine of Right" contains rights as perfect duties towards others only.

Influence [ edit ] In the English-speaking world, the Metaphysics of Morals (1797) is not as well known as Kant's earlier works, the Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) and the Critique of Practical Reason (1788), but it has experienced a renaissance through the pioneering work of Mary J. Gregor .

[ 9 ] English translations [ edit ] Translations of the entire book: Kant, Immanuel (1991).

The Metaphysics of Morals . Translated by Mary J. Gregor . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-30372-9 – via Internet Archive .

.

Kant, Immanuel.

The Metaphysics of Morals.

Translated by Mary J. Gregor .

Cambridge University Press , 1996.

ISBN 0-521-56673-8 .

Kant, Immanuel.

The Metaphysics of Morals.

In Practical Philosophy . Edited by Mary J. Gregor .

Cambridge University Press , 1996.

Translated by Anonymous (John Richardson), "Metaphysic of Morals divided into Metaphysical Elements of Law and of Ethics." 2 vols. (London [Hamburg]: William Richardson, 1799).

Translations of Part I: Kant, Immanuel.

The Philosophy of Law: An Exposition of the Fundamental Principles of Jurisprudence as the Science of Right .

Translated by W. Hastie. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1887; reprinted by Augustus M. Kelly Publishers, Clifton, NJ, 1974. [introduction and all of part I] Kant, Immanuel.

The Metaphysical Elements of Justice; Part I of the Metaphysics of Morals.

1st ed. Translated by John Ladd. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965. [introduction and most of part I] Kant, Immanuel.

The Metaphysics of Morals . In Kant: Political Writings . 2nd enl. ed. Edited by Hans Reiss. Translated by H. B. Nisbet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991. [selections from part I] Kant, Immanuel.

The Metaphysical Elements of Justice; Part I of the Metaphysics of Morals.

2nd ed. Translated by John Ladd. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1999. [introduction and all of part I] Kant, Immanuel.

Metaphysics of Morals, Doctrine of Rights, Section 43-section 62.

In Toward Perpetual Peace and Other Writings on Politics, Peace, and History . Edited by Pauline Kleingeld. Translated by David L. Colclasure. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006. [selections from part I, concerning public right] Translations of Part II: Kant, Immanuel, The Doctrine of Virtue . Translated by Mary J. Gregor. New York: Harper & Row Torchbooks, 1964; reprinted by the University of Pennsylvania Press, 1971.

Translated by James Wesley Ellington, in Ethical Philosophy. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1983 [1964]. [Part II] Translated by John William Semple, "The Metaphysic of Ethics." Edinburgh: Thomas Clark, 1836; Reprint editions include 1871, ed. Henry Calderwood (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark). [Introduction and portions of part II] See also [ edit ] Books portal Philosophy portal Psychology portal 1797 in literature Anthropology Ethics Immanuel Kant bibliography The Critique of Practical Reason The Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals Religion Within the Boundaries of Mere Reason Kantianism Philosophy of life References [ edit ] ^ Gregor, Mary J. (1996) "Translator's note on the text of The metaphysics of morals". In Practical Philosophy . The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant, pp. 355.

^ Rechtslehre has also been translated as the Science of Right (Hastie) or the Metaphysical Elements of Justice (Ladd).

^ Manfred Riedel , Between Tradition and Revolution: The Hegelian Transformation of Political Philosophy , Cambridge 1984.

^ Byrd, B. Sharon; Hruschka, Joachim (2010).

Kant’s Doctrine of Right: A Commentary . Cambridge University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 9780521196642 .

^ Gregor, Mary J. (1996) "The metaphysics of morals". In Practical Philosophy . The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant, p. 387.

^ Kant, MS 6:230.

^ Kant, MS 6:454-456.

^ Kant, MS 6:434-437.

^ See in particular her 1963 book, Laws of Freedom .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: The Philosophy of Law The Philosophy of Law: An Exposition of the Fundamental Principles of Jurisprudence as the Science of Right , full text of the introduction and part I of the Metaphysics of Morals .

An explanation of the division between the two parts, and what Kant means by virtue.

Die Metaphysik der Sitten , full German text of the Metaphysics of Morals (from Korpora ).

Book Review of Mary Gregor's 1991 translation of the Metaphysics of Morals , by Steven Palmquist.

Kant and the Moral Necessity of Civil Society , full text of political theory work by Dr. Jacqueline Augustine.

Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metaphysics_of_Morals&oldid=1303716769 " Categories : 1797 non-fiction books Books by Immanuel Kant Enlightenment philosophy Ethics books German non-fiction books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Government and politics articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles containing German-language text Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 17:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Metaphysics of Morals 12 languages Add topic

