Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Unmarried fathers 3 Married fathers 4 Legal proceedings 5 Paternity and inheritance rights 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Paternity law 9 languages العربية Čeština Eesti Español Français Íslenska Română Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Paternity (law) ) Body of law underlying legal obligations The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( December 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Family law Family Marriage and other unions and status Types of marriages Cohabitation Concubinage Common-law marriage Civil union Domestic partnership Validity of marriages Marriage licence Marriage certificate Prenuptial agreement Matrimonial regime Void and Voidable marriages Annulment Marriageable age Sham marriage Amatonormativity Dissolution of marriages Divorce Adultery Grounds for divorce No-fault divorce Matrimonial Causes Act Legal separation Alimony Parenting plan Residence [UK (EW and NI)] Custody evaluator (US) Parenting coordinator (US) Children's issues Paternity DNA paternity testing Legitimacy Child custody Legal guardian Adoption Tender years doctrine Filial responsibility Contact & visitation CAFCASS [UK (EW)] Grandparent visitation UN Rights of the Child Children's rights Emancipation Foster care Ward Child support Paper abortion List of child abuse cases featuring long-term detention Private international law Private international law Divorce Marriage Hague Convention (adoption) International child abduction Hague Convention (child abduction) Hague Convention (maintenance) Family and criminal code (or criminal law) Bigamy Child abuse CPS (US) Child selling Domestic violence Incest Legality of incest Parental child abduction Parental duties Parents' rights Paternity fraud Paternal rights and abortion Right to family life v t e Paternity law refers to body of law underlying legal relationship between a father and his biological or adopted children and deals with the rights and obligations of both the father and the child to each other as well as to others. A child's paternity may be relevant in relation to issues of legitimacy , inheritance and rights to a putative father 's title or surname, as well as the biological father's rights to child custody in the case of separation or divorce and obligations for child support .

Under common law , a child born to a married woman is presumed to be the child of her husband by virtue of a " presumption of paternity " or presumption of legitimacy .

[ 1 ] In consideration of a possible non-paternity event (which may or may not include paternity fraud ) these presumptions may be rebutted by evidence to the contrary, for example, in disputed child custody and child support cases during divorce, annulment or legal separation .

In the case of a father not married to a child's mother, depending on the laws of the jurisdiction: a man may accept the paternity of the child in what is called an acknowledgment of paternity , voluntary acknowledgement of paternity or affidavit of parentage , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] the mother or legal authorities can file a petition for a determination of paternity against a putative father, or paternity can be determined by the courts through estoppel over time.

[ 4 ] Today, when paternity is in dispute or doubt, paternity testing may be used to conclusively resolve the issue.

Overview [ edit ] See also: List of national legal systems The legal process of determining paternity normally results in the naming of a man to a child's birth certificate as the child's legal father. A paternity finding resolves issues of legitimacy, and may be followed by court rulings that relate to child support and maintenance, custody and guardianship.

Unmarried fathers [ edit ] Generally, under common law, a biological father has a legal obligation for the maintenance or support of his biological offspring, whether or not he is legally competent to marry the child's mother.

[ 5 ] In jurisdictions where there is no presumption of paternity there is a process for fathers to recognise their children and become the legal father of the child.

[ 6 ] Married fathers [ edit ] In the United States, where a child is conceived or born during wedlock, the husband is legally presumed to be the father of the child.

[ 7 ] Some states have a legal process for a husband to disavow paternity, such that a biological father can be named as the parent of a child conceived or born during a marriage. In most states, any claim of non-paternity by a husband must be heard by a court.

[ 8 ] If parents litigate a divorce case without raising the issue of paternity, in most states they will be barred from disputing the husband's paternity in a later court proceeding. Depending upon state law, it may nonetheless be possible for a man claiming to be the child's biological father to commence a paternity case following the divorce.

[ 9 ] Legal proceedings [ edit ] Where paternity of the child is in question, a party may ask the court to determine paternity of one or more possible fathers (called putative fathers), typically based initially upon sworn statements and then upon testimony or other evidence .

[ 10 ] Once paternity has been legally established, if the court finds that to do so would be contrary to the best interest of the child, in most U.S. states a court may deny DNA testing or decline to remove a husband from a child's birth certificate based upon DNA testing.

[ 11 ] A successful application to the court results in an order assigning paternity to a specific man, possibly including support responsibility and/or visitation rights, or declaring that one or more men (possibly including the husband of the mother) are not the father of the child. A disavowal action is a legal proceeding where a putative father attempts to prove to the court that he is not the father; if successful, it relieves the former putative father of legal responsibility for the child.

[ 12 ] On the other hand, it could be the case where several putative fathers are fighting to establish custody. In the United States, a state may legally bar a third party from disputing the paternity of a child born within an intact marriage.

[ 13 ] Some paternity laws assign full parental responsibility to fathers even in cases of women lying about contraception, using deceit (such as oral sex followed by self- artificial insemination ) [ citation needed ] or statutory rape by a woman ( Hermesmann v. Seyer ).

[ 5 ] Paternity and inheritance rights [ edit ] If the context of inheritance rights, it will be the heirs of the deceased person who are attempting to dispute or establish paternity.  In some states, DNA testing will be dispositive to establish paternity.  In many jurisdictions, however, there are a variety of rules and time restrictions that can deny inheritance rights to biological children of a deceased father.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Bradley Amendment Carol Smart Family law Filiation Lord Mansfield's Rule Parental leave Parenting plan Paternity Court Paternity fraud References [ edit ] ^ Richards, Edward P.

"The Presumption of Legitimacy" .

Law and the Physician . The Law, Science & Public Health Law Site . Retrieved 31 May 2017 .

^ "Affidavit of Parentage" (PDF) .

State of Michigan . Retrieved 17 September 2017 .

^ "Establishing Paternity Voluntarily" .

MassLegalHelp . Massachusetts Legal Services . Retrieved 17 September 2017 .

^ "Parentage/Paternity" .

California Courts . Retrieved 17 September 2017 .

^ a b "Court Tells Youth to Support Child He Fathered at Age 13" .

The New York Times . 6 March 1993 . Retrieved 2013-04-10 .

^ "The Rights of Unmarried Fathers" (PDF) .

The Child Welfare Information Gateway .

^ Singer, Jana (2006).

"Marriage, Biology, and Paternity: The Case for Revitalizing the Marital Presumption" .

Maryland Law Review .

65 . Retrieved 17 September 2017 .

^ Roberts, Paula.

"Disestablishing the Paternity of Non – Marital Children" (PDF) .

CLASP . Center for Law & Social Policy . Retrieved 17 September 2017 .

^ Glennon, Theresa (1999).

"Somebody's Child: Evaluating the Erosion of the Marital Presumption of Paternity" .

West Virginia Law Review .

102 : 547 . Retrieved 17 September 2017 .

^ "The Rights of Unmarried Fathers" (PDF) .

Child Welfare Information Gateway . Children's Bureau . Retrieved 31 May 2017 .

^ Strasser, Mark (1996).

"Legislative Presumptions and Judicial Assumptions: On Parenting, Adoption, and the Best Interest of the Child" .

University of Kansas Law Review .

45 : 49 . Retrieved 17 September 2017 .

^ "Louisiana Civil Code article 186 et seq" . Archived from the original on 2023-06-09 . Retrieved 2013-06-10 .

^ "Michael H. v. Gerald D., 491 US 110, 109 S. Ct. 2333, 105 L. Ed. 2d 91 (1989)" .

Google Scholar . Retrieved 17 September 2017 .

^ Beugge, Charlotte (8 June 2013).

"Rise in wills disputes over illegitimate children" . The Telegraph . Retrieved 31 May 2017 .

^ Mahapatra, Dhananjay (27 August 2012).

"How legitimate is an illegitimate child's right to property" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 31 May 2017 .

^ Smith, Meredith (4 March 2016).

"Intestate Succession Rights and Children Born Out of Wedlock" .

UNC School of Government . Retrieved 31 May 2017 .

Further reading [ edit ] Nara B. Milanich (2019).

Paternity: The Elusive Quest for the Father . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674980686 .

v t e Parenting Kinship terminology Parent Mother Father Adoptive Alloparenting Coparenting Extended family Foster care Noncustodial Nuclear family Orphaned Same-sex Shared parenting Single parent Blended family Surrogacy In loco parentis Theories · Areas Attachment theory Applied behavior analysis Behaviorism Child development Cognitive development Developmental psychology Human development Identity formation Introjection Love Maternal bond Nature versus nurture Parental investment Care work Cost of raising a child Paternal care Unpaid work Paternal bond Pediatrics Social emotional development Socialization Social psychology Styles Achievement ideology Atlas personality Attachment parenting Baby talk Buddha-like parenting Concerted cultivation Enmeshment Free-range parenting Gatekeeper parent Helicopter parent Nurturant parenting Reflective parenting Slow parenting Soccer mom Strict father model Taking Children Seriously Theybie Tiger parenting Work at home parent Techniques After-school activity Allowance Bedtime Child care Co-sleeping Dishabituation Education Habituation Homeschooling Identification (psychology) Introjection Kommune 1 Latchkey kid Moral development Normative social influence Parent management training Play ( date ) Role model Social integration Television The talk (race) The talk (sex education) Toy ( educational ) Positive Parenting Program Child discipline Blanket training Corporal punishment in the home Curfew Grounding Positive discipline Tactical ignoring Time-out Abuse Adverse childhood experiences Child abandonment Child abuse Child labour Child neglect Cinderella effect Codependency Deadbeat parent Dysfunctional family Effects of domestic violence Incest Management of domestic violence Narcissistic parent Parental abuse by children Parental alienation Stress in early childhood Legal Child custody Child support Disownment Family disruption Right to family life Marriage Parental leave Parental responsibility Parents' rights Paternity Shared parenting Experts Mary Ainsworth Diana Baumrind John Bowlby T. Berry Brazelton Rudolf Dreikurs David Elkind Jo Frost Haim Ginott Thomas Gordon Alan E. Kazdin Truby King Annette Lareau Penelope Leach Matthew Sanders William Sears B. F. Skinner Benjamin Spock Organizations Families Need Fathers Mothers' Union National Childbirth Trust National Fatherhood Initiative National Parents Organization Parent–teacher association Parents Against Child Exploitation Authority control databases National France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paternity_law&oldid=1305950795 " Categories : Divorce law Family law Marriage law Paternity Reproductive rights Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from December 2010 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 01:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paternity law 9 languages Add topic

