Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Stand description 2 Stand spacing 3 Purpose 4 Alternatives 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Forest stand 15 languages Čeština Deutsch Eesti فارسی Français Fulfulde Hrvatski Nederlands Polski Русский کوردی Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(June 2016) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the German article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,945 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Bestand (Forstwirtschaft)]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Bestand (Forstwirtschaft)}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Three forest stands Stand dynamics stages during succession .

A forest stand is a contiguous community of trees sufficiently uniform in composition, structure, age, size, class , distribution, spatial arrangement, condition, or location on a site of uniform quality to distinguish it from adjacent communities.

[ 1 ] A forest is a "collection of stands" also utilizing the practices of forestry .

[ 2 ] Stand level modelling is a type of modelling in the forest sciences in which the main unit is a forested stand.

Stand description [ edit ] A forest stand is commonly described as in 10ths or 10%s. Thus a ratio could be given of: 3 Ponderosa pines, 2 mangrove trees, 5 silver spruces. If there was a mixed stand that stand mix could be described as mixed up to 10%, mixed 10–40% and a mixed stand over that amount.

[ citation needed ] The form of mixing of the tree types is commonly given as: individuals – when there are a few unconnected trees of a type.

troop – up to 5 trees connected of one type.

group – when there are more than 5 trees, but they are shorter than a harvestable tree.

thicket – when there are more than 5 trees, but they are taller than a harvestable tree to around 0.5 ha.

rotten group (cluster) –  a packed together standing aggregate of trees, trees in the rotten group have different heights and different depths or a stripwise arrangement. Rotten is from German, Rotte and means pack. These trees are linked together in small rotten groups separated by bigger interstices. This means they are ideal for mountain afforestation .

[ 3 ] Stand spacing [ edit ] A stand's spacing may be described by the crown cover of the trees. It can thus be delimited as: Packed – the crowns all overlap when looked at from above Closed – the crowns all touch, but do not overlap Light – when there is space between the crowns that is even Spacey/gappy – when a few trees are close and yet there are many clearings between these little groups Purpose [ edit ] Stands are not logical, ecologically defined management units. Instead they have evolved from the Normalwald concept, which was predicated on the idea of harvesting efficiency and thus that forest land was primarily to generate income from timber production. Stands allow easier forest inventory and planning . The concept has by way of extension been applied across all forestry practice in the world, but originated in the Mitteleuropa of the late 18th and early 19th century with the mercantilist tradition, Prussian education and emergence of modern silviculture .

[ citation needed ] Along with the Normalwald concept has come the idea that stands are standardized in terms of size, species mix, age class and other tree metrics and that forestry should aim to impose this on nature where it has not existed up till now.

[ 4 ] Alternatives [ edit ] As stand is from an economic timber forestry perspective, it is very focused on the tree element of forests. It is not considerate of the other elements within a forest such as shrubs, animals or topography and alternative terms may better fit ecological or other land value purposes within forests. The English term grove is one example. Also proposed is eco-unit .

[ 5 ] Other terms may also work, but be on different scales, such as copse or woodland . To be useful in silviculture such terms must be clearly defined and consistently applied. Lacking that stand is likely to remain the preferred unit to be used by foresters and others managing forests, despite its limitations.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Bosquet , a formal plantation of trees Coppicing , method of tree management copse in Wiktionary Grove (nature) , small group of trees Thicket , a dense stand of trees Forest dynamics stand in Wiktionary Stand (disambiguation) References [ edit ] ^ Nyland, Ralph D. (2007).

Silviculture: concepts and applications (2nd ed.). Prospect Heights: Waveland Press.

^ Nyland, Ralph D. (2007).

Silviculture: concepts and applications (2nd ed.). Prospect Heights: Waveland Press. p. 5.

^ Eidg Forschungsanstalt WSL.

"Rottenaufforstung im Gebirge" .

waldwissen.net (in German).

^ Puettmann, Klaus J.; Coates, K. David; Messier, Christian (2009).

A Critique of Silviculture: Managing for Complexity . Washington, DC: Island Press.

ISBN 978-1597261463 .

^ Oldeman, Roelof A. A. (1990).

Forests: Elements of Silvology . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. p. 624.

ISBN 9783642752117 .

Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forest_stand&oldid=1215461396 " Categories : Forest modelling Forest ecology Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles needing translation from German Wikipedia All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 This page was last edited on 25 March 2024, at 07:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forest stand 15 languages Add topic

