Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Names 2 Origin 3 History 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mob rule 51 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Magyar Македонски მარგალური Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Sicilianu Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Democracy spoiled by demagoguery and the rule of passion over reason For other uses, see Mob Rule (disambiguation) .

Part of the Politics series Democracy History Theory Indices Types Anticipatory Athenian Cellular Consensus Conservative Cosmopolitan Defensive Deliberative Direct Economic Electronic Empowered Ethnic Grassroots Guided Hybrid regime Inclusive Industrial Jacksonian Jeffersonian Liberal / Illiberal Liquid Majoritarian Media Monitory Multiparty Non-partisan Oral Participatory Pluralist Popular Procedural Radical Representative Religious Buddhist Christian Islamic Jewish Mormon Sectarian Semi Semi-direct Social Socialist Sociocracy Sovereign Soviet Substantive Supermajority Totalitarian Workplace Methods Campaign Consultation Demonstration Election By-election Direct / Indirect Primary Recall Snap Systems Legislature / Parliament Opinion poll Petition Popular assembly Participatory budgeting Referendum Deliberative Initiative Popular War Sortition Citizens' assembly Jury Voting Related topics Anarchism Criticism of democracy Democratic backsliding Democratic capitalism Democratic centralism Democratic confederalism Democratic peace theory Democratic republic Democratic socialism Democratic transition Democratization Democracy and economic growth Democracy promotion Electoral competition Kleroterion Liberalism Libertarianism Majoritarianism Majority rule Motion Ochlocracy Nomination rules Peaceful transition of power Political equality Polyarchy Populism Post-democracy Proportional representation Right to petition Right to protest Right to candidacy Right to vote Territorial peace theory Tyranny of the majority Wars between democracies Waves of democracy Wisdom of the crowd Region Africa Asia Europe Historical Americas Middle East and North Africa Politics portal v t e Part of the Politics series Basic forms of government List of forms · List of countries Source of power Democracy ( rule by many ) Demarchy Direct Economic Liberal Representative Social Socialist Others Oligarchy (rule by few) Anocracy Aristocracy Broligarchy Gerontocracy Kleptocracy Kritarchy Meritocracy Noocracy Particracy Plutocracy Stratocracy Technocracy Theocracy Autocracy ( rule by one ) Despotism Dictatorship Military dictatorship Tyranny Anarchy (rule by none) Anarchism Free association Stateless Power ideology Monarchy Republic (socio-political ideologies) Absolute Communist Constitutional Directorial Legalist Parliamentary Presidential Semi-presidential Authoritarian Libertarian (socio-economic ideologies) Anarchism Colonialism Communism Despotism Distributism Fascism Feudalism Islamism Socialism Totalitarianism Tribalism Religious Secular State religion Secular state Separation of church and state State atheism Global Local (geo-cultural ideologies) City-state Intergovernmental organisation National government World government Nationalism Internationalism Globalism Power structure Unitarism Unitary state Empire Principality Client state Associated state Dependent territory Dominion Protectorate Puppet state Puppet monarch Satellite state Self-governing colony Tributary state Buffer state Vassal state Viceroyalty Federalism Confederation Devolution Federation Superstate Supranational union International relations Small power Middle power Regional power Emerging power Great power Superpower Related Administrative division Democracy indices Democratic transition Autocratization Democratisation Hybrid regimes Politics portal v t e A Tale of Two Cities , the mob in Paris dancing La Carmagnole , by Fred Barnard.

Mob rule or ochlocracy or mobocracy is a pejorative term describing an oppressive majoritarian form of government controlled by the common people through the intimidation of authorities. Ochlocracy is distinguished from democracy or similarly legitimate and representative governments by the absence or impairment of a procedurally civil process reflective of the entire polity.

[ 1 ] Names [ edit ] Ochlocracy comes from Latin ochlocratia , from Greek ὀχλοκρατία ( okhlokratía ), from ὄχλος ( ókhlos , "mass", "mob", or "common people") and κράτος ( krátos , "rule").

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] An ochlocrat is one who is an advocate or partisan of ochlocracy. The adjective may be either ochlocratic or ochlocratical.

Ochlocracy is synonymous in meaning and usage to mob rule or mobocracy , which was coined in the 18th century from the sense of "mob" meaning the common rabble that arose from the Latin phrase mobile vulgus ("the fickle crowd ") in the 1680s during disputes over the United Kingdom 's Glorious Revolution .

Origin [ edit ] Polybius appears to have coined the term ochlocracy in his 2nd century BC work Histories (6.4.6).

[ 4 ] He uses it to name the "pathological" version of popular rule, in opposition to the good version, which he refers to as democracy. There are numerous mentions of the word "ochlos" in the Talmud , in which "ochlos" refers to anything from "mob", "populace", to "armed guard", as well as in the writings of Rashi , a Jewish commentator on the Bible. The word was first recorded in English in 1584, derived from the French ochlocratie (1568), which stems from the original Greek okhlokratia , from okhlos ("mob") and kratos ("rule", "power", "strength").

Ancient Greek political thinkers [ 5 ] regarded ochlocracy as one of the three "bad" forms of government ( tyranny , oligarchy , and ochlocracy) as opposed to the three "good" forms of government: monarchy , aristocracy , and democracy . They distinguished "good" and "bad" according to whether the government form would act in the interest of the whole community ("good") or in the exclusive interests of a group or individual at the expense of justice ("bad").

[ citation needed ] Polybius' predecessor, Aristotle , distinguished between different forms of democracy, stating that those disregarding the rule of law devolved into ochlocracy.

[ 6 ] Aristotle's teacher, Plato , considered democracy itself to be a degraded form of government and the term is absent from his work.

[ 7 ] The threat of "mob rule" to a democracy is restrained by ensuring that the rule of law protects minorities or individuals against short-term demagoguery or moral panic .

[ 8 ] However, considering how laws in a democracy are established or repealed by the majority, the protection of minorities by rule of law is questionable. Some authors, like the Bosnian political theoretician Jasmin Hasanović, connect the emergence of ochlocracy in democratic societies with the decadence of democracy in neo-liberal Western societies , in which "the democratic role of the people has been reduced mainly to the electoral process".

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The mob attacking Joseph Foullon de Doué African-American lynched by white mob in Omaha, Nebraska, September 28, 1919, during the " Red Summer " During the late 17th and the early 18th centuries, English life was very disorderly. Although the Duke of Monmouth 's rising of 1685 was the last rebellion, there was scarcely a year in which London or the provincial towns did not see aggrieved people breaking out into riots. In Queen Anne 's reign (1702–14) the word "mob", first heard of not long before, came into general use. With no police force, there was little public order.

[ 9 ] Several decades later, the anti-Catholic Gordon Riots swept through London and claimed hundreds of lives; at the time, a proclamation painted on the wall of Newgate prison announced that the inmates had been freed by the authority of "His Majesty, King Mob".

The Salem Witch Trials in colonial Massachusetts during the 1690s, in which the unified belief of the townspeople overpowered the logic of the law, also has been cited by one essayist as an example of mob rule.

[ 10 ] In 1837, Abraham Lincoln wrote about lynching and "the increasing disregard for law which pervades the country – the growing disposition to substitute the wild and furious passions in lieu of the sober judgment of courts, and the worse than savage mobs for the executive ministers of justice." [ 11 ] Mob violence played a prominent role in the early history of the Latter Day Saint movement .

[ 12 ] Examples include the expulsions from Missouri , the Haun's Mill massacre , the death of Joseph Smith , the expulsion from Nauvoo , the Mountain Meadows Massacre , the murder of Joseph Standing , and the Cane Creek Massacre .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] In an 1857 speech , Brigham Young gave an address demanding military action against "mobocrats." See also [ edit ] Anacyclosis Anarchism Argumentum ad populum Bandwagon effect Cancel culture Collective consciousness Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Collectivism and individualism Communal violence Consensus reality Criticism of democracy Crowd manipulation Crowd psychology Democratic backsliding Diffusion of responsibility Direct democracy Group dynamics Herd behavior Illiberal democracy Lynching Mass psychogenic illness Mobbing Peer pressure Political demonstration Populism Presumption of guilt Proletarian revolution Smart mob Social group Spiral of silence Tyranny of the majority Vigilantism Vox populi References [ edit ] Notes ^ a b Hasanović, Jasmin.

"Ochlocracy in the Practices of Civil Society: A Threat for Democracy?" .

Studia Juridica et Politica Jaurinensis .

Archived from the original on 15 May 2018.

^ "ochlocracy" .

The Free Dictionary . Retrieved 31 December 2021 .

^ "ochlocracy | Etymology, origin and meaning of ochlocracy by etymonline" .

www.etymonline.com . Retrieved 31 December 2021 .

^ "Polybius, Histories, The Rotation of Polities" . www.perseus.tufts.edu.

Archived from the original on 26 February 2008 . Retrieved 29 March 2008 .

^ Plato Statesman , 302c ^ Aristotle Politics , Bk IV, Part IV ^ Blössner, Norbert (2007). "The City-Soul Analogy". In Ferrari, G. R. F. (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to Plato's Republic . Translated from the German by G. R. F. Ferrari. Cambridge University Press.

^ Jesús Padilla Gálvez , Democracy in Times of Ochlocracy, Synthesis philosophica, Vol. 32 No.1, 2017, pp. 167–178.

Padilla Gálvez, Jesús (23 August 2017).

"Demokracija u vremenu ohlokracije" .

Synthesis Philosophica .

32 (1): 167– 178.

doi : 10.21464/sp32112 .

Archived from the original on 24 December 2017 . Retrieved 18 December 2017 .

^ Clark, Sir George (1956).

The Later Stuarts, 1660–1714 . The Oxford History of England: Oxford University Press. pp.

258– 259.

ISBN 0-19-821702-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "Mob Rule and Violence in American Culture" .

colorado.edu . Archived from the original on 21 February 2010 . Retrieved 20 January 2010 .

^ " Opposition to Mob-Rule Archived 2009-01-09 at the Wayback Machine ", The Writings of Abraham Lincoln, Volume 1 .

^ Arrington, Leonard J.

& Bitton, Davis (1992).

The Mormon Experience: A History of the Latter-Day Saints . University of Illinois Press. p. 45.

ISBN 9780252062360 . Retrieved 23 June 2018 .

^ "Cane Creek Massacre" .

TNMormonHistory . Archived from the original on 14 February 2022 . Retrieved 23 June 2018 .

^ Wingfield, Marshall (1958). "Tennessee's Mormon Massacre".

Tennessee Historical Quarterly .

17 (1): 19– 36.

JSTOR 42621358 .

Bibliography Libby, Ronald T. (2021), American Ochlocracy: Black Lives Matter & Mob Rule . Miami: Twelve Tables Publisher [ ISBN missing ] Mob Rule in New Orleans by Ida B. Wells-Barnett EtymologyOnLine External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Mob rule at Wikiquote The dictionary definition of mob rule at Wiktionary v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Authoritarian and totalitarian forms of government Forms Absolute monarchy Autocracy Liberal Tsarist Communist state Counterintelligence state Dictatorship Benevolent Civilian Constitutional Dictablanda Grassroots Military Proletarian Right-wing Dominant-party system Illiberal democracy Totalitarian Libertarian authoritarianism Mafia state Managerial state Mediacracy Ochlocracy One-party state Oligarchy Police state Theocracy Islamic state Tyranny Majoritarian Soft Ideologies Authoritarian conservatism Chiangism Francoism Putinism Metaxism Authoritarian capitalism Pinochetism Authoritarian socialism Marxism–Leninism Stalinism Maoism Deng Xiaoping Theory Xi Jinping Thought Juche Despotism Enlightened Soft Ecoauthoritarianism Fascism Eco Neo Imperialism Nazism Neo Religious Caesaropapism Khomeinism Ziaism Shōwa Statism Techno See also Democracy indices Deep state Inverted totalitarianism Personality Leadership style Left-wing Right-wing Social dominance orientation Statism Strongman List of totalitarian states Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mob_rule&oldid=1303558914 " Categories : Authoritarianism Totalitarianism Democracy Pejorative terms for forms of government Political systems Crowd psychology Warlordism Societal collapse Social crises Government crises Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Pages with missing ISBNs Articles containing French-language text Use dmy dates from February 2021 This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 18:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mob rule 51 languages Add topic

