Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The First Amphictyony 2 Ancient historiography 3 Delphic Amphictyony 4 Sacred Wars 5 Decline 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Amphictyonic league 33 languages Afrikaans Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Amphictyonic League ) Pre-polis type of ancient Greek confederacy Look up amphictyony in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

In Archaic Greece , an amphictyony ( Ancient Greek : ἀμφικτυονία , a "league of neighbors"), or Amphictyonic League , was an ancient religious [ 1 ] association of tribes [ 2 ] formed before the rise of the Greek polis .

The six Dorian cities of coastal southwest Anatolia and the twelve Ionian cities to their north that formed the Ionian League after a Meliac war in the mid-7th century BC were already of considerable antiquity when the first written records emerged.

The First Amphictyony [ edit ] The oldest religious Amphictyonic League was known as Anthelian because it was centered on the cult of the chthonic goddess Demeter at Anthela . The twelve delegates were entitled Pylagorai (gate-assemblers), perhaps a reference to the local Gates of Hades, since Demeter was a chthonic goddess in her older local cults.

[ citation needed ] The immediate dwellers-round were some small states, including Achaea-Phthiotis, that paved the way for the entry of the body of the rest Boeotian tribes which were living around Thessaly ( perioikoi ).

[ citation needed ] Boeotia and Phocis , the most remote locations, joined only during or after the " First Sacred War ", which led to the defeat of the old priesthood and to a new control of the prosperity of the oracle at Delphi .

[ 3 ] As a result of the war the Anthelan body was known thenceforth as the Delphic Amphictyony and became the official overseer and military defender of the Delphic cult. A strange and revealing anti- Thessalian feeling appeared and a wall was built across the narrow defile at Thermopylae to keep the Thessalians out.

[ citation needed ] It is suggested that the Shield of Heracles may reflect anti-Thessalian feeling after the First Sacred War. In this epic, a Thessalian hero interfering with the Phoecian sanctuary is killed by a Boeotian hero, Heracles , whose mortal father, Amphitryon, had for allies Locrians and Phoecians. This was made to be sung at a Boeotian festival at midsummer at the hottest time of the Dog Star, Sirius.

[ 4 ] The name Hellenes , is related to the members of the league and was broadened to refer to all Greeks when the myth of their patriarch, Hellen , was invented. In Greek mythology, Amphictyon was brother of Hellen, and Graecus was son of his sister Pandora . According to the Parian Chronicle , the previously-named Graeces were renamed Hellenes.

[ 5 ] Ancient historiography [ edit ] An amphictyony consisting of polities under the aegis of Apollo's shrine at Delos was well-established in the seventh century. The Homeric Hymn to Delian Apollo of that approximate date lists them.

[ 6 ] Those cities and islands that trembled and refused to offer themselves for the birthplace of Apollo when pregnant Leto went to each in turn.

[ 7 ] The Homeric hymn presents an origin myth for the cult of Apollo on Delos. The joint Ionian festival celebrated there was the Delia . The Delian Amphictyony arose in the 4th century BC as an instrument of Athenian hegemony .

Thucydides made recollection of the Lelantine War when writing, "The war between Chalcis and Eretria was the one in which most cities belonging to the rest of Greece were divided up into alliances with one side or the other." [ 8 ] The Lelantine War was fought in Euboea at some point between the late 8th century BC and the first half of the 7th century BC.

[ citation needed ] Historians have puzzled over the broader meanings of "alliance" in such early times. However, as George Forrest notes, "large-scale associations lead more readily to contacts, to friendships and enmities at a distance than do little city-like units." [ 9 ] This explains why Phrygia and Assyria were at war with each other about 720–710, raising tensions among interested Greeks.

An amphictyony would survive as a form of religious organization enjoined to support specific temples or sacred places. Traditional amphictyonies coordinated Olympic and Pythian Games . Twelve members would meet at specific times in the same sanctuary to keep religious festivals and conduct other matters as well.

[ citation needed ] An early amphictyony centered on Kalaureia , an island close to the coast of Troezen in the Peloponnese and sacred to Poseidon , was noted by Strabo . Archaeology of the site suggested to Thomas Kelly that the sacred league was founded in the second quarter of the 7th century BCE, c.

680 –650.

[ 10 ] Before that date, there were virtually no remains at the site, which were not used more than sporadically.

[ 11 ] The island was known at one time as Eirene (Εἰρήνη) ("Peace"), which is in reference to the amphictyony.

[ 12 ] Strabo [ 13 ] lists the polis that belonged: "And there was also a kind of amphictyonic league connected with this temple, a league of seven cities which shared in the sacrifice; they were Hermione , Epidaurus , Aegina , Athens , Prasïeis , Nauplïeis , and Orchomenus Minyeius ; [ 14 ] however, the Argives paid dues for the Nauplians, [ 15 ] and the Lacedaemonians for the Prasians." [ 16 ] Delphic Amphictyony [ edit ] Amphictyonic law of Delphi (4th century BCE, marble, from Aegina , now in the Louvre ) Silver stater from Delphi, 336 BCE, issued in the name of Amphictyonic Council of Delphi The least obscure and longest lasting amphictyony was the Delphic Amphictyony that was organized to support the greater temples of Apollo and Demeter . Its council had religious authority and the power to pronounce punishments against offenders which ranged from fines to expulsion. They also had the ability to conduct sacred wars.

[ citation needed ] The Amphictyonic League also set the rules of battle so as to protect sanctuaries and impose sentences on those who molested sanctuaries. All members were obliged to pledge themselves by an oath as reported by Aeschines .

[ 17 ] Based on legend, the Great Amphictyonic League was founded somewhat after the Trojan War , for the protection and administration of the temple of Apollo in Delphi and temple of Demeter in Anthela (Ἀνθήλη), near Thermopylae . The founding myth claimed that it had been founded in the most distant past by an eponymous founder Amphictyon , brother of Hellen , the common ancestor of all Hellenes. Representatives of the twelve members (called hieromnemones ) met in Thermopylae in spring and in Delphi in autumn.

Many different sources have noted eleven to thirteen founding populations. The list below is as enumerated by Aeschines : [ 18 ] The Aenianes or Oetaeans (Αἰνιᾶνες, Οἰταῖοι) The Boeotians (Βοιωτοί) The Dolopes (Δόλοπες) The Dorians (Δωριείς) The Ionians (Ἴωνες) The Phthian (Φθιῶται) Achaeans (Ἀχαιοί) The Locrians (Λοκροί) [divided into the eastern Opuntians (Ὀπούντιοι) and western Ozolians (Ὀζολοί)] The Magnesians (Μάγνητες) The Malians (Μαλιεῖς) The Perrhaebians (Περραιβοί) The Phoecians (Φωκεῖς) The Pythians (Πύθιοι) of Delphi The Thessalians (Θεσσαλοί) The League doctrine required that no member would be entirely wiped out in war and no water supply of any member would be cut even in wartime. It did not prevent members from fighting about the dominance over the temples.

[ citation needed ] Sacred Wars [ edit ] Originally a religious organization, the Delphic Amphictyonic League became politically important in the 6th century BCE, when larger city-states began to use it to apply pressure to the lesser ones.

[ citation needed ] The Oracle managed to become independent from the city of Krissa, to which the temple originally belonged. The people of Krissa then imposed a tax on those who were passing through their area to go to Delphi, causing strong complaints and reducing the resources of the Oracle.

[ citation needed ] The Amphictyony, having exhausted all other means to peacefully resolve the crisis, declared the First Sacred War (or Cirrhean War ) [ 19 ] against Krissa that lasted a decade, from 596 to 585 BCE. The result was the destruction of Krissa and the dedication of this country to Apollo , Leto , Artemis , and Athena Pronaia. After this, the Pythian Games were held every four years, under the direction of the Amphictyons.

[ citation needed ] In 449-448 the Phoecians, wanting to become masters of the sanctuary, marched against Delphi, but the Spartans sent an army to preserve the status quo: this was the Second Sacred War .

[ citation needed ] After the Spartans' departure, the Athenians, led by Pericles , gave back to the Phoecians the rule of Delphi and the management of the Pythian Games. In 421, after the Peace of Nicias , Delphi became autonomous again.

[ citation needed ] It is unlikely, however, that Phoecis remained in control of Delphi after members of the Boeotian League defeated Athens at the Battle of Coronea (447 BCE) .

[ 20 ] In 356 the Phoecians under Philomelos captured and looted Delphi, and a Third Sacred War was declared against them.

[ citation needed ] After ten years of war, in 346, the Phoecians were expelled from the League and their two votes were given to Macedon , which had helped to defeat them.

[ citation needed ] Philip II of Macedonia used this power to further his expansionist policy in Greece. This resulted in the Fourth Sacred War which culminated in the Battle of Chaeronea (338 BCE) , marking the final domination of the Macedonians over Greece.

[ citation needed ] Decline [ edit ] In 279 the Delphic Amphictyony admitted as new members the Aetolian League , who had successfully defended the sanctuary as well as the rest of mainland Greece against the Gauls . At this instance the Phoecians were also readmitted for having also participated at the defense of the region.

[ citation needed ] In the 3rd century the Soteria (festival) was held in honour of the Greek victory against the Gauls. By 191 the League had 17 members but only the most dominant one had the two votes, when others had only one. The league continued to exist under the Roman Empire but its authority was limited to the care of the temple of Apollo at Delphi.

[ citation needed ] The Roman emperor Augustus incorporated the Aenianes, Malians, Magnetians and Pythians with the Thessalians. Since the Dolopes had meanwhile vanished, [ clarification needed ] he gave their vote to the city of Nicopolis .

[ citation needed ] The Amphictyonic League gradually declined and in the 2nd century CE it was replaced by the Panhellenion, established by the Roman emperor Hadrian .

[ citation needed ] However, the see of the Amphictyonic League was in Athens, the emperor's favorite city. Thus, it seems that the Amphictyony lost influence and came to an end, although we have no specific date for its actual cessation.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Calaurian Amphictyony Panionium Notes [ edit ] ^ Definition.

"Amphictyony" .

2014 . Dictionary.com . Retrieved 5 April 2014 .

^ History.com Archived April 23, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ; Encarta Archived 2009-10-29 at the Wayback Machine .  Archived 2009-10-31.

^ L. H . Jeffery (1976).

Archaic Greece. The Greek city states c. 700-500 B.C.

. Ernest Benn Ltd. London & Tonbridge  pp. 72–73, 78.

ISBN 0-510-03271-0 ^ L.H.Jeferry (1976).

The Archaic Greece. The Greek city states. 700-500 B.C.

, p.74 ^ Entry No 6: Graeces-Hellenes ^ Cf.

Encyclopædia Britannica , 11 ed., s.v.

Botsford, George Willis (1911).

"Amphictyony" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 1 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

885– 886.

^ Hera , notably worshiped at Samos in the Archaic period, was opposed to the birth of Apollo and obstructed Leto's parturition, according to the Hymn.

^ Thucydides , I 15, 3.

^ Forrest, "Greece: The history of the archaic Period", in John Boardman , Jasper Griffin and Oswyn Murray, Greece and the Hellenistic World (Oxford University Press, 1986) 1988:14f.

^ Thomas Kelly, "The Calaurian Amphictiony" American Journal of Archaeology 70 .2 (April 1966:113–121).

^ Some Mycenaean objects found at the site related to a few ancient burials without connection to Poseidon. (Kelly 1966:115, 116).

^ In a fragment of Aristotle and in the Suidas , s.v.

"Kalaunia" (Kelly 1966:118 note 45).

^ Strabo, Geography viii.6.14 ^ That is, "Minyan Orchomenus, in Boeotia ; the eighth-century date of Orchomenus' last access to the sea and the general agreement, following Strabo, that the league was a sea league, have affected the dating of the league.

^ That is, Argos took the place of Nauplia; the Argives destroyed Nauplia shortly after the Second Messenian War , of uncertain date in the mid-seventh century.

^ That is, Sparta took the place of Prasïeis, which was conquered by Sparta shortly after the middle of the sixth century (Kelly 1966:119, noting Herodotus , i.82) ^ The Speeches of Aeschines, On the Embassy (p. 245) ^ Aeschines, ii ( On the embassy ).116; see also Strabo , ix.3.7, and Pausanias , x.8.2–5.

^ An Epitome of the Civil and Literary Chronology of Greece. By Henry Fynes Clinton, p. 92.

^ For a more detailed account of this conflict, see Donald Kagan (1969), The Outbreak of the Peloponnesian War, pp. 120–124, based largely on Thuc. 1.112-13.

References [ edit ] Ancient Library on Amphictyones [ usurped ] and Hieromnemones [ usurped ] Decrees of the Amphictyonic Council , in English translation at attalus.org "Amphictyones" – A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities (1890) External links [ edit ] Media related to Delphic Amphictyony at Wikimedia Commons v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Sacred Wars First Sacred War Second Sacred War Third Sacred War Fourth Sacred War Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Amphictyonic_league&oldid=1303217187 " Categories : Society of ancient Greece Delphic amphictyony Archaic Greece Iron Age Greece Greek city-state federations Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2015 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 18:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Amphictyonic league 33 languages Add topic

