Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Public participation in legislation 2 Dead letter 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Legislation 40 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Cymraeg Eesti Español Français 한국어 Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша Lietuvių മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Română Русский Simple English کوردی Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 Zazaki Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legislative or parliamentary law Constitution of the United States , page 1 Legislation is the process or result of enrolling , enacting , or promulgating laws by a legislature , parliament , or analogous governing body .

[ 1 ] Before an item of legislation becomes law it may be known as a bill , and may be broadly referred to as "legislation" while it remains under consideration to distinguish it from other business. Legislation can have many purposes: to regulate, to authorize, to outlaw, to provide (funds), to sanction, to grant, to declare, or to restrict. It may be contrasted with a non-legislative act by an executive or administrative body under the authority of a legislative act.

[ 2 ] Overview [ edit ] Legislation to design or amend a bill requires identifying a concrete issue in a comprehensive way.

[ 3 ] When engaging in legislation, drafters and policy-makers must  take into consideration the best possible avenues to address problem areas.

[ 4 ] Possible solutions within bill provisions might involve implementing sanctions , targeting indirect behaviors, authorizing agency action, etc.

[ 5 ] Legislation is usually proposed by a member of the legislature (e.g. a member of Congress or Parliament), or by the executive, whereupon it is debated by members of the legislature and is often amended before passage . Most large legislatures enact only a small fraction of the bills proposed in a given session .

[ 6 ] Whether a given bill will be proposed is generally a matter of the legislative priorities of the government.

Legislation is regarded as one of the three main functions of government, which are often distinguished under the doctrine of the separation of powers . Those who have the formal power to create legislation are known as legislators ; a judicial branch of government will have the formal power to interpret legislation (see statutory interpretation ); the executive branch of government can act only within the powers and limits set by the law, which is the instrument by which the fundamental powers of government are established.

The function and procedures are primarily the responsibility of the legislature. However, there are situations where legislation is made by other bodies or means, such as when constitutional law or secondary legislation is enacted. Such other forms of law-making include referendums , orders in council or regulations . The term legislation is sometimes used to include these situations, or the term primary legislation may be used to exclude these other forms.

Public participation in legislation [ edit ] All modern constitutions and fundamental laws contain and declare the concept and principle of popular sovereignty, which essentially means that the people are the ultimate source of public power or government authority. The concept of popular sovereignty holds simply that in a society organized for political action, the will of the people as a whole is the only right standard of political action. It can be regarded as an important element in the system of checks and balances and representative democracy. Therefore, the people are implicitly entitled even to directly participate in the process of law-making. This role of linking citizens and their government and legislators is closely related to the concept of legitimacy. The exercise of democratic control over the legislative system and the policy-making process can occur even when the public has only an elementary understanding of the national legislative institution and its membership. Civic education is a vital strategy for strengthening public participation and confidence in the legislative process.

[ 7 ] Dead letter [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2016 ) The term " dead letter " refers to legislation that has not been revoked, but that has become inapplicable or obsolete, or is no longer enforced. In more simpler terms, it means that the legislation is gone.

[ 8 ] There are several types of dead letter laws.

[ 9 ] Some laws become obsolete because they are so hateful to their community that no one wishes them to be enforced (e.g., slavery ). Similarly, some laws are unenforced because a majority wishes to circumvent them, even if they believe in the moral principle behind the law (e.g., prohibition ). Finally, some laws are unenforced because no mechanism or resources were provided to enforce them. Such laws often become selectively enforced or tacked onto other crimes in the judicial process.

See also [ edit ] Rollback (legislation) Rule according to higher law References [ edit ] ^ See Article 289(3) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ^ Wim Voermans (December 2009). "Is the European Legislator after Lisbon a real Legislature?".

Legislacao Cadernos de Ciencia de Legislacao .

50 : 391–413 [402].

Within the category of legal acts provided for by the TFEU, a distinction is made between legislative acts and non-legislative acts. Legislative acts are decisions adopted under the ordinary or special legislative procedure (Article 289(3) of the TFEU) and non-legislative acts are decisions that are adopted pursuant to delegation or for the purpose of implementing a legislative act (Articles 35 See Article 288 of the TFEU, last 290 and 291 of the TFEU) ^ Kealy, Sean.

"African Parliamentary Knowledge Network Legislative Handbook: Using Evidence to Design and Assess Legislation" (PDF) .

^ Kealy, Sean.

"African Parliamentary Knowledge Network Legislative Handbook: Using Evidence to Design and Assess Legislation" (PDF) .

^ Kealy, Sean.

"African Parliamentary Knowledge Network Legislative Handbook: Using Evidence to Design and Assess Legislation" (PDF) .

^ Senate.gov ^ Vértesy, László (2017-01-10).

"The Public Participation in the Drafting of Legislation in Hungary" .

Central European Public Administration Review .

14 (4).

doi : 10.17573/ipar.2016.4.06 .

ISSN 2591-2259 . Archived from the original on 2020-05-24 . Retrieved 2019-07-30 .

^ Dead Letter ^ Browne, Irving (March–April 1889). "Dead-Letter Laws".

American Law Review .

23 (2): 178– 189 – via Hein Online.

External links [ edit ] "Legislation" .

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

Most-Viewed Bills on Congress.gov v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Japan Spain Korea Israel Other NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Legislation&oldid=1306090484 " Categories : Statutory law Politics Legislatures Law by type Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be expanded from September 2016 All articles to be expanded Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 21:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Legislation 40 languages Add topic

