Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Coinage 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Fourth World 27 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano مصرى Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Српски / srpski Svenska తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Extension of the three-world model For other uses, see Fourth World (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Four Worlds .

The Fourth World is an extension of the three-world model , used variably to refer to Sub-populations socially excluded from global society , such as uncontacted peoples ; Hunter-gatherer , nomadic , pastoral , and some subsistence farming peoples living beyond the modern industrial norm.

[ 1 ] Sub-populations existing in a First World country, but with the living standards of those of a Third World .

The term is not commonly used. "Fourth World" has also been used to refer to other parts of the world in relation to the three-world model.

Etymology [ edit ] Fourth World follows the First World , Second World , and Third World classification of nation-state status; however, unlike the former categories, Fourth World is not spatially bounded, and is usually used to refer to size and shape which does not map onto citizenship in a specific nation-state. It can denote nations without a sovereign state , emphasizing the perceived non-recognition and exclusion of ethnically- and religiously defined peoples from the politico-economic world system, such as the First Nations groups throughout North, Central and South America. Spanish sociologist Manuel Castells of the University of Southern California Annenberg School for Communication has made extensive use of the term fourth world .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Coinage [ edit ] The term was coined in 1969 by Father Joseph Wresinski when he renamed the charity he had founded in 1957 with families from the Noisy-le-Grand (France) shanty town to ATD Quart Monde .

The term was recycled in the 1970s by Mbuto Milando, first secretary of the Tanzanian High Commission , in conversation with George Manuel , Chief of the National Indian Brotherhood (now the Assembly of First Nations ). Milando stated that "When Native peoples come into their own, on the basis of their own cultures and traditions, that will be the Fourth World." [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Since publication of Manuel's The Fourth World: An Indian Reality (1974), the term Fourth World became synonymous with stateless, poor, and marginal nations.

[ 6 ] Since 1979, think tanks such as the Center for World Indigenous Studies have used the term in defining the relationships between ancient, tribal , and non-industrial nations and modern industrialised nation-states.

[ 7 ] With the 2007 UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples , communications and organizing amongst Fourth World peoples have accelerated in the form of international treaties between aboriginal nations for the purposes of trade, travel, and security.

[ 8 ] In the Indian left movement, M. P. Parameswaran 's ideas on the fourth world caused widespread debates, which eventually led to his expulsion from the Communist Party of India (Marxist) in 2004.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Least developed countries National wealth References [ edit ] ^ "International day of the world's indigenous people" .

Asian Center for the Progress of Peoples . Archived from the original on 4 December 2008.

^ Castells, Manuel (2000).

"32: The Rise of the Fourth World" (PDF) . In Held, David; McGrew, Andy (eds.).

The Global Transformations Reader: An Introduction to the Globalization Debate . Cambridge: Polity Press. pp.

348– 354.

ISBN 978-0745631356 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 October 2022.

^ Castells, Manuel (29 January 2010). "2: The Rise of the Fourth World: Informational Capitalism, Poverty, and Social Exclusion". In Castells, Manuel (ed.).

End of Millennium . Vol. 3 (Second ed.).

doi : 10.1002/9781444323436.ch2 .

ISBN 9781405196888 .

^ Hall, Tony (2003).

The American Empire and the Fourth World: The bowl with one spoon . McGill-Queen's native and northern series, 34. Montreal; Ithaca: McGill-Queen's University Press . p. 238.

ISBN 0-7735-3006-1 .

ISBN 9780773530065 , ISBN 0773523324 , ISBN 9780773523326 .

^ McFarlane, Peter (1993).

Brotherhood to nationhood: George Manuel and the making of the modern Indian movement . Toronto: Between the Lines. p. 160.

ISBN 0-921284-67-5 .

ISBN 9780921284673 , ISBN 0921284667 , ISBN 9780921284666 .

^ Griggs, Richard.

"The breakdown of states" .

Center for World Indigenous Studies .

^ Ryser, Rudolph C. (September 1993).

"Toward the coexistence of nations and states" .

Center for World Indigenous Studies . Archived from the original on 25 July 2008 . Retrieved 1 February 2008 .

^ Cloud, Redwing (10 August 2007).

"United League of Indigenous Nations formed" .

Indian Country Today .

^ "CPI(M) expels M.P. Parameswaran" .

The Hindu . 16 February 2004.

[ dead link ] ^ "KSSP to continue with existing policies" .

The Hindu . 1 March 2004.

[ dead link ] Further reading [ edit ] Castells, Manuel (2000) [1998].

End of Millennium, The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture . Vol. III (second ed.). Oxford, UK: Blackwell .

ISBN 978-0-631-22139-5 .

External links [ edit ] Fourth World Journal International Movement ATD Fourth World Fourth World Center for the Study of Indigenous Law and Politics at University of Colorado at Denver ( on archive.org ) Fourth World: Nations without a State - Nadesan Satyendra Fourth World Eye Archived 18 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine Fourth World Documentation Program v t e South–South cooperation and Third Worldism Global South Development Landlocked developing countries Least developed countries Heavily indebted poor countries Markets Emerging markets Newly industrialized country Transition economy Worlds theory First World Second World Third World Fourth World Geopolitics Decolonization Cold War Neocolonialism Multipolarity World Conference against Racism Durban I Durban II Durban III Globalization Finance Debt Asian Clearing Union Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank Asian Development Bank Arab Monetary Fund BancoSur BRIC (economics term) Caribbean Development Bank Common Fund for Commodities New Development Bank OPEC Fund for International Development Trade and development Developmental state Flying geese paradigm Infrastructure-based development Sustainable development Global System of Trade Preferences Protocol on Trade Negotiations New International Economic Order New World Information and Communication Order United Nations Conference on Trade and Development United Nations Development Programme United Nations Industrial Development Organization Public health Generic drugs biosimilar Pharmaceutical patents criticism Test data exclusivity Doha Declaration World Health Organization Organizations and groups G-5 G-77 G-15 D-8 G20 developing nations (G-20) G-24 G33 developing countries (G-33) G-11 G-90 Non-Aligned Movement African, Caribbean and Pacific Group African Union Afro–Asian Conference BASIC countries BRICS Association of Southeast Asian Nations Colombo Plan Community of Latin American and Caribbean States IBSA Dialogue Forum International Solar Alliance Melanesian Spearhead Group North–South Summit Polynesian Leaders Group South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Small Island Developing States South Centre North–South divide Brandt Report Global financial system International Monetary Fund World Bank World Trade Organization Fair trade Financial regulation Global digital divide v t e Economic classification of countries Developed country Developing country Heavily indebted poor countries Least developed countries Newly industrialized country World Bank high-income economy Three/Four-World Model First World Second World Third World Fourth World Gross domestic product (GDP) Nominal By country past and projected per capita per capita Purchasing power parity (PPP) By country future estimates per capita per capita per person employed Gross national income and Income Disposable income GNI (nominal) per capita GNI (PPP) per capita Per capita growth Income inequality Median income Real income Wages and salary Average wage Europe Employee compensation (per hour) Labour productivity Minimum wage Canada Europe United States Wealth Wealth inequality Wealth per adult Europe Financial assets per capita Other national accounts Gross National Happiness Net material product Research and development spending Stock market capitalization Patents, trademarks, and industrial design filing activity Human development Human Development Index by country inequality-adjusted planetary pressures–adjusted HDI Human Poverty Index Percentage living in poverty Human Capital Index Household income Social Progress Index Digital divide ICT Development Index Number of broadband Internet subscriptions Number of Internet users Smartphone penetration Net international investment position (NIIP) Per capita (creditors) Per capita (debtors) Economics portal World portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fourth_World&oldid=1305012547 " Categories : Economic country classifications Imperialism studies Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2021 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2021 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 14:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fourth World 27 languages Add topic

