Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usage 2 Transportation 3 Chain tracked vehicles 4 Film and paper 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Sprocket 30 languages Afrikaans العربية Català Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Lombard Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Sprockets ) Toothed wheel or cog This article is about a gear or wheel with metal teeth. For other uses, see Sprocket (disambiguation) .

16 tooth sprocket. Do = Sprocket diameter. Dp = Pitch diameter A sprocket and roller chain A sprocket , [ 1 ] sprocket-wheel [ 2 ] or chainwheel is a profiled wheel with teeth that mesh with a chain , rack or other perforated or indented material.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The name 'sprocket' applies generally to any wheel upon which radial projections engage a chain passing over it. It is distinguished from a gear in that sprockets are never meshed together directly, and differs from a pulley in that sprockets have teeth and pulleys are smooth except for timing pulleys used with toothed belts.

Sprockets are used in bicycles , motorcycles , tracked vehicles , and other machinery either to transmit rotary motion between two shafts where gears are unsuitable or to impart linear motion to a track, tape etc. Perhaps the most common form of sprocket may be found in the bicycle, in which the pedal shaft carries a large sprocket-wheel, which drives a chain, which, in turn, drives a small sprocket on the axle of the rear wheel. Early automobiles were also largely driven by sprocket and chain mechanism, a practice largely copied from bicycles.

Sprockets are of various designs, a maximum of efficiency being claimed for each by its originator. Sprockets typically do not have a flange . Some sprockets used with timing belts have flanges to keep the timing belt centered. Sprockets and chains are also used for power transmission from one shaft to another where slippage is not admissible, sprocket chains being used instead of belts or ropes and sprocket-wheels instead of pulleys. They can be run at high speed and some forms of chain are so constructed as to be noiseless even at high speed.

Usage [ edit ] The term 'sprocket' originally applied to the projection from the wheel that caught on the chain and provided the drive to it [ citation needed ] . The overall wheel was then termed a 'sprocket wheel'. With time and common use of these devices, the overall wheel became known as a sprocket. The earlier uses would now be seen as archaic.

Transportation [ edit ] In the case of bicycle chains, it is possible to modify the overall gear ratio of the chain drive by varying the diameter (and therefore, the tooth count) of the sprockets on each side of the chain . This is the basis of derailleur gears . A multi-speed bicycle, by providing two or three different-sized driving sprockets and up to 12 (as of 2018) different-sized driven sprockets, allows up to 36 different gear ratios. The resulting lower gear ratios make the bike easier to pedal up hills while the higher gear ratios make the bike more powerful to pedal on flats and downhills. In a similar way, manually changing the sprockets on a motorcycle can change the characteristics of acceleration and top speed by modifying the final drive gear ratio. The final drive gear ratio can be calculated by dividing the number of teeth on the rear sprocket by the number of teeth on the counter-shaft sprocket. With respect to the stock gearing on a motorcycle, installing a smaller counter-shaft sprocket (fewer teeth), or a larger rear sprocket (more teeth), produces a lower gear ratio, which increases the acceleration of the motorcycle but decreases its top speed. Installing a larger counter-shaft sprocket, or a smaller rear sprocket, produces a higher gear ratio, which decreases the acceleration of the motorcycle but increases its top speed.

Chain tracked vehicles [ edit ] Chain track drive sprocket ( Leclerc battle tank , 2006) In the case of vehicles with caterpillar tracks the engine-driven toothed-wheel transmitting motion to the tracks is known as the drive sprocket and may be positioned at the front or back of the vehicle, or in some cases both. There may also be a third sprocket, elevated, driving the track.

Film and paper [ edit ] Moving picture mechanism from 1914.  The sprocket wheels a, b, and c engage and transport the film.  a and b move with uniform velocity and c indexes each frame of the film into place for projection.

Sprockets are used in the film transport mechanisms of movie projectors and movie cameras .

[ 5 ] In this case, the sprocket wheels engage film perforations in the film stock. Sprocket feed was also used for punched tape and is used for paper feed to some computer printers .

See also [ edit ] Bicycle chain Bicycle gearing Chain drive Cogset (as used in bicycle gearing) Gear train Glossary of cycling Mechanical advantage Rack and pinion Roller chain (or "sprocket chain") Toad the Wet Sprocket Toothed belt References [ edit ] ^ "Sprocket - Definition" . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 2011-11-14 .

sprocket, n. 1: a toothed wheel whose teeth engage the links of a chain ^ Oxford English Dictionary (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press. 1989.

sprocket, n. 2. b. ellipt. A sprocket-wheel, esp. that of a cycle; and (Cinematogr.), one that propels film by engaging with perforations along its edge.

^ The Encyclopedia Americana: a library of universal knowledge, sprocket. pg 460 ^ Elements of machine design By Oscar Adolph Leutwiler ^ Motion picture handbook By Frank Herbert Richardson External links [ edit ] Chain Engagement with Sprockets v t e Gears Systems Spur gear systems Worm drive Rack and pinion Epicyclic (planetary) gearing Sun and planet gear Harmonic drive Cycloidal drive Non-circular gear Shapes Spur Bevel Crown Spiral bevel Helical Herringbone Geartooth profiles Involute Cycloid Mechanics Transmission Differential Coupling Train Bicycle gearing Continuously variable transmission Offset Examples Bicycles Cogset Derailleur Hub gear Shaft-driven bicycle Sprocket Horology Wheel train See also Ball screw Leadscrew Jackscrew Belt drive Chain drive Gear manufacturing Freewheel Spur gear corrected tooth v t e Bicycle parts Frame Handlebars Stem Head tube Headset Fork Seatpost Saddle Bottom bracket Fork end Suspension Wheels Tire Spoke Spoke nipple Valve stem Dustcap Quick release skewer Drivetrain Pedal Crankset Chain / Belt Master link Cogset Derailleur / Hub gears Gear case Sprocket Cabling Shifter Bowden cable Cable guide Brake Ferrule Peripherals Basket Bell Bottle cage Fairing Cyclocomputer Kickstand Lighting Luggage carrier Mudguards Panniers Saddlebag Spoke card Reflectors Skirt guard Fender Training wheels Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sprocket&oldid=1251726031 " Categories : Gears Mechanical power transmission Mechanical power control Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 This page was last edited on 17 October 2024, at 18:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sprocket 30 languages Add topic

