Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Career 3 Involvement Toggle Involvement subsection 3.1 Astronomical Experiments 3.2 Sub-Millimeter Experiments 4 Awards 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Rachel Bean 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American astronomer Rachel Bean Title Professor of astronomy and senior associate dean of math and science, Cornell University College of Arts and Sciences Awards Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers Cottrell Scholar Award NASA Group Achievement Award Academic background Education University of Cambridge Imperial College London Academic work Discipline Astronomy Sub-discipline Dark energy Institutions Cornell University Rachel Bean is a cosmologist , theoretical astrophysicist , [ 1 ] professor of astronomy , [ 2 ] and senior associate dean for math and science at the College of Arts and Sciences at Cornell University .

Education [ edit ] Bean received her bachelor's degree in natural sciences from the University of Cambridge in 1995. After graduation, she worked in the strategy division at Accenture , and then obtained her master's degree in 1999 and doctorate degree in 2002 in theoretical physics from Imperial College London . Following this, she was a postdoctoral research Fellow for Princeton University before being hired as a professor for Cornell's Department of Astronomy.

Career [ edit ] In 2005, Bean became a faculty member at Cornell University , [ 3 ] where her research focuses on cosmological tests of the nature of dark energy and gravity, and the physical origins of primordial inflation , using data from large-scale structure and the cosmic microwave background .  She is actively involved in a number of international astronomical surveys, including the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST), the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI), and the Euclid space mission .

[ 1 ] During her time at Cornell University, Bean served as the Senior Associate Dean for the university's Undergraduate Education department, where she was responsible for designing the curriculum, overseeing admissions into the program, and career development, among other things. On July 13, 2023, Bean succeeded Ray Jayawardhana as interim dean of the College of Arts and Sciences at Cornell University, [ 4 ] where she was later named the Senior Associate Dean for Math and Science. While she held this position within the university, she was partially responsible for introducing the data science minor to the school's Undergraduate Program.

Involvement [ edit ] Astronomical Experiments [ edit ] Vera Rubin Telescope (LSST) Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) Euclid and Roman Space Telescope missions. (NASA) Sub-Millimeter Experiments [ edit ] Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT) Simons Observatory Fred Young Submillimeter Telescope (FYST) During her time spent on her many collaborative experiments, Bean was the collaboration leader on the LSST Dark Energy Science Collaboration, which involved more than 500 international scientists. She also served as a member of the U.S. Astronomy and Astrophysics Advisory Council .

Awards [ edit ] 2007 NASA Group Achievement Award (for the results of the WMAP mission) [ 1 ] 2008 Cottrell Scholar Award , Research Corporation.

[ 3 ] 2010 Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers (PECASE) [ 5 ] 2012 Gruber Prize in Cosmology , for the results of the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) mission [ 6 ] 2016 Fellow, American Physical Society [ 7 ] 2018 Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics [ 8 ] (for the results of the WMAP mission) References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Bio | Rachel Bean" .

blogs.cornell.edu . Retrieved 2017-11-15 .

^ "Department of Astronomy Cornell University" .

The Department of Astronomy . 28 April 2020.

^ a b "Rachel Esther Bean Curriculum Vitae" (PDF) .

National Science Foundation . 28 April 2020.

^ Fleischman, Tom (July 12, 2023).

"A&S dean Jayawardhana named provost at Johns Hopkins | Cornell Chronicle" .

Cornell Chronicle . Retrieved 2023-07-15 .

^ "Obama White House Archives" .

The White House President Barack Obama . 11 May 2010.

^ "Gruber Cosmology Prize Citation" .

Gruber Foundation . 28 April 2020.

^ "Fellows" . aps.org . Retrieved April 20, 2017 .

^ Friedlander, Blaine (6 December 2017).

"Astronomer shares $3M physics Breakthrough Prize" .

Cornell Chronicle . Retrieved 28 April 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Biography at the Department of Physics, Cornell University Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rachel_Bean&oldid=1259313244 " Categories : Living people Fellows of the American Physical Society Cornell University faculty Alumni of the University of Cambridge Alumni of Imperial College London Recipients of the Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers 21st-century American women scientists 21st-century American astronomers 21st-century American physicists American astrophysicists American women astrophysicists American university and college faculty deans Women deans (academic) 21st-century women physicists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 24 November 2024, at 13:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rachel Bean 1 language Add topic

