Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Academics 3 Athletics 4 Notable faculty 5 Notable alumni 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Anna Maria College 2 languages Italiano اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°19′46″N 71°55′10″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3294°N 71.9194°W ﻿ / 42.3294; -71.9194 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Catholic college in Paxton, Massachusetts, US Anna Maria College Motto Lux et Veritas Motto in English Light and Truth Type Private college Established September 17, 1946 ( 1946-09-17 ) Accreditation NECHE Religious affiliation Roman Catholic ( Sisters of Saint Anne ) Academic affiliation HECCMA Endowment $7.2 million (2022) [ 1 ] President Mary Lou Retelle Academic staff 42 full-time 145 part-time [ 2 ] Undergraduates 1,104 (2019) Postgraduates 333 (2019) Location Paxton , Massachusetts , United States 42°19′46″N 71°55′10″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3294°N 71.9194°W ﻿ / 42.3294; -71.9194 Campus Rural , 190 acres Colors Cardinal and white Nickname AMCATS Sporting affiliations NCAA Division III GNAC ECFC Website annamaria.edu Anna Maria College is a private Catholic college in Paxton, Massachusetts , United States. It was founded in 1946 as a women's college , but has been coeducational since 1973. The school offers both undergraduate and graduate degrees.

History [ edit ] View of Socquet Hall, the location of the Office of the President, in 2016 Anna Maria College was founded in 1946 as a women's college by the Sisters of Saint Anne , after receiving formal approval from Richard Cushing , the Archbishop of Boston . The original campus was in Marlborough, Massachusetts . In 1951, the college moved to its present location in Paxton.

[ 3 ] Four years later, accreditation by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges was issued.

In 1973, Anna Maria College became coeducational and began graduate degree programs a year later.

[ 4 ] On April 3, 1980, the Sisters of Saint Anne ceased involvement in running the school, and a Board of Trustees was established.

In 2004, the college established the Molly Bish Center for the Protection of Children and the Elderly.

[ 5 ] Academics [ edit ] Anna Maria College has an average annual enrollment of around 1,500 students, mostly undergraduate and graduate students, and some continuing education learners.

[ 6 ] Rooted in the traditions of Catholic education, the college combines liberal arts and sciences education with career preparation.

The college is divided into six academic schools: the School of Business, the School of Education, the School of Justice and Social Sciences, the School of Fire and Health Sciences, the School of Visual and Performing Arts, and the School of Humanities.

[ 7 ] Athletics [ edit ] Main article: Anna Maria Amcats Anna Maria College has thirteen Division III athletic teams, known as the AMCATS (Anna Maria College Athletic Team Sports), in the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), including men's baseball, basketball, cross country, football, ice hockey, lacrosse, and soccer; and women's basketball, cross country, field hockey, soccer, softball, tennis, and volleyball. The school is a Great Northeast Athletic Conference (GNAC) member. Football is played in the Eastern Collegiate Football Conference (ECFC). Anna Maria was also a charter member of the Commonwealth Coast Conference (CCC), which it competed in from 1984 to 2011 before joining the GNAC.

Notable faculty [ edit ] View of the Madonna Hall residences in 2016.

Craig Blais (English) Mark Eshbaugh (art) Thomas Lewis (art) Brian Mitchell (history) Notable alumni [ edit ] Geraldo Alicea , member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives Catherine Cool Rumsey , member of the Rhode Island Senate James M. Cummings, sheriff of Barnstable County Ed Davis , Police Commissioner of the Boston Police Department Brendan Doherty , Superintendent of the Rhode Island State Police Shawn Dooley , member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives James J. Dwyer , member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives William B. Evans , Police Commissioner of the Boston Police Department Raymond Hull , member of the Rhode Island House of Representatives Brian Patrick Kennedy , member of the Rhode Island House of Representatives Frederica Williams , President of the Whittier Street Health Center Steven Xiarhos , member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives References [ edit ] ^ "Worcester area college endowments. Holy Cross pushes past $1 billion" .

Worcester Telegram . March 21, 2022.

Archived from the original on February 17, 2023 . Retrieved April 11, 2022 .

^ "College Navigator - Anna Maria College" .

National Center for Education Statistics . Retrieved April 13, 2022 .

^ O'Connell, Scott (January 6, 2021).

"College Town: Anna Maria College marking 75th anniversary" .

Worcester Telegram .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2021 . Retrieved April 13, 2022 .

^ "About" .

Archived from the original on 2022-05-20 . Retrieved 2022-04-11 .

^ "Molly Bish Center" .

Archived from the original on 2022-08-17 . Retrieved 2022-04-13 .

^ "Enrollment Dashboard" .

Archived from the original on 2022-09-26 . Retrieved 2022-04-11 .

^ "Home" .

Anna Maria College .

Archived from the original on 2007-05-27 . Retrieved 2007-05-21 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anna Maria College .

Official website Athletics website v t e Anna Maria College Paxton, Massachusetts Campus Residence halls Esther House Madonna Hall South Hall Saint Anne's Hall Coughlin Hall Academic halls Trinity Hall Foundress Hall Science Building Other halls Mondor-Eagen Library Bishop Flanigan Campus Center Chapel Zecco Performing Arts Center Athletics GNAC ECFC Color Guard Alumni Field AMCATS Student life AM(CAB) HABACATS Commuter Club Active Minds The HUB SGA People Alumni President Calereso Dean Klein Schools School of Business School of Liberal Arts v t e Higher Education Consortium of Central Massachusetts (HECCMA) Anna Maria Assumption Clark Cummings Holy Cross MCPHS Nichols Quinsigamond UMass-Chan Worcester State WPI v t e Great Northeast Athletic Conference Full members Albertus Magnus Falcons Colby-Sawyer Chargers Dean Bulldogs Elms Blazers Emmanuel Saints Lasell Lasers Mitchell Mariners New England College Pilgrims Norwich Cadets Regis Pride Rivier Raiders Saint Joseph (CT) Blue Jays Saint Joseph's (ME) Monks Simmons Sharks Associate members Eastern Nazarene Lions ( men's tennis ) Husson Eagles ( swimming & diving ) Rhode Island College Anchormen ( men's golf ) Southern Maine Huskies ( men's golf ) UMass Dartmouth Corsairs ( men's golf ) Wentworth Leopards ( men's volleyball ) Former members Anna Maria Amcats Daniel Webster Eagles Endicott Gulls Emerson Lions Mount Ida Mustangs Pine Manor Gators Southern Vermont Mountaineers Suffolk Rams Western New England Golden Bears v t e Eastern Collegiate Football Conference Final members Alfred State Pioneers Anna Maria Amcats Dean Bulldogs Gallaudet Bison Former members Becker Hawks Castleton Spartans Husson Eagles Keystone Giants Maritime Privateers Mount Ida Mustangs Norwich Cadets v t e American women's colleges that became coeducational Became coeducational Adelphi Albertus Magnus Andrew Anna Maria Arcadia Avila Barber–Scotia Belhaven Belmont Bennington Blue Mountain Christian Brescia Caldwell Carlow Chatham Chestnut Hill Chowan Columbia (MO) Columbia (SC) Connecticut College Converse Dominican (CA) Dominican (NY) Drexel College of Medicine D'Youville Elms Elmira Emmanuel (MA) Felician Florida State Fontbonne Georgia College Georgian Court Goucher Greensboro Holy Cross (LA) Holy Family (PA) Hood Hunter Huston–Tillotson Immaculata Incarnate Word James Madison Keuka LaGrange Lake Erie Lasell Lesley Lindenwood Longwood Lynn Manhattanville Mary Baldwin Mary Hardin–Baylor Mary Washington Marygrove Marymount (VA) Marymount Manhattan Maryville (MO) Marywood Mercy (NY) Mercyhurst Midway Misericordia Mississippi University for Women Montevallo Mount Mercy Mount St. Joseph Mount Saint Vincent Moravian Notre Dame (MD) Notre Dame de Namur Ohio Dominican Our Lady of the Lake Queens (NC) Radford Randolph Regis (MA) Rivier Rosemont Russell Sage Saint Elizabeth St. Francis (IL) Saint Joseph (CT) Saint Joseph's (ME) St. Joseph's (NY) Saint Mary (KS) St. Mary's (MD) Saint Mary-of-the-Woods St. Scholastica Saint Xavier (IL) Salve Regina Sarah Lawrence Seton Hill Shorter Skidmore Southern Virginia Spalding Stevenson Texas Woman's Thomas More (KY) Trocaire UNC Greensboro University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma UT Southern Valdosta State Vassar Virginia Union Viterbo Washington College of Law Webster West Alabama Wheaton (MA) William Peace William Woods Wilson (PA) Winthrop Coordinate colleges H. Sophie Newcomb Memorial College (merged with Tulane University ) Margaret Morrison Carnegie College (merged with Carnegie Mellon University ) Maryhill College (merged with St. Edward's University ) Mt. Vernon College (with George Washington University ) Pembroke (merged with Brown University ) Radcliffe College (merged with Harvard University ) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anna_Maria_College&oldid=1305482548 " Categories : Anna Maria College Universities and colleges established in 1946 Former women's universities and colleges in the United States Universities and colleges in Worcester County, Massachusetts Catholic universities and colleges in Massachusetts Association of Catholic Colleges and Universities 1946 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 09:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anna Maria College 2 languages Add topic

