Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Usage 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Driptorch 4 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tool for controlled burning This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Driptorch" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A driptorch is a tool used in wildfire suppression , controlled burning , and other forestry applications to intentionally ignite fires by dripping flaming fuel onto the ground.

Description [ edit ] The Drip Torch. 1. Wick 2. Spout 3. Fuel trap Loop 4. Locking ring 5. Air breather valve 6. Handle 7. Storage configuration - assembly inverted, breather valve closed, tube cap in place.

The driptorch consists of a canister for holding fuel with a handle attached to the side, a spout with a loop to prevent fire from entering the fuel canister, a breather valve to allow air into the canister while fuel is exiting through the spout, and a wick from which flaming fuel is dropped to the ground. The wick is ignited and allows the fire to be directed as needed. The spout and wick can be secured upside down inside the canister for storage or transport. Typically the fuel used is a mixture of gasoline and diesel with a ratio of 30% to 70% respectively, although, the amounts may need to be adjusted according to fuel and weather conditions.

[ 1 ] Sometimes heavier oils are used to increase adhesion of the liquid fuel to the vegetation, and increase burn time and heat.

Variations of the driptorch can be attached to off-road vehicles, such as tractors, to ignite a fire while driving slowly along the ignition line.  Another variant of the driptorch is the helitorch , which is attached to a helicopter and is used to ignite fire from the air.

Usage [ edit ] The intentional ignition of fires is a common firefighting tactic. A burnout (also called a firing operation, firing out or a back burn) is a smaller fire ignited along a control line ahead of the main fire. The intent is to consume fuel ahead of the main fire, strengthening the control line. A backfire is a more aggressive type of burning done to influence the behavior of the main fire.

In forest and prairie management, the driptorch is the most common tool used to ignite prescribed burns, which are used to remove excess fuel buildup or to re-create natural cycles of fire in an ecosystem . Other tools which can also be used for this purpose include the fusee , a pyrotechnic device similar to a road flare , other pyrotechnic devices, or even burning vegetative fuels .

A driptorch used for a controlled burn in response to the 2020 Creek Fire in California Using a driptorch to ignite a prescribed fire ATV mounted driptorch Driptorch used in Southeastern South Dakota for a controlled burn.

See also [ edit ] Fire flapper (tool) Flare Flare gun Glossary of wildland fire terms McLeod (tool) Pulaski (tool) References [ edit ] ^ "Controlling Plants with Fire" . Texas A&M University. Archived from the original on 2012-07-30 . Retrieved 2009-04-16 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to driptorches at Wikimedia Commons v t e Forestry tools and equipment Tree planting , afforestation Caulk boots Hoedad (hoedag) Groasis Waterboxx Mattock Pottiputki Root trainer Seed trap Tree planting bar (dibble bar) Tree shelter (Tuley tube) Tree spade Mensuration 3D scanner Angle gauge Biltmore stick Chain Cruising rod Diameter tape Hemispherical photography Inclinometer Increment borer Rangefinder laser Microtome Relascope Tree caliper Wedge prism Fire suppression Aerial firefighting DC-10 UAVs Driptorch Fire flapper Fire rake Fire retardant Helitack McLeod (rakehoe) Pulaski Axes Billhook Broadaxe Brush hook Froe (shake axe) Hatchet Labrys Log splitter Marking axe Splitting maul Tomahawk Saws Bow saw Bucksaw Chainsaw safety clothing safety features Crosscut saw Dragsaw Hacksaw Head saw Lumber edger Polesaw Portable sawmill Resaw Two-man saw Whipsaw Logging Cant hook Feller buncher Forwarder Go-devil Harvester Helicopter Log truck Lombard Steam Log Hauler Peavey Pickaroon Pike pole Skid cone Skidder Washington Winch Steam donkey Yarder swing Other Denailer Firewood processor Forest railway Forestry mulcher Hand compass Hand hook Hydraulic debarker Log house moulder Log pond Log flume Machete Stump grinder Chainsaw mill Tree tyer Tsakat Whoopie sling Wood-drying kiln Woodchipper Categories tools equipment Commons tools equipment WikiProject Forestry Types of tools Cleaning Cutting and abrasive Forestry Garden Hand Kitchen Machine and metalworking Masonry Measuring and alignment Mining Power Textile Woodworking v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Driptorch&oldid=1243260668 " Categories : Forestry tools Wildfire suppression equipment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2008 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 August 2024, at 13:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Driptorch 4 languages Add topic

