Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Biological laws and autonomy of biology 3 Ethical implications of biology 4 Other perspectives 5 Scientific discovery process 6 The Darwinian dynamic and the origin of life 7 Journals and professional organizations Toggle Journals and professional organizations subsection 7.1 Journals 7.2 Professional organizations 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of biology 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subfield of philosophy of science The philosophy of biology is a subfield of philosophy of science , which deals with epistemological , metaphysical , and ethical issues in the biological and biomedical sciences. Although philosophers of science and philosophers generally have long been interested in biology (e.g., Aristotle , Descartes , and Kant ), philosophy of biology only emerged as an independent field of philosophy in the 1960s and 1970s, associated with the research of David Hull .

[ 1 ] Philosophers of science then began paying increasing attention to biology , from the rise of Neodarwinism in the 1930s and 1940s to the discovery of the structure of DNA in 1953 to more recent advances in genetic engineering .
Other key ideas include the reduction of all life processes to biochemical reactions, and the incorporation of psychology into a broader neuroscience .

Overview [ edit ] Philosophers of biology examine the practices, theories, and concepts of biologists with a view toward better understanding biology as a scientific discipline (or group of scientific fields). Scientific ideas are philosophically analyzed and their consequences are explored. Philosophers of biology have also explored how our understanding of biology relates to epistemology , ethics , aesthetics , and metaphysics and whether progress in biology should compel modern societies to rethink traditional values concerning all aspects of human life. It is sometimes difficult to separate the philosophy of biology from theoretical biology .

"What is a biological species ?" "What is natural selection , and how does it operate in nature?" "How should we distinguish disease states from non-disease states?" [ 2 ] "What is life ?" [ 3 ] "What makes humans uniquely human?" "What is the basis of moral thinking?" "Is biological materialism & deterministic molecular biology compatible with free will ?" "How is rationality possible, given our biological origins?" "Is evolution compatible with Christianity or other religious systems?" "Are there laws of biology like the laws of physics?" Ideas drawn from philosophical ontology and logic are being used by biologists in the domain of bioinformatics . Ontologies such as the Gene Ontology [ 4 ] are being used to annotate the results of biological experiments in model organisms in order to create logically tractable bodies of data for reasoning and search. The ontologies are species-neutral graph-theoretical representations of biological types joined together by formally defined relations.

[ 5 ] Philosophy of biology has become a visible, well-organized discipline, with its own journals, conferences, and professional organizations. The largest of the latter is the International Society for the History, Philosophy, and Social Studies of Biology (ISHPSSB).

[ 6 ] Biological laws and autonomy of biology [ edit ] A prominent question in the philosophy of biology is whether biology can be reduced to lower-level sciences such as chemistry and physics. Materialism is the view that every biological system including organisms consists of nothing except the interactions of molecules; it is opposed to vitalism . As a methodology, reduction would mean that biological systems should be studied at the level of chemistry and molecules. In terms of epistemology , reduction means that knowledge of biological processes can be reduced to knowledge of lower-level processes, a controversial claim.

[ 7 ] Holism in science is the view that emphasizes higher-level processes, phenomena at a larger level that occur due to the pattern of interactions between the elements of a system over time. For example, to explain why one species of finch survives a drought while others die out, the holistic method looks at the entire ecosystem. Reducing an ecosystem to its parts in this case would be less effective at explaining overall behavior (in this case, the decrease in biodiversity). As individual organisms must be understood in the context of their ecosystems, holists argue, so must lower-level biological processes be understood in the broader context of the living organism in which they take part. Proponents of this view cite our growing understanding of the multidirectional and multilayered nature of gene modulation (including epigenetic changes) as an area where a reductionist view is inadequate for full explanatory power.

[ 8 ] All processes in organisms obey physical laws, but some argue that the difference between inanimate and biological processes is that the organisation of biological properties is subject to control by coded information. This has led biologists and philosophers such as Ernst Mayr and David Hull to return to the strictly philosophical reflections of Charles Darwin to resolve some of the problems which confronted them when they tried to employ a philosophy of science derived from classical physics . The old positivist approach used in physics emphasised a strict determinism and led to the discovery of universally applicable laws, testable in the course of experiment. It was difficult for biology to use this approach.

[ 9 ] Standard philosophy of science seemed to leave out a lot of what characterised living organisms - namely, a historical component in the form of an inherited genotype.

Philosophers of biology have also examined the notion of teleology in biology . Some have argued that scientists have had no need for a notion of cosmic teleology that can explain and predict evolution, since one was provided by Darwin. But teleological explanations relating to purpose or function have remained useful in biology, for example, in explaining the structural configuration of macromolecules and the study of co-operation in social systems. By clarifying and restricting the use of the term 'teleology' to describe and explain systems controlled strictly by genetic programmes or other physical systems, teleological questions can be framed and investigated while remaining committed to the physical nature of all underlying organic processes. While some philosophers claim that the ideas of Charles Darwin ended the last remainders of teleology in biology, the matter continues to be debated. Debates in these areas of philosophy of biology turn on how one views reductionism more generally.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Ethical implications of biology [ edit ] Further information: Bioethics Sharon Street claims that contemporary evolutionary biological theory creates what she calls a “Darwinian Dilemma” for realists . She argues that this is because it is unlikely that our evaluative judgements about morality are tracking anything true about the world. Rather, she says, it is likely that moral judgements and intuitions that promote our reproductive fitness were selected for, and there is no reason to think that it is the truth of these moral intuitions which accounts for their selection. She notes that a moral intuition most people share, that someone being a close family member is a prima facie good reason to help them, happens to be an intuition likely to increase reproductive fitness, while a moral intuition almost no one has, that someone being a close family member is a reason not to help them, is likely to decrease reproductive fitness.

[ 14 ] David Copp responded to Street by arguing that realists can avoid this so-called dilemma by accepting what he calls a “quasi-tracking” position. Copp explains that what he means by quasi tracking is that it is likely that moral positions in a given society would have evolved to be at least somewhat close to the truth. He justifies this by appealing to the claim that the purpose of morality is to allow a society to meet certain basic needs, such as social stability, and a society with a successful moral codes would be better at doing this.

[ 15 ] Other perspectives [ edit ] One perspective on the philosophy of biology is how developments in modern biological research and biotechnologies have influenced traditional philosophical ideas about the distinction between biology and technology, as well as implications for ethics, society, and culture. An example is the work of philosopher Eugene Thacker in his book Biomedia .

[ 16 ] Building on current research in fields such as bioinformatics and biocomputing, as well as on work in the history of science (particularly the work of Georges Canguilhem , Lily E. Kay , and Hans-Jörg Rheinberger ), Thacker defines biomedia as entailing "the informatic recontextualization of biological components and processes, for ends that may be medical or non-medical...biomedia continuously make the dual demand that information materialize itself as gene or protein compounds. This point cannot be overstated: biomedia depend upon an understanding of biological as informational but not immaterial." [ 17 ] Some approaches to the philosophy of biology incorporate perspectives from science studies and/or science and technology studies , anthropology, sociology of science, and political economy. This includes work by scholars such as Melinda Cooper , Luciana Parisi, Paul Rabinow , Nikolas Rose , and Catherine Waldby.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Philosophy of biology was historically associated very closely with theoretical evolutionary biology, but more recently there have been more diverse movements, such as to examine molecular biology.

[ 22 ] Scientific discovery process [ edit ] Research in biology continues to be less guided by theory than it is in other sciences.

[ dead link ] [ 23 ] This is especially the case where the availability of high throughput screening techniques for the different "- omics " fields such as genomics , whose complexity makes them predominantly data-driven. Such data-intensive scientific discovery is by some considered to be the fourth paradigm, after empiricism, theory and computer simulation.

[ 24 ] Others reject the idea that data driven research is about to replace theory.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] As Krakauer et al. put it: "machine learning is a powerful means of preprocessing data in preparation for mechanistic theory building, but should not be considered the final goal of a scientific inquiry." [ 27 ] In regard to cancer biology, Raspe et al. state: "A better understanding of tumor biology is fundamental for extracting the relevant information from any high throughput data." [ 28 ] The journal Science chose cancer immunotherapy as the breakthrough of 2013. According to their explanation a lesson to be learned from the successes of cancer immunotherapy is that they emerged from decoding of basic biology.

[ 29 ] Theory in biology is to some extent less strictly formalized than in physics. Besides 1) classic mathematical-analytical theory, as in physics, there is 2) statistics-based, 3) computer simulation and 4) conceptual/verbal analysis.

[ 30 ] Dougherty and Bittner argue that for biology to progress as a science, it has to move to more rigorous mathematical modeling, or otherwise risk to be "empty talk".

[ 31 ] In tumor biology research, the characterization of cellular signaling processes has largely focused on identifying the function of individual genes and proteins. Janes [ 32 ] showed however the context-dependent nature of signaling driving cell decisions demonstrating the need for a more system based approach.

[ 33 ] The lack of attention for context dependency in preclinical research is also illustrated by the observation that preclinical testing rarely includes predictive biomarkers that, when advanced to clinical trials, will help to distinguish those patients who are likely to benefit from a drug.

[ 34 ] The Darwinian dynamic and the origin of life [ edit ] Organisms that exist today, from viruses to humans, possess a self-replicating informational molecule (genome) that is either DNA (most organisms) or RNA (as in some viruses), and such an informational molecule is likely intrinsic to life.  Probably the earliest forms of life were likewise based on a self-replicating informational molecule ( genome ), perhaps RNA [ 35 ] [ 36 ] or an informational molecule more primitive than RNA or DNA.  It has been argued [ 37 ] that the evolution of order in living systems and in particular physical systems obey a common fundamental principle that was termed the Darwinian dynamic.  This principal was formulated by first considering how macroscopic order is generated in a simple non-biological system far from thermodynamic equilibrium, and subsequently extending consideration to short, replicating RNA molecules.  The underlying order-generating process was concluded to be basically similar for both types of systems.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Journals and professional organizations [ edit ] Journals [ edit ] History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences Journal of the History of Biology Biology & Philosophy Biological Theory Philosophy, Theory, and Practice in Biology Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Professional organizations [ edit ] International Society for the History, Philosophy, and Social Studies of Biology See also [ edit ] Autopoiesis Biosemiotics Golden Eurydice Award Materialism Controversy Mechanism (biology) Orthogenesis Philosophy of Science Physics envy References [ edit ] ^ "Northwestern professor David L. Hull helped found philosophy of biology" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved 11 January 2023 .

^ Boorse, Christopher (1977).

"Health as a Theoretical Concept" .

Philosophy of Science .

44 (4): 542– 573.

doi : 10.1086/288768 .

^ Maturana, Humberto; Varela, Francisco (1980).

Autopoiesis and cognition : the realization of the living . D. Reidel.

ISBN 978-90-277-1016-1 .

^ "Gene Ontology Consortium" . Retrieved 1 July 2018 .

^ Smith, Barry (2005).

"Relations in biomedical ontologies" .

Genome Biology .

6 (5): R46.

doi : 10.1186/gb-2005-6-5-r46 .

PMC 1175958 .

PMID 15892874 .

^ "Society for the History, Philosophy, and Social Studies of Biology (ISHPSSB)" . Retrieved 1 July 2018 .

^ Brigandt, Ingo; Love, Alan (2017), "Reductionism in Biology" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2017 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 8 April 2019 ^ Talbott, Stephen L.

"Getting Over the Code Delusion" . The New Atlantis.

^ Smocovitis, Vassiliki Betty (1996).

Unifying Biology: The Evolutionary Synthesis and Evolutionary Biology . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. pp.

100– 114.

ISBN 978-0-691-03343-3 .

^ Ayala, Francisco J.

(1977).

Dobzhansky, T.

(ed.).

Teleological explanations . W.H. Freeman. pp.

497– 504.

^ Neander, Karen (1998). "Functions as Selected Effects: The Conceptual Analyst's Defense," in C. Allen, M. Bekoff & G. Lauder (Eds.), Nature's Purposes: Analyses of Function and Design in Biology (pp. 313–333). The MIT Press.

^ Ayala, Francisco (1998). "Teleological explanations in evolutionary biology." Nature's purposes: Analyses of Function and Design in Biology . The MIT Press.

^ Mayr, Ernst W.

(1992). "The idea of teleology".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

53 (1): 117– 135.

doi : 10.2307/2709913 .

JSTOR 2709913 .

^ Street, Sharon (2006). "A Darwinian Dilemma for Realist Theories of Value".

Philosophical Studies .

127 : 109– 166.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.150.5948 .

doi : 10.1007/s11098-005-1726-6 .

S2CID 170656319 .

^ Copp, David (2008). "Darwinian Skepticism about Moral Realism".

Philosophical Issues .

18 : 186– 206.

doi : 10.1111/j.1533-6077.2008.00144.x .

^ Thacker, Eugene (2004).

Biomedia . University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 978-0816643530 .

^ Thacker, "Biomedia", in W. J. T. Mitchell and Mark B. N. Hansen (editors), Critical Terms for Media Studies , University of Chicago Press 2010, p. 123.

^ Cooper, Melinda (2008).

Life As Surplus: Biotechnology and Capitalism in the Neoliberal Era . University of Washington Press.

ISBN 978-0295987910 .

^ Parisi, Luciana (2004).

Abstract Sex: Philosophy, Biotechnology and the Mutations of Desire . Continuum.

ISBN 978-0826469908 .

^ Rose, Nikolas (2006). The Politics of Life Itself: Biomedicine, Power, and Subjectivity in the Twenty-First Century.

ISBN 978-0691121918 .

^ Waldby, Catherine, and Robert Mitchell (2006).

Tissue Economies: Blood, Organs, and Cell Lines in Late Capitalism . Duke University Press.

ISBN 978-0822337706 .

^ Philosophy of Biology.

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Vienna series in theoretical biology ^ Hey, T. (ed) 2009 The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientific Discovery ^ Callebaut, Werner (2012). "Scientific perspectivism: A philosopher of science's response to the challenge of big data biology".

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences .

43 (1): 69– 80.

doi : 10.1016/j.shpsc.2011.10.007 .

PMID 22326074 .

^ Dougherty, E.R. (2008).

"On the Epistemological Crisis in Genomics" .

Current Genomics .

9 (2): 69– 79.

doi : 10.2174/138920208784139546 .

PMC 2674806 .

PMID 19440447 .

^ Krakauer; et al. (2011).

"The challenges and scope of theoretical biology" (PDF) .

Journal of Theoretical Biology .

276 (1): 269– 276.

doi : 10.1016/j.jtbi.2011.01.051 .

PMID 21315730 .

^ Raspe, Eric; Decraene, Charles; Berx, Geert (2012).

"Gene expression profiling to dissect the complexity of cancer biology: Pitfalls and promise" .

Seminars in Cancer Biology .

22 (3): 250– 260.

doi : 10.1016/j.semcancer.2012.02.011 .

PMID 22459768 .

^ Couzin-Frankel, J. (2013).

"Cancer Immunotherapy" .

Science .

342 (6165): 1432– 1433.

doi : 10.1126/science.342.6165.1432 .

PMID 24357284 .

^ Pigliucci, Massimo (2013).

"On the Different Ways of "Doing Theory" in Biology" .

Biological Theory .

7 (4): 287– 297.

doi : 10.1007/s13752-012-0047-1 .

S2CID 15090379 .

^ Dougherty, E.R. & Bittner, M.L. (2012) Epistemology of the Cell: A Systems Perspective on Biological Knowledge. Wiley-IEEE Press, p. 149 ISBN 978-1-1180-2779-0 ^ Janes, K. A.; Albeck, J. G.; Gaudet, S.; Sorger, P. K.; Lauffenburger, D. A.; Yaffe, M. B. (2005). "A Systems Model of Signaling Identifies a Molecular Basis Set for Cytokine-Induced Apoptosis".

Science .

310 (5754): 1646– 1653.

Bibcode : 2005Sci...310.1646J .

doi : 10.1126/science.1116598 .

PMID 16339439 .

S2CID 22495219 .

^ Creixell, Pau; Schoof, Erwin M.; Erler, Janine T.; Linding, Rune (2012).

"Navigating cancer network attractors for tumor-specific therapy" .

Nature Biotechnology .

30 (9): 842– 848.

doi : 10.1038/nbt.2345 .

PMID 22965061 .

^ Begley, C. (2012).

"Drug development: Raise standards for preclinical cancer research" .

Nature .

483 (7391): 531– 533.

Bibcode : 2012Natur.483..531B .

doi : 10.1038/483531a .

PMID 22460880 .

S2CID 4326966 .

^ Neveu, M.; Kim, H.J.; Benner, S.A. (April 2013). "The "strong" RNA world hypothesis: fifty years old".

Astrobiology .

13 (4): 391– 403.

doi : 10.1089/ast.2012.0868 .

PMID 23551238 .

^ Cech, T.R. (July 2012).

"The RNA worlds in context" .

Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol .

4 (7): a006742.

doi : 10.1101/cshperspect.a006742 .

PMC 3385955 .

PMID 21441585 .

^ a b Bernstein, Harris; Byerly, Henry C.; Hopf, Frederick A.; Michod, Richard A.; Vemulapalli, G. Krishna (June 1983). "The Darwinian Dynamic". The Quarterly Review of Biology. 58 (2): 185. doi:10.1086/413216. JSTOR 2828805. S2CID 83956410 ^ Michod, Richard E. (2000). Darwinian Dynamics: Evolutionary Transitions in Fitness and Individuality. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-05011-9 External links [ edit ] "Philosophy of biology" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Griffiths, Paul.

"Philosophy of Biology" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Philosophy of biology Themes Ethics Eugenics Dysgenics Kin selection Naturalism Reductionism Holism Emergence Evolutionary taxonomy Evolution Adaptationism Alternatives to Darwinian evolution Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Darwinism Evolutionary epistemology Teleology Tree of life Philosophers of biology John Beatty Lindley Darden Daniel Dennett John Dupré Carla Fehr Marjorie Grene Peter Godfrey-Smith James R. Griesemer Paul E. Griffiths David Hull Hans Jonas Philip Kitcher Tim Lewens Helen Longino Jane Maienschein Roberta Millstein Sandra Mitchell Susan Oyama Alex Rosenberg Michael Ruse Sahotra Sarkar Elliott Sober Kim Sterelny Alfred I. Tauber Francisco Varela Gerard Verschuuren William C. Wimsatt Biologists Francisco J. Ayala Patrick Bateson Charles Darwin Richard Dawkins Jared Diamond Michael Ghiselin François Jacob Stephen Jay Gould Richard Lewontin Konrad Lorenz Humberto Maturana Ernst Mayr Jacques Monod Denis Noble Joan Roughgarden Rolf Sattler John Maynard Smith E. O. Wilson Jonas Salk Related Philosophy of mind History of biology v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Branches of biology Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology See also History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophy_of_biology&oldid=1292102213 " Category : Philosophy of biology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2017 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2021 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 06:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of biology 24 languages Add topic

