Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 Gas supply 3 Spin behaviors 4 Observations 5 Anomalous X-ray pulsars 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents X-ray pulsar 18 languages العربية বাংলা Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Class of astronomical objects that are X-ray sources X-ray pulsars or accretion-powered pulsars are a class of astronomical objects that are X-ray sources displaying strict periodic variations in X-ray intensity. The X-ray periods range from as little as a fraction of a second to as much as several minutes.

Characteristics [ edit ] An X-ray pulsar is a type of binary star system consisting of a typical star (stellar companion) in orbit around a magnetized neutron star . The magnetic field strength at the surface of the neutron star is typically about 10 8 Tesla , over a trillion times stronger than the strength of the magnetic field measured at the surface of the Earth (60 μT ).

Gas is accreted from the stellar companion and is channeled by the neutron star's magnetic field on to the magnetic poles producing two or more localized X-ray hot spots, similar to the two auroral zones on Earth, but far hotter. At these hotspots the infalling gas can reach half the speed of light before it impacts the neutron star surface. So much gravitational potential energy is released by the infalling gas, that the hotspots, which are estimated to about one square kilometer in area, can be ten thousand times, or more, as luminous as the Sun .

[ 1 ] Temperatures of millions of degrees are produced so the hotspots emit mostly X-rays. As the neutron star rotates, pulses of X-rays are observed as the hotspots move in and out of view if the magnetic axis is tilted with respect to the spin axis.

[ 1 ] Gas supply [ edit ] The gas that supplies the X-ray pulsar can reach the neutron star by a variety of ways that depend on the size and shape of the neutron star's orbital path and the nature of the companion star.

Some companion stars of X-ray pulsars are very massive young stars, usually OB supergiants (see stellar classification ), that emit a radiation driven stellar wind from their surface. The neutron star is immersed in the wind and continuously captures gas that flows nearby.

Vela X-1 is an example of this kind of system.

In other systems, the neutron star orbits so closely to its companion that its strong gravitational force can pull material from the companion's atmosphere into an orbit around itself, a mass transfer process known as Roche lobe overflow. The captured material forms a gaseous accretion disc and spirals inwards to ultimately fall onto the neutron star as in the binary system Cen X-3 .

For still other types of X-ray pulsars, the companion star is a Be star that rotates very rapidly and apparently sheds a disk of gas around its equator. The orbits of the neutron star with these companions are usually large and very elliptical in shape. When the neutron star passes nearby or through the Be circumstellar disk, it will capture material and temporarily become an X-ray pulsar. The circumstellar disk around the Be star expands and contracts for unknown reasons, so these are transient X-ray pulsars that are observed only intermittently, often with months to years between episodes of observable X-ray pulsation.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Spin behaviors [ edit ] Radio pulsars (rotation-powered pulsars) and X-ray pulsars exhibit very different spin behaviors and have different mechanisms producing their characteristic pulses although it is accepted that both kinds of pulsar are manifestations of a rotating magnetized neutron star . The rotation cycle of the neutron star in both cases is identified with the pulse period.

The major differences are that radio pulsars have periods on the order of milliseconds to seconds, and all radio pulsars are losing angular momentum and slowing down. In contrast, the X-ray pulsars exhibit a variety of spin behaviors. Some X-ray pulsars are observed to be continuously spinning faster and faster or slower and slower (with occasional reversals in these trends) while others show either little change in pulse period or display erratic spin-down and spin-up behavior.

[ 2 ] The explanation of this difference can be found in the physical nature of the two pulsar classes. Over 99% of radio pulsars are single objects that radiate away their rotational energy in the form of relativistic particles and magnetic dipole radiation, lighting up any nearby nebulae that surround them. In contrast, X-ray pulsars are members of binary star systems and accrete matter from either stellar winds or accretion disks. The accreted matter transfers angular momentum to (or from) the neutron star causing the spin rate to increase or decrease at rates that are often hundreds of times faster than the typical spin down rate in radio pulsars. Exactly why the X-ray pulsars show such varied spin behavior is still not clearly understood.

Observations [ edit ] X-ray pulsars are observed using X-ray telescopes that are satellites in low Earth orbit although some observations have been made, mostly in the early years of X-ray astronomy , using detectors carried by balloons or sounding rockets. The first X-ray pulsar to be discovered was Centaurus X-3 , in 1971 with the Uhuru X-ray satellite.

[ 1 ] Anomalous X-ray pulsars [ edit ] Main article: Anomalous X-ray pulsar Magnetars , isolated and highly-magnetised neutron stars, can be observed as relatively slow x-ray pulsars with periods of a few seconds.  These are referred to as anomalous X-ray pulsars, but are unrelated to binary X-ray pulsars.

See also [ edit ] Millisecond pulsar Pulsar planets List of X-ray pulsars X-ray pulsar-based navigation References [ edit ] ^ a b c Charles, Philip A.; Seward, Frederick D. (1995). "7".

Exploring the X-ray Universe . Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-26182-1 .

^ a b Bildsten, L.; Chakrabarty, D.; Chu, J.; Finger, M. H.; Koh, D. T.; Nelson, R. W.; Prince, T. A.; Rubin, B. C.; Scott, D. M.; Vaughan, B.; Wilson, C. A.; Wilson, R. B. (1997). "Observations of Accreting Pulsars".

The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series .

113 (2): 367– 408.

arXiv : astro-ph/9707125 .

Bibcode : 1997ApJS..113..367B .

doi : 10.1086/313060 .

S2CID 706199 .

^ Chandra, Amar Deo; Roy, Jayashree; Agrawal, P C; Choudhury, Manojendu (2020-07-01).

"Study of recent outburst in the Be/X-ray binary RX J0209.6−7427 with AstroSat: a new ultraluminous X-ray pulsar in the Magellanic Bridge?" .

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society .

495 (3): 2664– 2672.

arXiv : 2004.04930 .

Bibcode : 2020MNRAS.495.2664C .

doi : 10.1093/mnras/staa1041 .

ISSN 0035-8711 .

^ Rowden, Pam (1 June 2020).

"Ultra-bright X-ray source awakens near a galaxy not so far away" .

Royal Astronomical Society .

^ Carpineti, Alfredo (5 June 2020).

"Ultra-Bright Pulsar Awakens Next Door To The Milky Way After 26-Year Slumber" .

IFLScience .

External links [ edit ] BATSE Pulsar Studies Cain/Gay - Astronomy Cast. Pulsars - Nov 2009 Ultraluminous X-ray Pulsar (ULXP) Catalogue v t e Stars List Formation Accretion Molecular cloud Bok globule Young stellar object Protostar Pre-main-sequence Herbig Ae/Be T Tauri Herbig–Haro object Hayashi track Henyey track Evolution Main sequence Red-giant branch Horizontal branch Red clump Asymptotic giant branch post-AGB super-AGB Blue loop Planetary nebula Protoplanetary Wolf–Rayet nebula PG1159 Dredge-up OH/IR Instability strip Luminous blue variable Stellar population Supernova Superluminous Hypernova Classification Early Late Main sequence O B A F G K M Subdwarf O B WR OB Subgiant Giant Blue Red Yellow Bright giant Supergiant Blue Red Yellow Hypergiant Yellow Carbon S CN CH White dwarf Chemically peculiar Am Ap/Bp CEMP HgMn He-weak Barium Lambda Boötis Lead Technetium Be Shell B[e] Helium Extreme Blue straggler Remnants Compact star Parker's star White dwarf Helium planet Neutron Radio-quiet Pulsar Binary X-ray Magnetar Stellar black hole X-ray binary Burster SGR Hypothetical Blue dwarf Black dwarf Exotic Boson Electroweak Strange Preon Planck Dark Dark-energy Quark Q Black hole star Black Hawking Quasi-star Gravastar Thorne–Żytkow object Iron Blitzar White hole Nucleosynthesis Deuterium burning Lithium burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle Helium flash Triple-alpha process Alpha process C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning s-process r-process p-process Nova Symbiotic Remnant Luminous red nova Recurrent Micronova Supernova Structure Core Convection zone Microturbulence Oscillations Radiation zone Atmosphere Photosphere Starspot Chromosphere Stellar corona Alfvén surface Stellar wind Bubble Bipolar outflow Accretion disk Protoplanetary disk Proplyd Asteroseismology Helioseismology Circumstellar dust Cosmic dust Circumstellar envelope Eddington luminosity Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism Properties Designation Dynamics Effective temperature Luminosity Kinematics Magnetic field Absolute magnitude Mass Metallicity Rotation Gravity darkening Starlight Variable Photometric system Color index Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Color–color diagram Strömgren sphere Kraft break Star systems Binary Contact Common envelope Eclipsing Symbiotic Multiple Cluster Open Globular Super Planetary system Earth-centric observations Sun Solar eclipse Solar radio emission Solar System Sunlight Pole star Circumpolar Constellation Asterism Magnitude Apparent Extinction Photographic Radial velocity Proper motion Parallax Photometric-standard Lists Proper names Arabic Chinese Extremes Most massive Highest temperature Lowest temperature Largest volume Smallest volume Brightest Historical brightest Most luminous Nearest bright Most distant With resolved images With multiple exoplanets Brown dwarfs Red dwarfs White dwarfs Milky Way novae Supernovae Candidates Remnants Planetary nebulae Timeline of stellar astronomy Related Substellar object Brown dwarf Desert Sub Planet Galactic year Galaxy Guest Gravity Intergalactic Neutron star merger Planet-hosting stars Stellar collision Stellar engulfment Tidal disruption event Category Stars portal v t e Neutron star Types Radio-quiet Pulsar Single pulsars Magnetar Soft gamma repeater Anomalous X-ray Ultra-long period Rotating radio transient Binary pulsars Binary X-ray pulsar X-ray binary X-ray burster List Millisecond Be/X-ray Spin-up Hulse–Taylor pulsar Properties Blitzar Fast radio burst Bondi accretion Chandrasekhar limit Gamma-ray burst Glitch Neutron matter Neutron-star oscillation Optical Pulsar kick Quasi-periodic oscillation Relativistic Rp-process Starquake Timing noise Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit Urca process Related Gamma-ray burst progenitors Asteroseismology Compact star Quark star Exotic star Supernova Supernova remnant Related links Hypernova Kilonova Microquasar Neutron star merger Quark-nova White dwarf Related links Stellar black hole Related links Radio star Pulsar planet Pulsar wind nebula Thorne–Żytkow object QCD matter Discovery LGM-1 Centaurus X-3 Timeline of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and supernovae Satellite investigation Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Chandra X-ray Observatory Other X-ray pulsar-based navigation The Magnificent Seven List of neutron stars Most massive neutron stars Neutron stars in fiction Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=X-ray_pulsar&oldid=1245044818 " Categories : X-ray binaries X-ray pulsars Star types Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 September 2024, at 17:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents X-ray pulsar 18 languages Add topic

