Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Types of buds Toggle Types of buds subsection 2.1 Image gallery 3 References Toggle the table of contents Bud 65 languages العربية Arpetan Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Sakizaya සිංහල Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit తెలుగు Türkçe Українська 吴语 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Immature or embryonic shoot "Flower bud" redirects here. For EP of GFriend, see Flower Bud .

For usage in asexual reproduction , see Budding .

For other uses, see Bud (disambiguation) .

European beech ( Fagus sylvatica ) bud In botany , a bud is an undeveloped or embryonic shoot and normally occurs in the axil of a leaf or at the tip of a stem . Once formed, a bud may remain for some time in a dormant condition, or it may form a shoot immediately. Buds may be specialized to develop flowers or short shoots or may have the potential for general shoot development. The term bud is also used in zoology , where it refers to an outgrowth from the body which can develop into a new individual.

Overview [ edit ] Inflorescence bud scales in Halesia carolina The buds of many woody plants , especially in temperate or cold climates, are protected by a covering of modified leaves called scales which tightly enclose the more delicate parts of the bud. Many bud scales are covered by a gummy substance which serves as added protection. When the bud develops, the scales may enlarge somewhat but usually just drop off, leaving a series of horizontally-elongated scars on the surface of the growing stem. By means of these scars one can determine the age of any young branch, since each year's growth ends in the formation of a bud, the formation of which produces an additional group of bud scale scars. Continued growth of the branch causes these scars to be obliterated after a few years so that the total age of older branches cannot be determined by this means.

[ citation needed ] In many plants, scales do not form over the bud, and the bud is then called a naked bud.

[ 1 ] The minute underdeveloped leaves in such buds are often excessively hairy. Naked buds are found in some shrubs, like some species of the Sumac and Viburnums ( Viburnum alnifolium and V. lantana ) [ 2 ] and in herbaceous plants. In many of the latter, buds are even more reduced, often consisting of undifferentiated masses of cells in the axils of leaves. A terminal bud occurs on the end of a stem and lateral buds are found on the side. A head of cabbage (see Brassica ) is an exceptionally large terminal bud, while Brussels sprouts are large lateral buds.

[ citation needed ] Since buds are formed in the axils of leaves, their distribution on the stem is the same as that of leaves. There are alternate, opposite, and whorled buds, as well as the terminal bud at the tip of the stem. In many plants buds appear in unexpected places: these are known as adventitious buds.

[ 3 ] Often it is possible to find a bud in a remarkable series of gradations of bud scales. In the buckeye , for example, one may see a complete gradation from the small brown outer scale through larger scales which on unfolding become somewhat green to the inner scales of the bud, which are remarkably leaf-like. Such a series suggests that the scales of the bud are in truth leaves, modified to protect the more delicate parts of the plant during unfavorable periods.

[ citation needed ] Types of buds [ edit ] Plant buds classification Terminal, vegetative bud of Ficus carica Buds are often useful in the identification of plants, especially for woody plants in winter when leaves have fallen.

[ 4 ] Buds may be classified and described according to different criteria: location, status, morphology, and function.

[ citation needed ] Botanists commonly use  the following terms: for location: [ citation needed ] terminal , when located at the tip of a stem  ( apical is equivalent but rather reserved for the one at the top of the plant); axillary , when located in the axil of a leaf ( lateral is the equivalent but some adventitious buds may be lateral too); adventitious , when located elsewhere, for example on the trunk or roots (some adventitious buds may be former axillary ones that are reduced and hidden under the bark, while other adventitious buds are completely new formed ones).

for status: [ citation needed ] accessory , for secondary buds formed besides a principal  bud (axillary or terminal); resting , for a bud that forms at the end of a growth season, and then lies dormant until the onset of the next growth season; dormant or latent , for buds whose growth has been delayed for a rather long time. The term is usable as a synonym of resting , but is better employed for buds waiting undeveloped for years, for example epicormic buds ; pseudoterminal , for an axillary bud taking over the function of a terminal bud (characteristic of species whose growth is sympodial : terminal  bud dies and is replaced by the closer axillary bud, for examples beech , persimmon , Platanus have sympodial growth).

for morphology: scaly or covered ( perulate ), when scales, also referred to as a perule (lat. perula, perulaei) (which are in fact transformed and reduced leaves) cover and protect the embryonic parts; naked , when not covered by scales; hairy , when also protected by hairs (it may apply either to scaly or to naked buds).

for function: [ citation needed ] vegetative , only containing vegetative structures: a leaf bud is an embryonic shoot containing leaves; reproductive , only containing embryonic flower(s): a flower bud contains a single flower while an inflorescence bud contains an inflorescence ; mixed , containing both embryonic leaves and flower(s).

Image gallery [ edit ] Buds Alnus glutinosa bud Tilia bud Black buds of a European ash, Fraxinus excelsior A quince 's flower bud with spirally folded petals Opening Nelumbo flower bud Opening Coreopsis tinctoria flower buds Vitis vinifera flower buds Diospyros eriantha bud Inflorescence bud of the common sunflower ( Helianthus annuus ) Inflorescence bud of Acanthus balcanicus Inflorescence bud of the parrot bush ( Banksia sessilis ) Inflorescence bud of cardoon ( Cynara cardunculus ) An opening inflorescence bud at left, which will develop like the one to its right References [ edit ] ^ Walters, Dirk R., and David J. Keil. 1996.

Vascular plant taxonomy . Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall/Hunt Pub. Co. page 598.

^ Cronquist, Arthur, and Henry A. Gleason. 1991.

Manual of Vascular Plants of Northeastern United States and Adjacent Canada . Bronx, New York: New York Botanical Garden Press. page 512.

^ Coulter, John G. 1913.

Plant life and plant uses; an elementary textbook, a foundation for the study of agriculture, domestic science or college botany . New York: American book company. page 188 ^ Trelease, W. (1967) [1931], Winter botany: An Identification Guide to Native Trees and Shrubs , New York: Dover Publications, Inc, ISBN 0486218007 v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bud&oldid=1295375660 " Categories : Plant physiology Plant morphology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 This page was last edited on 13 June 2025, at 10:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bud 65 languages Add topic

