Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Precursors 2 Details 3 Artists in the Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibition 4 Legacy 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents The Pictures Generation 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Pictures Generation ) 2009 exhibition at The Metropolitan Museum of Art (The Met) in New York City The Pictures Generation, 1974–1984 was an exhibition at The Metropolitan Museum of Art (The Met) in New York City that ran from April 29 – August 2, 2009.

[ 1 ] The exhibition took its name from Pictures , a 1977 five person group show organized by art historian and critic Douglas Crimp (1944–2019) at New York City's Artists Space gallery.

[ 2 ] The artists exhibited from September 24 to October 29, 1977 were Troy Brauntuch , Jack Goldstein , Sherrie Levine , Robert Longo and Philip Smith.

[ 3 ] Artists in the 2009 Met exhibition included well known artists of the 1980s such as Cindy Sherman , Barbara Kruger , Louise Lawler , Robert Longo , David Salle , Richard Prince , Laurie Simmons , Jack Goldstein and Sherrie Levine , together with lesser-known contemporaries such as Troy Brauntuch and Michael Zwack .

[ 4 ] It also featured some of the group's artistic predecessors including John Baldessari and Allan McCollum .

[ 5 ] Precursors [ edit ] In his catalogue essay for the 1977 show and a 1979 expansion of the essay published in the journal October , Crimp outlined a framework to describe shared themes in the work of the five artists he presented. In general, these were an interest in representational imagery, and references to mass media that the artists explored through "processes of quotation, excerptation, framing, and staging." [ 6 ] The Pictures Generation was not the first major exhibition to examine these artists as a distinct group, but it was the first to focus only on this cohort from a scholarly perspective.

[ 7 ] A Forest of Signs: Art in the Crisis of Representation , a 1989 exhibition at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles examined the work of American artists born between 1944 and 1956 who used mass media imagery.

[ 8 ] Also in 1989, Image World: Art and Media Culture , an exhibition at the Whitney Museum of American Art , examined the role of mass media imagery in contemporary art from the 1950s to the 1980s, with the Pictures Generation artists playing a prominent role.

[ 9 ] Details [ edit ] The Met's show, curated by Douglas Eklund, argued that, from the perspective of three decades later, it is evident that Crimp's observations described a widely shared sensibility among artists of the 1970s and 80s.

[ 10 ] The exhibition and its accompanying catalogue sought to tell the story of this "Pictures Generation" and explore the ways that these artists developed their approach to art-making. In the main catalogue essay, Elkund focused on three communities where artists shared and refined the concepts that unify the Pictures Generation : The California Institute of the Arts (CalArts) in Los Angeles, Hallwalls in Buffalo and Artists Space .

[ 11 ] Artists in the Met exhibition included art stars of the 1980s such as Cindy Sherman , Barbara Kruger , Louise Lawler , Robert Longo , David Salle , Richard Prince , Jack Goldstein and Sherrie Levine , together with lesser-known contemporaries such as Troy Brauntuch and Michael Zwack . It also featured some of the group's artistic predecessors including John Baldessari and Allan McCollum .

[ 5 ] The artists in Crimp's 1977 show were Troy Brauntuch, Jack Goldstein, Sherrie Levine, Robert Longo and Philip Smith. For the 1979 expansion of his catalogue essay, Crimp deleted Philip Smith and added Cindy Sherman.

[ 6 ] As time has gone on, other writers have argued that artists not included in the Metropolitan Museum of Art show, such as Eric Fischl and Julian Schnabel , were a part of this group.

Norman Rosenthal , the curator of Schnabel's 2011 retrospective at the Museo Correr in Venice , in that show's catalogue calls the artist "a leader and an outsider of the so-called Pictures Generation".

Gary Indiana has proposed further artists as having been part of this group despite the exclusion of their work from the Metropolitan Museum's exhibition, including Walter Robinson .

[ 12 ] A few artists grouped under the "Pictures Generation" category, such as Sherrie Levine and Richard Prince, have been involved in legal disputes concerning their appropriation of content protected by intellectual property laws , particularly copyright law .

[ 13 ] Artists in the Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibition [ edit ] John Baldessari Ericka Beckman Dara Birnbaum Barbara Bloom Eric Bogosian Glenn Branca Troy Brauntuch James Casebere Sarah Charlesworth Rhys Chatham Charles Clough Nancy Dwyer Jack Goldstein Barbara Kruger Louise Lawler Thomas Lawson Sherrie Levine Robert Longo Allan McCollum Paul McMahon MICA-TV ( Carole Ann Klonarides & Michael Owen) Matt Mullican Richard Prince David Salle Cindy Sherman Laurie Simmons Michael Smith James Welling Michael Zwack Legacy [ edit ] During the fall of 2020 into the winter of 2021 the Metropolitan Museum has produced a follow-up exhibition on the occasion of the ten year anniversary of The Pictures Generation , titled Pictures Revisited . This second show focuses on "appropriation" and features the work of five artists from the original exhibition as well of that of other artists whose careers began both before and after the Pictures Generation practitioners' did.

See also [ edit ] Criticism of capitalism Remix culture Pop art References [ edit ] ^ "Past Exhibitions: The Pictures Generation, 1974–1984" .

Metropolitan Museum of Art . Retrieved 2015-12-12 .

^ Eklund, Douglas (2009).

The Pictures Generation, 1974-1984 . Metropolitan Museum of Art. p. 16.

ISBN 9781588393142 . Retrieved 8 October 2017 .

^ [1] Artists Space exhibitions Pictures archive ^ Preview the Met's Fab New Show, 'The Pictures Generation' - Vulture ^ a b Eklund, The Pictures Generation , pp. 320-329.

^ a b Crimp, Douglas (Spring 1979). "Pictures".

October .

8 : 75– 88.

doi : 10.2307/778227 .

JSTOR 778227 .

^ Wilcox, Jess (April 21, 2009).

"The Pictures Generation: A Conversation with Douglas Eklund" . Art in America. Archived from the original on March 27, 2016 . Retrieved 8 October 2017 .

^ Duncan, Elmer H. (1990). "A Forest of Signs: Art in the Crisis of Representation, ed. by Catherine Gudis (review)".

Leonardo .

23 (4): 449.

doi : 10.2307/1575355 .

JSTOR 1575355 .

S2CID 193813078 .

^ Kimmelman, Michael (November 10, 1989).

"Review/Art: At the Whitney, 100 Works From the Last 30 Years" .

New York Times . Retrieved 19 October 2017 .

^ Fowle, Kate (June 10, 2009).

"Review: The Pictures Generation: 1974–84" .

Frieze . Retrieved 8 October 2017 .

^ Eklund, The Pictures Generation , pp. 22-116 ^ Indiana, Gary (13 February 2017).

"These '80s Artists Are More Important Than Ever" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 19 January 2018 .

^ "Copy Rights | ARTnews" .

www.artnews.com . 22 March 2012 . Retrieved 2015-12-12 .

External links [ edit ] Douglas Eklund essay on the exhibition A review of the exhibition in The New York Times The exhibition catalogue from Yale University Press v t e Metropolitan Museum of Art Places The Met Fifth Avenue Anna Wintour Costume Center Astor Court Robert Goldwater Library Temple of Dendur Thomas J. Watson Library Other sites The Cloisters Met Breuer Directors Luigi Palma di Cesnola Caspar Purdon Clarke Edward Robinson Herbert Eustis Winlock Francis Henry Taylor James Rorimer Thomas Hoving Philippe de Montebello Thomas P. Campbell Miscellaneous Met Gala Museum Mile Metropolitan Museum of Art Guide Antiquities Amathus sarcophagus Bajaur casket Burke Jizō Pratt Ivories Coffin of Nedjemankh Cesnola Sphinx Funerary Stele Dipylon krater Magdeburg Ivories Armenian Gospel with Silver Cover Calligraphic Galleon Carp and Pine Chair of Reniseneb Fieschi Morgan Staurotheke Hounds and Jackals The Unicorn Tapestries Hunting of Birds with a Hawk and a Bow Kettle Drums Kneeling Bull with Vessel Miniature Altarpiece with the Crucifixion Modern Gothic cabinet Montebello Mosaics Morgan Casket Pair of Incense Boxes in the Shape of Mandarin Ducks Pomegranate carved in the round Rectangular Octave Virginal Studiolo from the Ducal Palace in Gubbio Intan Jizō The Story of Troy The Triumph of Fame Vase with lid Woman Seen from the Back Statuette of Mercury Statuette of the lady Tiye Phoenician metal bowls Paintings 1476 Altarpiece A Cavalryman A Vase of Flowers (1716) The Abduction of Rebecca The Accommodations of Desire The Actor (painting) Adoration of the Magi (Bosch, New York) Adoration of the Shepherds (Mantegna) The Aegean Sea The Afternoon Meal (Luis Meléndez) Alexander Hamilton (Trumbull) The Allegory of Faith Allegory of the Planets and Continents Alpine Pool Altman Madonna America Today Ancient Rome (painting) Annunciation (Memling) Annunziata Polyptych Anthony van Dyck self portrait Approaching Thunder Storm Arab Woman (watercolor) Arcadia (painting) Ariadne (Giorgio de Chirico) Aristotle with a Bust of Homer Artillery (Roger de la Fresnaye) The Artist's Wife and His Setter Dog At the Seaside Au Lapin Agile Autumn Ivy (Ogata Kenzan) Autumn Rhythm (Number 30) Bamboo in the Four Seasons Bache Madonna Bain à la Grenouillère The Baker's Cart The Banks of the Bièvre near Bicêtre Banquet in Silence (Marsden Hartley) Bashi-Bazouk (Jean-Léon Gérôme) A Basket of Clams (Winslow Homer) Beauty Revealed Black Iris (painting) Black Stork in a Landscape Boating (Édouard Manet) Annunciation (Botticelli, New York) Bouquet of Small Chrysanthemums (Léon Bonvin) Boy Carrying a Sword The Bridge at Villeneuve-la-Garenne Brigand and His Wife in Prayer Bringing Down Marble from the Quarries to Carrara The Brioche Broadway and 42nd Street Broken Eggs Burg Weiler Altarpiece Butler Madonna By the Seashore Ca' Dolfin Tiepolos The Calm Sea (painting) Camouflage Self-Portrait Cannon Rock (painting) The Card Players Catania and Mount Etna Cemetery, New Mexico (Marsden Hartley) Cervara Altarpiece The Chess Players (Eakins painting) Children Playing with a Goat Christ Carrying the Cross (El Greco, New York) Christ Presented to the People (Il Sodoma) Christ with a Staff Claes Duyst van Voorhout Cloudy Mountains Coast Guard Station, Two Lights, Maine Coast Scene, Isles of Shoals The Collector of Prints (Edgar Degas) Comtesse de la Châtre Captain George K. H. Coussmaker Cow's Skull: Red, White, and Blue A Cowherd at Valhermeil, Auvers-sur-Oise Cows Crossing a Ford Crucifixion (Corpus Hypercubus) Crucifixion and Last Judgement diptych Crucifixion with the Virgin and St John The Cup of Tea Cypresses (Metropolitan Museum of Art) The Dance Class (Degas, Metropolitan Museum of Art) The Dancing Class The Dead Christ with Angels The Death of Harmonia The Death of Socrates The Defense of Champigny Delirious Hem The Denial of Saint Peter (Caravaggio) Diana and Cupid The Dream of Aeneas (Salvator Rosa) Dressing for the Carnival Madonna and Child (Duccio) Egyptian Woman with Earrings Egyptians Raising Water from the Nile The Empress Elizabeth of Russia on Horseback, Attended by a Page Entrance to a Dutch Port Equestrian Portrait of Cornelis and Michiel Pompe van Meerdervoort with Their Tutor and Coachman Esther before Ahasuerus (Artemisia Gentileschi) Ethel Scull 36 Times The Experts (painting) The Falls of Niagara The Farm at Les Collettes, Cagnes Femme Lisant Ferry near Gorinchem The Fingernail Test Fish Market (Joachim Beuckelaer) The Fishing Boat Fishing Boats, Key West The Five Points (Metropolitan Museum of Art) Florinda (painting) The Forest in Winter at Sunset (painting) The Fortune Teller (de La Tour) Fruit Dish and Glass The Funeral (painting) Fur Traders Descending the Missouri Garden at Sainte-Adresse George Washington (Trumbull) Gilbert Stuart (Goodridge) A Girl Asleep Girl with a Cat (Gwen John) Glass Blowers of Murano Golden Cock and Hen A Goldsmith in His Shop, Possibly Saint Eligius The Great Sirens The Gulf Stream (painting) Harlequin with a Guitar The Harvest, Pontoise The Harvesters (painting) Haystacks:Autumn Head of Christ (Rembrandt, New York) The Heart of the Andes The Hermit (Il solitario) The Horse Fair Houses on the Achterzaan I Saw the Figure 5 in Gold In a Courtyard, Tangier The Interior of an Atelier of a Woman Painter (Lemoine) Interior with a Young Couple and a Dog Irises screen Isaac Blessing Jacob (Gerbrand van den Eeckhout) Isle of the Dead (painting) Italian Hill Town (Arthur B. Davies) Jingo-ji Tripiṭaka Jo, the Beautiful Irishwoman Joy of Life (Valadon) Juan Legua July Fourteenth, Rue Daunou, 1910 The Kearsarge at Boulogne The Lacemaker (Maes) Lachrymae (Frederic Leighton) Lady at the Tea Table Lady with the Rose (Charlotte Louise Burckhardt) Lake George (John Frederick Kensett) Landscape with Sky The Last Communion of Saint Jerome (Botticelli) Lehman Madonna Lilacs in a Window Lobster Fishermen (Marsden Hartley) The Lovesick Maiden Lukas Spielhausen Lydia Crocheting in the Garden at Marly (Mary Cassatt) Madame Élisabeth de France Madame Grand Madonna and Child (Bellini, New York, 1485–1490) Madonna and Child Enthroned with Saints (Raphael) Magdalene with Two Flames The Maidservant Maine Coast Majas on a Balcony Manuel Osorio Manrique de Zúñiga The Marriage of the Virgin (Michelino da Besozzo) The Martyrdom of Saint Barbara (Lucas Cranach the Elder) The Masquerade Dress The Matador Saluting Max Schmitt in a Single Scull Mérode Altarpiece Merry company with two men and two women Mezzetino (painting) The Midnight Ride of Paul Revere (painting) Miss V Dressed as a Bullfighter Model by the Wicker Chair Mont Sainte-Victoire and the Viaduct of the Arc River Valley Moonlight, Wood Island Light Morning, An Overcast Day, Rouen Moses Striking the Rock Mother and Child (Cassatt) Mountain Stream (John Singer Sargent) Mountain with Red House Movement No. 5, Provincetown Houses Mr. and Mrs. I. N. Phelps Stokes Mrs. Atkinson (Gwen John) Mrs. Beckington (Alice Beckington) Mrs. Hugh Hammersley The Musician (Bartholomeus van der Helst painting) A Musician and His Daughter The Musicians (Caravaggio) Mystic Marriage of St. Catherine (Memling) Nativity scenes attributed to Zanobi Strozzi Night-Shining White Northeaster (painting) Nude Before a Mirror Oedipus and the Sphinx Old Trees, Level Distance Pity (William Blake) Portrait of Madame Jacques-Louis Leblanc Red Sunset on the Dnipro Exhibitions Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty American Woman: Fashioning a National Identity AngloMania: Tradition and Transgression in British Fashion Before Yesterday We Could Fly Camp: Notes on Fashion China: Through the Looking Glass Death Becomes Her: A Century of Mourning Attire Fashion and History: A Dialogue Glitter and Doom Heavenly Bodies: Fashion and the Catholic Imagination In America: A Lexicon of Fashion In America: An Anthology of Fashion Jacqueline Kennedy: The White House Years Manus x Machina: Fashion in an Age of Technology The Metropolitan Museum of Art Centennial The Model as Muse: Embodying Fashion The Pictures Generation Rei Kawakubo/Comme des Garçons Art of the In-Between Sleeping Beauties: Reawakening Fashion Superheroes: Fashion and Fantasy Te Maori Vessel Orchestra Commons * Category v t e Appropriation in the arts By field Music Bootleg recording Chopped and screwed Contrafact list Contrafactum Cover version DJ mix Interpolation Medley Music mashup Music plagiarism Musical quotation Nightcore Parody music Pasticcio Plunderphonics Potpourri Quodlibet Remix Riddim Sampling Sound collage Standard Tribute act Trope Variation Vaporwave Literature / theatre Assemblage Cut-up technique Flarf poetry Found poetry Jukebox musical Trope Verbatim theatre Visual arts Collage Combine painting Photographic mosaic Readymades of Marcel Duchamp Swipe By source material Mona Lisa Michelangelo's David Michelangelo's Pietà Statue of Liberty Cinema / television / video Abridged series Anime music video Collage film Found footage Literal music video Parody film Re-cut trailer Remake Shot-for-shot Supercut TV format Vidding Video mashup YouTube Poop Other arts In-joke Internet meme Joke theft Parody advertisement Revivalism (architecture) Video game modding General concepts Intertextual figures Allusion Calque Parody Pastiche Plagiarism Quotation Translation Adaptation Film Literary Theatre Other concepts After (art) Assemblage (art) Bricolage Citation Détournement Found object Homage Imitation in art Mashup Reprise Satire Source criticism in the arts Related artistic concepts Aesthetic interpretation Anti-art Archetypal literary criticism Artistic inspiration " The Death of the Author " Divine inspiration Afflatus Genius (literature) Muses Fan labor Fan fiction Genre Genre studies Originality Simulacrum Western canon Standard blocks and forms Archetype Formula fiction Genre fiction Jazz standard Plot device Stock character Story structure Epoch-marking works L.H.O.O.Q.

(1919) " Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote " (1939) Reality Hunger: A Manifesto (2010) Theorization Dada De Copia Rerum Diegesis Dionysian imitatio Mimesis Nachahmung Palimpsests: Literature in the Second Degree The Pictures Generation Pop art Postmodernism Russian formalism Related non- artistic concepts Academic dishonesty Appropriation in sociology Articulation in sociology Cultural appropriation History of printing Information society Intellectual property Copyright infringement Derivative work Fair use Meme Open source Participatory culture Pirate politics Recontextualisation Remix culture v t e Cindy Sherman Photographs Untitled Film Still #21 (1978) Untitled Film Still #48 (1979) Untitled #92 (1981) Untitled #93 (1981) Untitled #96 (1981) Untitled #153 (1985) Photography series Untitled Film Stills (1977–1980) Films Office Killer (1997) Album covers Fontanelle (1992 Babes in Toyland album) Family and relationships Michel Auder (ex-husband) David Byrne (ex-partner) Robert Longo (ex-partner) Related The Pictures Generation (2009 exhibition) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Pictures_Generation&oldid=1295896920 " Categories : Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibitions 2009 in art Photography exhibitions 2009 in New York City 1970s in art 1980s in art Postmodern art American art movements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 14:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Pictures Generation 1 language Add topic

