Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Project Zero 1.2 Usable Knowledge 2 Academics Toggle Academics subsection 2.1 Master's in Education 3 Buildings 4 Notable people Toggle Notable people subsection 4.1 Current faculty members 4.2 Past faculty members 4.3 Alumni 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Graduate School of Education 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′32″N 71°07′18″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37542°N 71.12177°W ﻿ / 42.37542; -71.12177 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Education school of Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts Harvard Graduate School of Education Coat of arms Type Private Established 1920 ; 105 years ago ( 1920 ) Dean Nonie K. Lesaux Students 876 Location Cambridge, Massachusetts , United States Campus Urban Website www .gse .harvard .edu The Harvard Graduate School of Education ( HGSE ) is the education school of Harvard University , a private Ivy League research university in Cambridge, Massachusetts . Founded in 1920, it was the first school to grant the EdD degree and the first Harvard school to award degrees to women. HGSE enrolls around 800 students between its master of education (Ed.M.) and three-year doctor of education leadership (Ed.L.D.) programs.

It is associated with the Harvard Education Publishing Group whose imprint is the Harvard Education Press and publishes the Harvard Educational Review .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] In 1892, Harvard president Charles W. Eliot served as the chair of the Committee of Ten , a working group of educators charged with understanding the current state of preparation for students attending secondary education in public schools, and making recommendations for the future.

In addition, he appointed Paul Henry Hanus to begin the formal study of education as a discipline at Harvard. As a result, in 1906, education became a formal division within the Faculty of Arts and Sciences at the university.

[ 2 ] This school was formally established in 1920, [ 3 ] and in the next year, HGSE became the first school to grant a doctor of education (Ed.D.) degree. The EdD provided rigorous research training that equipped graduates with the knowledge and skills to have a broad impact in the worlds of policy and practice.

[ 4 ] The faculty has grown ever since.

In 1949, the Laboratory of Human Development (now the Human Development and Education Program) was established to examine the psychological development of children in their families and communities. Two years later, the Masters of Arts in Teaching degree was offered by HGSE, followed by the Administrative Career Program.

The school is run by Dean Bridget Terry Long .

[ 5 ] Project Zero [ edit ] Nelson Goodman founded Project Zero in 1967 to explore a basic research project in artistic cognition and artistic education. This project developed into a bigger scope ever since included being directed by Howard Gardner . Numerous research findings are converted into practice through modules, from thinking routines to learning rubrics that can be freely accessed.

[ 6 ] Usable Knowledge [ edit ] Originally developed by faculty members Kurt Fischer and Joe Blatt, the aim of Usable Knowledge is to be a resource for educators who hope to put HGSE research learnings into practice.

[ 7 ] Academics [ edit ] HGSE offers a master of education degree (EdM) with five programs and two doctoral degree programs, a doctor of philosophy in education (PhD) and a doctor of education leadership (EdLD). (The PhD program replaced the EdD program, which enrolled its final cohort of students in fall 2013.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] )  In addition, in 2022, the school launched an online, two-year, part-time master's degree in education leadership.

Master's in Education [ edit ] HGSE offers five full-time, one-year, on-campus master's programs: Education Leadership, Organizations, and Entrepreneurship Education Policy and Analysis Human Development and Education Learning Design, Innovation, and Technology Teaching and Teacher Leadership Students in the master's degree programs can also declare optional concentrations and pursue teacher, principal, or superintendent licensure pathways.

Buildings [ edit ] Larsen Hall HGSE took possession of Longfellow Hall from Radcliffe College in 1962. The learning activities, along with the library and office were moved to Longfellow's basement. Larsen Hall was dedicated in 1963, completed in 1965, operating as the new classroom and research center of HGSE.

The Monroe C. Gutman Library is the school's primary library and one of its four main buildings.

Notable people [ edit ] See also: Harvard University people Current faculty members [ edit ] Catherine E. Snow , Patricia Albjerg Graham Professor of Education Felipe Barrera-Osorio , Associate Professor of Education and Economics Fernando Reimers , Ford Foundation Professor of the Practice Howard Gardner , John H. and Elisabeth A. Hobbs Professor of Cognition and Education Jerome Murphy , Harold Howe II Professor of Education John B. Willett , Charles William Eliot Professor of Education Julie Reuben , Professor of Education Meredith L. Rowe , Saul Zaentz Professor of Early Learning and Development Richard Murnane , Juliana W. and William Foss Thompson Professor of Education and Society Richard Weissbourd , Senior Lecturer of Education Thomas Kane , Professor of Education Past faculty members [ edit ] Carol Gilligan Patricia Graham , professor of education Robert Kegan William and Miriam Meehan Professor in Adult Learning and Professional Development Lawrence Kohlberg Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot , Emily Hargroves Fisher Professor of Education, renamed to the Sarah Lawrence-Lightfoot Professor of Education since her retirement [ 11 ] Gerald S. Lesser , psychologist who played a major role in developing the educational programming included in Sesame Street .

[ 12 ] Kathleen McCartney , former dean; Gerald S. Lesser Professor in Early Childhood Education; current president of Smith College William G. Perry (psychologist) James E. Ryan , former dean; Charles William Eliot Professor of Education; current president of the University of Virginia Israel Scheffler Charles V. Willie , Charles William Eliot Professor of Education, Emeritus Alumni [ edit ] Andrew McCollum , co-founder of Facebook ; angel investor James McGreevey , former New Jersey state governor Martha Minow , dean, Harvard Law School Dianne Morales (born 1967), non-profit executive and political candidate Anne Sweeney , president, Disney-ABC Television Group Carl Gershman , president of the National Endowment for Democracy Deborah Bial , founder and president of the Posse Foundation Denise Juneau , superintendent of Seattle Public Schools ; former Montana Superintendent of Public Instruction Elizabeth Dole , former United States Senator from North Carolina and wife of Bob Dole Geoffrey Canada , founder, Harlem Children's Zone Guadalupe Guerrero , superintendent of Portland Public Schools Jason Kamras , 2005 National Teacher of the Year and superintendent of Richmond Public Schools Joanne V. Creighton , former president of Mount Holyoke College Jodi Picoult , American author Joseph Lekuton , Kenyan politician Lorna Hodgkinson , Australian educator; first woman to receive an Ed.D. from HGSE Michael Johnston , Colorado state senator, co-founder of New Leaders for New Schools Neal Baer , executive producer, Law and Order: SVU ; former executive producer and writer, ER Nínive Clements Calegari , CEO of 826 National and founding executive director of 826 Valencia Robyn Ochs , bisexual and LGBT rights activist, speaker Marvin Ronning , education and environmental advocate; senior administrator at the Rhode Island Free Clinic Rhea Paul , speech and language disorder researcher Timothy Lannon , president of Creighton University Debbie Ricker , interim president of Hood College Theodore R. Sizer , dean, Harvard Graduate School of Education (1964-1972); headmaster, Phillips Andover Academy (1972-1981); founder of the Coalition of Essential Schools , Annenberg Institute for School Reform at Brown University, and Francis W. Parker Charter Essential School ; author of numerous books on public education reform Clint Smith , writer and educator Sandra Sucher , business executive; professor, Harvard Business School William E. Trueheart , president of Bryant University , nonprofit CEO Joan Wexler , dean and president of Brooklyn Law School Peggy R. Williams , former president of Ithaca College Frank H. Wu , president of Queens College, City University of New York Zahia Marzouk , an Egyptian social worker and feminist who founded Egypt's first family planning association Ronald F. Levant , a psychologist and professor who co-founded the field of the psychology of men and masculinities References [ edit ] ^ "Harvard Education Publishing Group" . Archived from the original on 26 April 2013 . Retrieved 2 May 2013 .

^ "Paul Henry Hanus, 1855-1941" .

Archived from the original on 22 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 Nov 2020 .

^ "History of HGSE" .

Archived from the original on 23 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 Nov 2020 .

^ "Doctor of Education" .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 Nov 2020 .

^ "Bridget Terry Long" .

Harvard Graduate School of Education .

Archived from the original on 5 August 2018 . Retrieved 5 August 2018 .

^ "Project Zero" .

Archived from the original on 26 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 Nov 2020 .

^ "History of HGSE" .

Archived from the original on 23 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 Nov 2020 .

^ "Ph.D. in Education Approved" .

Harvard.edu Website .

Archived from the original on 2012-05-18 . Retrieved 2012-05-15 .

^ "Doctor of Education" .

Harvard.edu Website .

Archived from the original on 2015-03-02 . Retrieved 2015-03-12 .

^ "Doctor of Philosophy in Education" .

Harvard.edu Website .

Archived from the original on 2015-03-08 . Retrieved 2015-03-12 .

^ "Teaching" .

SARA LAWRENCE-LIGHTFOOT . Retrieved 2022-10-09 .

^ Fox, Margalit.

"Gerald S. Lesser, Shaper of ‘Sesame Street,’ Dies at 84" Archived 2012-09-08 at archive.today , The New York Times , October 4, 2010. Accessed October 4, 2010.

External links [ edit ] Official Web Site Harvard Education Publishing Group v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX 42°22′32″N 71°07′18″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37542°N 71.12177°W ﻿ / 42.37542; -71.12177 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Graduate_School_of_Education&oldid=1298352001 " Categories : 1920 establishments in Massachusetts Universities and colleges established in 1920 Harvard University schools Schools of education in Massachusetts Universities and colleges in Cambridge, Massachusetts University subdivisions in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Webarchive template archiveis links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the image name parameter Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 00:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Graduate School of Education 1 language Add topic

