Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of non-Newtonian behavior Toggle Types of non-Newtonian behavior subsection 1.1 Summary 1.2 Shear thickening fluid 1.3 Shear thinning fluid 1.4 Bingham plastic 1.5 Rheopectic or anti-thixotropic 2 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 2.1 Oobleck 2.2 Flubber (slime) 2.3 Chilled caramel topping 2.4 Silly Putty 2.5 Plant resin 2.6 Quicksand 2.7 Ketchup 2.8 Dry granular flows 2.9 Radioactive waste vitrification 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Non-Newtonian fluid 35 languages العربية Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latviešu Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English کوردی Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fluid whose viscosity varies with the amount of force/stress applied to it This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Non-Newtonian fluid" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Continuum mechanics J = − − D d φ φ d x {\displaystyle J=-D{\frac {d\varphi }{dx}}} Fick's laws of diffusion Laws Conservations Mass Momentum Energy Inequalities Clausius–Duhem (entropy) Solid mechanics Deformation Elasticity linear Plasticity Hooke's law Stress Strain Finite strain Infinitesimal strain Compatibility Bending Contact mechanics frictional Material failure theory Fracture mechanics Fluid mechanics Fluids Statics · Dynamics Archimedes' principle · Bernoulli's principle Navier–Stokes equations Poiseuille equation · Pascal's law Viscosity ( Newtonian · non-Newtonian ) Buoyancy · Mixing · Pressure Liquids Adhesion Capillary action Chromatography Cohesion (chemistry) Surface tension Gases Atmosphere Boyle's law Charles's law Combined gas law Fick's law Gay-Lussac's law Graham's law Plasma Rheology Viscoelasticity Rheometry Rheometer Smart fluids Electrorheological Magnetorheological Ferrofluids Scientists Bernoulli Boyle Cauchy Charles Euler Fick Gay-Lussac Graham Hooke Newton Navier Noll Pascal Stokes Truesdell v t e In physical chemistry and fluid mechanics , a non-Newtonian fluid is a fluid that does not follow Newton's law of viscosity , that is, it has variable viscosity dependent on stress . In particular, the viscosity of non-Newtonian fluids can change when subjected to force.

Ketchup , for example, becomes runnier when shaken and is thus a non-Newtonian fluid. Many salt solutions and molten polymers are non-Newtonian fluids , as are many commonly found substances such as custard , [ 1 ] toothpaste , starch suspensions, paint , blood , melted butter and shampoo .

Most commonly, the viscosity (the gradual deformation by shear or tensile stresses ) of non-Newtonian fluids is dependent on shear rate or shear rate history. Some non-Newtonian fluids with shear-independent viscosity, however, still exhibit normal stress-differences or other non-Newtonian behavior. In a Newtonian fluid, the relation between the shear stress and the shear rate is linear, passing through the origin , the constant of proportionality being the coefficient of viscosity . In a non-Newtonian fluid, the relation between the shear stress and the shear rate is different. The fluid can even exhibit time-dependent viscosity . Therefore, a constant coefficient of viscosity cannot be defined.

Although the concept of viscosity is commonly used in fluid mechanics to characterize the shear properties of a fluid, it can be inadequate to describe non-Newtonian fluids. They are best studied through several other rheological properties that relate stress and strain rate tensors under many different flow conditions—such as oscillatory shear or extensional flow—which are measured using different devices or rheometers . The properties are better studied using tensor -valued constitutive equations , which are common in the field of continuum mechanics .

For non-Newtonian fluid's viscosity , there are pseudoplastic , plastic , and dilatant flows that are time-independent, and there are thixotropic and rheopectic flows that are time-dependent.  Three well-known time-dependent non-newtonian fluids which can be identified by the defining authors are the Oldroyd-B model, [ 2 ] Walters’ Liquid B [ 3 ] and Williamson [ 4 ] fluids.

Time-dependent self-similar analysis of the Ladyzenskaya -type model with a non-linear velocity dependent stress tensor was performed.

[ 5 ] No analytical solutions could be derived, but a rigorous mathematical existence theorem [ 6 ] was given for the solution.

For time-independent non-Newtonian fluids the known analytic solutions are much broader.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Types of non-Newtonian behavior [ edit ] Summary [ edit ] Classification of fluids with shear stress as a function of shear rate. The gradient of each line represents the material's viscosity at the given shear rate.

Comparison of non-Newtonian, Newtonian, and viscoelastic properties Behaviour Models Properties Examples Viscoelastic Kelvin material , Maxwell material "Parallel" linear combination of elastic and viscous effects [ 11 ] Some lubricants , whipped cream , Silly Putty Time-dependent viscosity Rheopectic Apparent viscosity increases with duration of stress Synovial fluid , printer ink , gypsum paste Thixotropic Apparent viscosity decreases with duration of stress [ 11 ] Yogurt , peanut butter , xanthan gum solutions, aqueous iron oxide gels, gelatin gels, pectin gels, hydrogenated castor oil , some clays (including bentonite , and montmorillonite ), carbon black suspension in molten tire rubber, some drilling muds , many paints , many floc suspensions, many colloidal suspensions Non-Newtonian viscosity Shear thickening (dilatant) Apparent viscosity increases with increased stress [ 12 ] Suspensions of corn starch in water (oobleck) Shear thinning (pseudoplastic) Apparent viscosity decreases with increased stress [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Nail polish , whipped cream , ketchup , molasses , syrups, paper pulp in water, latex paint , ice , blood , some silicone oils , some silicone coatings , sand in water Generalized Newtonian fluids Viscosity is function of the shear strain rate.

Stress depends on normal and shear strain rates and also the pressure applied on it Blood plasma , custard , water Shear thickening fluid [ edit ] The viscosity of a shear thickening – i.e.

dilatant –  fluid appears to increase when the shear rate increases.

Corn starch suspended in water ("oobleck", see below ) is a common example: when stirred slowly it looks milky, when stirred vigorously it feels like a very viscous liquid.

Shear thinning fluid [ edit ] Paint is a non-Newtonian fluid. A flat surface covered with white paint is oriented vertically (before taking the picture the flat surface was horizontal, placed on a table). The fluid starts dripping down the surface but, because of its non-Newtonian nature, it is subjected to stress due to the gravitational acceleration . Therefore, instead of slipping along the surface, it forms very large and very dense droplets with limited dripping.

A familiar example of the opposite, a shear thinning fluid , or pseudoplastic fluid, is wall paint : The paint should flow readily off the brush when it is being applied to a surface but not drip excessively. Note that all thixotropic fluids are extremely shear thinning, but they are significantly time dependent, whereas the colloidal "shear thinning" fluids respond instantaneously to changes in shear rate. Thus, to avoid confusion, the latter classification is more clearly termed pseudoplastic.

Another example of a shear thinning fluid is blood. This application is highly favoured within the body, as it allows the viscosity of blood to decrease with increased shear strain rate.

Bingham plastic [ edit ] Fluids that have a linear shear stress/shear strain relationship but require a finite yield stress before they begin to flow (the plot of shear stress against shear strain does not pass through the origin) are called Bingham plastics . Several examples are clay suspensions, drilling mud, toothpaste, mayonnaise, chocolate, and mustard. The surface of a Bingham plastic can hold peaks when it is still. By contrast Newtonian fluids have flat featureless surfaces when still.

Rheopectic or anti-thixotropic [ edit ] There are also fluids whose strain rate is a function of time. Fluids that require a gradually increasing shear stress to maintain a constant strain rate are referred to as rheopectic . An opposite case of this is a fluid that thins out with time and requires a decreasing stress to maintain a constant strain rate ( thixotropic ).

Examples [ edit ] Many common substances exhibit non-Newtonian flows. These include: [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Soap solutions, cosmetics , and toothpaste Food such as butter , cheese , jam , mayonnaise , soup , taffy , and yogurt Natural substances such as magma , lava , gums , honey , and extracts such as vanilla extract Biological fluids such as blood , saliva , semen , mucus , and synovial fluid Slurries such as cement slurry and paper pulp, emulsions such as mayonnaise, and some kinds of dispersions Oobleck [ edit ] Demonstration of a non-Newtonian fluid at Universum in Mexico City Oobleck on a subwoofer. Applying force to oobleck, by sound waves in this case, makes the non-Newtonian fluid thicken.

[ 20 ] An inexpensive, non-toxic example of a non-Newtonian fluid is a suspension of starch (e.g., cornstarch/cornflour) in water, sometimes called "oobleck", "ooze", or "magic mud" (1 part of water to 1.5–2 parts of corn starch).

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] The name "oobleck" is derived from the Dr. Seuss book Bartholomew and the Oobleck .

[ 21 ] Because of its dilatant properties, oobleck is often used in demonstrations that exhibit its unusual behavior. A person may walk on a large tub of oobleck without sinking due to its shear thickening properties, as long as the individual moves quickly enough to provide enough force with each step to cause the thickening. Also, if oobleck is placed on a large subwoofer driven at a sufficiently high volume, it will thicken and form standing waves in response to low frequency sound waves from the speaker. If a person were to punch or hit oobleck, it would thicken and act like a solid. After the blow, the oobleck will go back to its thin liquid-like state.

Flubber (slime) [ edit ] Main article: Flubber (material) Slime flows under low stresses but breaks under higher stresses Flubber, also commonly known as slime, is a non-Newtonian fluid, easily made from polyvinyl alcohol –based glues (such as white "school" glue) and borax . It flows under low stresses but breaks under higher stresses and pressures. This combination of fluid-like and solid-like properties makes it a Maxwell fluid . Its behaviour can also be described as being viscoplastic or gelatinous .

[ 24 ] Chilled caramel topping [ edit ] Another example of non-Newtonian fluid flow is chilled caramel ice cream topping (so long as it incorporates hydrocolloids such as carrageenan and gellan gum ). The sudden application of force —by stabbing the surface with a finger, for example, or rapidly inverting the container holding it—causes the fluid to behave like a solid rather than a liquid. This is the " shear thickening " property of this non-Newtonian fluid. More gentle treatment, such as slowly inserting a spoon, will leave it in its liquid state. Trying to jerk the spoon back out again, however, will trigger the return of the temporary solid state.

[ 25 ] Silly Putty [ edit ] Main article: Silly Putty Silly Putty is a silicone polymer based suspension that will flow, bounce, or break, depending on strain rate.

Plant resin [ edit ] Main article: Pitch (resin) Plant resin is a viscoelastic solid polymer . When left in a container, it will flow slowly as a liquid to conform to the contours of its container. If struck with greater force, however, it will shatter as a solid.

Quicksand [ edit ] Main article: Quicksand Quicksand is a shear thinning non-Newtonian colloid that gains viscosity at rest. Quicksand's non-Newtonian properties can be observed when it experiences a slight shock (for example, when someone walks on it or agitates it with a stick), shifting between its gel and sol phase and seemingly liquefying, causing objects on the surface of the quicksand to sink.

Ketchup [ edit ] Ketchup is a shear thinning fluid.

[ 12 ] [ 26 ] Shear thinning means that the fluid viscosity decreases with increasing shear stress . In other words, fluid motion is initially difficult at slow rates of deformation, but will flow more freely at high rates. Shaking an inverted bottle of ketchup can cause it to transition to a lower viscosity through shear thinning, making it easier to pour from the bottle.

Dry granular flows [ edit ] Under certain circumstances, flows of granular materials can be modelled as a continuum, for example using the μ ( I ) rheology . Such continuum models tend to be non-Newtonian, since the apparent viscosity of granular flows increases with pressure and decreases with shear rate. The main difference is the shearing stress and rate of shear.

Radioactive waste vitrification [ edit ] Important issue for non-Newtonian fluids is glass behavior during radioactive waste vitrification when special attention is given to viscosity of the molten multicomponent glass being described by Douglas-Doremus- Ojovan (DDO) model of viscosity of glasses and melts [ 27 ] See also [ edit ] Complex fluid Dilatant Dissipative particle dynamics Generalized Newtonian fluid Herschel–Bulkley fluid Liquefaction Navier–Stokes equations Newtonian fluid Pseudoplastic Quicksand Quick clay Rheology Superfluids Thixotropy Weissenberg effect References [ edit ] ^ Ouellette, Jennifer (2013).

"An-Ti-Ci-Pa-Tion: The Physics of Dripping Honey" .

Scientific American .

^ Oldroyd, J. (1950).

"On the Formulation of Rheological Equations of State" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences .

200 (1063): 523– 541.

Bibcode : 1950RSPSA.200..523O .

doi : 10.1098/rspa.1950.0035 .

^ Walters, K. (1963). "Non -Newtonian effects in some elastic-viscous liquids whose behavior at small rates of shear is characterized by a general linear equations of state".

Quart. J. Mech. Appl. Math .

6 : 63.

^ Williamson, R.V (1929).

"The flow of pseudoplastic materials" .

Ind. Eng. Chem .

21 (11): 1108– 1111.

doi : 10.1021/ie50239a035 .

^ I.F., Barna; Bognár, G.; Hriczó, K. (2016).

"Self-Similar Analytic Solution of the Two-Dimensional Navier-Stokes Equation with a Non-Newtonian Type of Viscosity" .

Mathematical Modelling and Analysis .

21 (1): 83– 94.

arXiv : 1410.1303 .

doi : 10.3846/13926292.2016.1136901 .

^ Wei, D.; Al-Ashhab, S. (2019).

"Existence of self-similar solutions of the two-dimensional Navier–Stokes equation for non-Newtonian fluids" .

Arab Journal of Mathematical Sciences .

26 ((1/2)): 167.

doi : 10.1016/j.ajmsc.2019.04.001 .

^ Guedda, M.; Hammouch, Z. (2008).

"Similarity flow solutions of a non-Newtonian power-law fluid" .

International Journal of Nonlinear Science .

6 (3): 255– 264.

arXiv : 0904.0315 .

^ Guedda, M.; Kersner, R. (2011).

"Non-Newtonian pseudoplastic fluids: Analytical results and exact solutions" .

International Journal of Non-Linear Mechanics .

46 (7): 949– 957.

Bibcode : 2011IJNLM..46..949G .

doi : 10.1016/j.ijnonlinmec.2011.04.009 .

^ Wei, D.H.; Al-Ashhab, S. (2014).

"Similarity solutions for non-newtonian power-law fluid flow" .

Applied Mathematics and Mechanics .

35 (9): 1155– 1166.

doi : 10.1007/s10483-014-1854-6 .

^ Bognár, G. (2009).

"Similarity solution of boundary layer flow for non-Newtonian fluids" .

International Journal of Nonlinear Sciences and Numerical Simulation .

10 : 555– 1566.

doi : 10.1016/j.camwa.2010.09.039 .

^ a b Tropea, Cameron; Yarin, Alexander L.; Foss, John F. (2007).

Springer handbook of experimental fluid mechanics . Springer. pp. 661, 676.

ISBN 978-3-540-25141-5 .

^ a b Garay, Paul N. (1996).

Pump Application Desk Book (3rd ed.). Prentice Hall. p. 358.

ISBN 978-0-88173-231-3 .

^ Rao, M. A. (2007).

Rheology of Fluid and Semisolid Foods: Principles and Applications (2nd ed.). Springer. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-387-70929-1 .

^ Schramm, Laurier L. (2005).

Emulsions, Foams, and Suspensions: Fundamentals and Applications . Wiley VCH. p. 173.

ISBN 978-3-527-30743-2 .

^ Chhabra, R.P. (2006).

Bubbles, Drops, and Particles in Non-Newtonian Fluids (2nd ed.). Hoboken: Taylor & Francis Ltd. pp.

9– 10.

ISBN 978-1-4200-1538-6 .

^ Astarita, G.; Marucci, G. (1972).

Principles of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics . McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 9780070840225 .

^ Fridtjov, I. (2014).

Rheology and Non-Newtonian Fluids . Springer.

ISBN 9783319010526 .

^ Hori, Y. (2006).

Hydrodynamic Lubrication . Springer.

ISBN 9784431278986 .

^ Böhme, G. (1987).

Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics . North-Holland.

ISBN 9780444567826 .

^ This demonstration of oobleck is a popular subject for YouTube videos.

[ which?

] ^ a b "Oobleck: The Dr. Seuss Science Experiment" .

instructables.com .

^ "Outrageous Ooze" .

Exploratorium . 7 March 2023.

^ Rupp, Rebecca (1998).

"Magic Mud and Other Great Experiments" .

The Complete Home Learning Source Book . Three Rivers Press. pp.

235– 236.

ISBN 978-0-609-80109-3 .

^ Glurch Meets Oobleck Archived 6 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine .

Iowa State University Extension.

^ Barra, Giuseppina (2004).

The Rheology of Caramel (PhD). University of Nottingham.

^ Cartwright, Jon (2 September 2011).

"Microscopy reveals why ketchup squirts" .

Chemistry World . Royal Society of Chemistry.

^ Yudintsev, Sergey V.; Ojovan, Michael I.; Malkovsky, Victor I. (February 2024).

"Thermal Effects and Glass Crystallization in Composite Matrices for Immobilization of the Rare-Earth Element–Minor Actinide Fraction of High-Level Radioactive Waste" .

Journal of Composites Science .

8 (2): 70.

doi : 10.3390/jcs8020070 .

ISSN 2504-477X .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Non-Newtonian fluids .

Classical experiments with Non-Newtonian fluids by the National Committee for Fluid Mechanics on YouTube v t e Non-Newtonian fluids Effects Barus Self-siphoning Kaye Toms Weissenberg Properties Viscoelastic materials Kelvin–Voigt Maxwell Time-dependent viscosity Rheopecty Thixotropy Non-Newtonian viscoelasticity Shear thinning Shear thickening Generalized Newtonian fluids Bingham Carreau Cross Herschel–Bulkley Newtonian Ideal Power-law Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Non-Newtonian_fluid&oldid=1301696563 " Categories : Continuum mechanics Fluid dynamics Non-Newtonian fluids Viscosity Polymers Tribology Hidden categories: All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2021 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2024 All articles needing additional references Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Commons category link is on Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2020 This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 06:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Non-Newtonian fluid 35 languages Add topic

