Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Methodology 3 Past projects Toggle Past projects subsection 3.1 2007 3.2 2008 3.3 2011 4 Other projects 5 Publicity 6 See also 7 References 8 Works cited Toggle the table of contents Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Former NASA program Hydrothermal vents and its ecosystems are a research focus of ASTEP Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets (ASTEP) was a program established by NASA to sponsor research projects that advance the technology and techniques used in planetary exploration .  The objective was to enable the study of astrobiology and to aid the planning of extraterrestrial exploration missions while prioritizing science, technology, and field campaigns.

Overview [ edit ] ASTEP is one of four elements of NASA's Astrobiology Program, which falls under the Planetary Science Division of the Science Mission Directorate. According to the formal description from NASA, "The ASTEP program sponsors the development of technologies that enable remote searches for, and identification of, life in extreme environments, including planetary surfaces and subsurfaces." [ 1 ] ASTEP is concerned with discovering technologies which will enable scientists to study astrobiology both on the surface of the Earth and on extraterrestrial bodies. A central focus of ASTEP's research is terrestrial field campaigns, or long-duration expeditions where researchers live in the same region they are studying. These are conducted on Earth in remote or hostile locations, such as Antarctica or the bottom of the ocean. Through understanding complex and exotic life on Earth, such as extremophiles , scientists hope to better define the characteristics they should look for and the locations they should seek when attempting to discover extraterrestrial life.

The program was active from 2001 to 2014, when it was consolidated into the Planetary Science and Technology from Analog Research (PSTAR) program.

[ 2 ] Methodology [ edit ] ASTEP funded projects typically perform research by searching for and studying extremophile biology in Earth's harshest environments through the use of field research campaigns. The environments where this research is conducted is meant to simulate the expected conditions on extraterrestrial worlds in the Solar System. Past field work has typically targeted two regions. Arctic and Antarctic climates simulate the low temperatures expected on many other planets such as Mars , near rover landing sites.

[ 1 ] Underwater regions are also an area of study because they simulate high pressure, low light and variable temperature conditions. This region simulates proposed missions to explore the vast liquid water ocean that is expected to reside under Jupiter's moon, Europa .

[ 3 ] ASTEP promotes the development of new exploration technologies and techniques that can search, identify, and study life in extreme conditions in locations that are difficult to access. There is a broad range of things that can fall into this category. Previous examples include laboratories such as the Mars Science Laboratory , sampling techniques, the Mars rovers , the Titan lander ( Huygens ), and submersibles.

[ 4 ] Autonomous systems are preferred because data can be collected without the presence of humans near the test area. The field campaigns are used as a proof-of-concept for the proposed technologies as well as a demonstration. They are generally tested with mock-mission where conditions and challenges simulate those that might be experienced on an actual mission. This helps identify their strengths and weaknesses in the technology's mission execution and structural endurance.

Beyond the practice of new technologies, ASTEP strives to learn more about astrobiology through observation and study on the field campaigns. Analyzing the collected samples helps researchers determine the thermal, photonic, pressure, and chemical boundary conditions for living organisms. Understanding how these organisms adapt and evolve in these extreme conditions may be similar to the methods used by extraterrestrial organisms, and thus offers clues about where life may be found. Another area of study is the environmental footprint that extremophile life leaves behind, biomolecules or biosignatures such as chemical trails, geological formations, etc. Identifying these clues often inspires new biology searching techniques, and simplifies mission planning.

Past projects [ edit ] 2007 [ edit ] The Deep Phreatic Thermal Explorer ( DEPTHX ) The Arctic Gakkel Vents Expedition (AGAVE) The Arctic Mars Analogue Svalbard Expedition ( AMASE ) The Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute ’s Environmental Sample Processor (ESP) 2008 [ edit ] The Environmentally Non-Disturbing Under-Ice Robotic Antarctic Explorer ( ENDURANCE ) Arctic Mars Analogue Svalbard Expedition (AMASE) Sample Return Oases for Life and Pre-Biotic Chemistry: Hydrothermal Exploration Using Advanced Underwater Robotics IceBite: An auger and sampling system for ground ice on Mars [ 5 ] VALKYRIE: Very-deep Autonomous Laser-powered Kilowatt-class Yo-yoing Robotic Ice Explorer [ citation needed ] Autonomous Exploration, Discovery, and Sampling of Life in Deep Sea Extreme Environments [ citation needed ] Deep Drilling and Sampling Via Compact Low-Mass Rotary-Hammer Auto-Gopher [ citation needed ] Exploration of Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Vent Microbial Communities using the Environmental Sample Processor (ESP) 2011 [ edit ] The 2011 projects included: [ citation needed ] Mars Methane Plume Tracer Planetary Lake Lander Shallow-Borehole Array for Measuring Greenland Emission of Trace Gases as an Analogue for Methane on Mars (GETGAMM) VALKYRIE: Phase 2 Robotic Investigation of Subsurface Life in the Atacama Desert Other projects [ edit ] Stromatolite building provides important geological information on the history of microorganisms dating back to over a billion years ago. In recent years, ASTEP has been researching how these layered fossils could have formed by studying modern day microbial mats , which leave stromatolite similar to their ancestors.

[ 6 ] ASTEP's instrument development program is currently working on a prototype to detect the presence of DNA on the Martian surface.

[ 1 ] The prototype will replicate any DNA found in Martian ice or regolith using polymerase chain reaction amplification techniques.

The IceBite Project involves testing drills for future Martian missions where ice will need to be penetrated. The research is being conducted in high altitude Antarctic valleys which closely resemble the Phoenix landing site in geologic composition.

[ 1 ] As of 2009, the scientists have successfully completed the first phase of the three-year mission, which was to probe the region, install scientific  instruments, and determine the future testing sites.

[ 1 ] A team of ASTEP scientists are exploring the Mid-Cayman Spreading Center , a wide ridge at the westernmost region of the Cayman Trough. Oceanic life reaches the extremes at the depths, where the pressure is the greatest and underwater sea vents pump hot and mineral-rich water into the ocean. Project researchers think extraterrestrial life could be similar to the exotic life forms found near these vents. The submersible Nereus was developed by ASTEP to autonomously survey the hydrothermal vent systems at the depths of the Mid-Cayman Spreading Center.

[ 3 ] Publicity [ edit ] In order to raise awareness about the research being conducted under the auspices of ASTEP, scientists have been increasingly using blogs as a way to convey information about their studies, typically when they are performing science at a remote location on a terrestrial field test. Scientists have also begun contacting museums via satellite uplink to discuss astrobiology with the public.

[ 4 ] The most prominent blog is produced by NASA's IceBite team, which performs annual expeditions to Antarctica.

See also [ edit ] Astronomy portal Biology portal Abiogenesis NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e (Marinova, 2010) http://www.astrobio.net/index.php?option=com_expedition&task=detail&id=3388&type=blog&pid=19 ^ "NASA Astrobiology" . NASA . Retrieved 28 January 2022 .

^ a b (German, 2009) http://www.astrobio.net/pressrelease/3287/oases-for-life-on-the-mid-caymen-rise ^ a b (Billings, Apout ASTEP, 2008) "About ASTEP" . Archived from the original on 2010-05-28 . Retrieved 2010-03-10 .

^ 2010 ASTEP Conference Schedule ^ (Schirber, Astrobiology Magazine , 2010) http://www.astrobio.net/exclusive/3418/first-fossil-makers-in-hot-water Works cited [ edit ] Billings, L. (2008, 01 22). About ASTEP. Retrieved from Astrobiology: https://web.archive.org/web/20100528091403/http://astrobiology.nasa.gov/astep/about/ Billings, L. (2008, 02 06). NASA Astrobiology Roadmap 2008. Retrieved from Astrobiology: https://web.archive.org/web/20100219093302/http://astrobiology.nasa.gov/roadmap/ Commodore, J. (2010, 02). NRA Proposers Guidebook - Final. Retrieved from NASA: http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/procurement/nraguidebook/ German, C. (2009, 10 21).

Astrobiology Magazine . Retrieved from Oases for Life on the Mid-Caymen Rise: http://www.astrobio.net/pressrelease/3287/oases-for-life-on-the-mid-caymen-rise Marinova, M. (2010, 02 01).

Astrobiology Magazine . Retrieved from IceBite Blog: Saying Farewell to a Frozen World: http://www.astrobio.net/index.php?option=com_expedition&task=detail&id=3388&type=blog&pid=19 Peter Doran, P. C. (2010). RESULTS FROM ASTEP AND OTHER ASTROBIOLOGY FIELD CAMPAIGNS II.

Schirber, M. (2010, 01 03).

Astrobiology Magazine . Retrieved from First Fossil-Makers in Hot Water: http://www.astrobio.net/exclusive/3418/first-fossil-makers-in-hot-water Schirber, M. (2010, 02 15).

Astrobiology Magazine . Retrieved from Detecting Our Martian Cousins: http://www.astrobio.net/exclusive/3401/detecting-our-martian-cousins v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons v t e Exoplanets Planet Definition IAU Planetary science Main topics Exoplanet Exoplanet orbital and physical parameters Methods of detecting exoplanets Planetary system Planet-hosting stars Sizes and types Terrestrial Carbon planet Catastrophically evaporating planet Coreless planet Desert planet Dwarf planet Hycean planet Ice planet Iron planet (Super-Mercury) Lava planet Ocean world Mega-Earth Steam world Sub-Earth Super-Earth Gaseous Cold Jupiter Eccentric Jupiter Mini-Neptune (Gas dwarf) Helium planet Hot Jupiter Hot Neptune Gas giant Ice giant Neptunian Jupiter analogue Super-Jupiter Super-Neptune Super-puff Ultra-hot Jupiter Ultra-hot Neptune Warm Jupiter Other types Blanet Brown dwarf Chthonian planet Circumbinary planet Circumtriple planet Disrupted planet Double planet Ecumenopolis Eyeball planet Giant planet Mesoplanet Planemo Planet/Brown dwarf boundary Planetesimal Protoplanet Pulsar planet Sub-brown dwarf Sub-Neptune Toroidal planet Ultra-cool dwarf Ultra-short period planet (USP) Formation and evolution Accretion Accretion disk Asteroid belt Circumplanetary disk Circumstellar disc Circumstellar envelope Cosmic dust Debris disk Detached object Disrupted planet Excretion disk Exozodiacal dust Extraterrestrial materials Extraterrestrial sample curation Giant-impact hypothesis Gravitational collapse Hills cloud Internal structure Interplanetary dust cloud Interplanetary medium Interplanetary space Interstellar cloud Interstellar dust Interstellar medium Interstellar space Kuiper belt List of interstellar and circumstellar molecules Merging stars Molecular cloud Nebular hypothesis Oort cloud Outer space Planetary migration Planetary system Planetesimal Planet formation Protoplanetary disk Radial drift Ring system Rubble pile Sample-return mission Scattered disc Star formation Systems Exocomet Interstellar Exomoon Tidally detached Rogue planet Jupiter-mass binary objects Orbits Retrograde Trojan Mean-motion resonances Titius–Bode law Host stars A B Binary star Brown dwarfs F/Yellow-white dwarfs G/Yellow dwarfs Herbig Ae/Be K/Orange dwarfs M/Red dwarfs Pulsar Red giant Subdwarf B Subgiant T Tauri White dwarfs Yellow giants Detection Astrometry Direct imaging list Microlensing list Polarimetry Timing list Radial velocity list Transit method list Transit-timing variation Habitability Astrobiology Astrooceanography Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Catalogues Nearby Habitable Systems Exoplanet Data Explorer Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia NASA Exoplanet Archive NASA Star and Exoplanet Database Open Exoplanet Catalogue Lists Exoplanetary systems Host stars Multiplanetary systems Stars with proto-planetary discs Exoplanets Discoveries Extremes Firsts Nearest Largest Heaviest Terrestrial candidates Kepler 1–500 501–1000 1001–1500 1501–2000 K2 Potentially habitable Proper names Discovered exoplanets by year before 2000 2000–2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Other Carl Sagan Institute Exoplanet naming convention Exoplanet phase curves Exoplanetary Circumstellar Environments and Disk Explorer Extragalactic planet Extrasolar planets in fiction Geodynamics of terrestrial exoplanets Neptunian desert Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Planets in globular clusters Small planet radius gap Sudarsky's gas giant classification Discoveries of exoplanets Search projects Portals : Astronomy Biology Space Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Astrobiology_Science_and_Technology_for_Exploring_Planets&oldid=1240852927 " Categories : Astrobiology NASA programs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 This page was last edited on 17 August 2024, at 20:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets 1 language Add topic

