Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early Islam 1.2 Islamic Reformism 1.3 Soviet Union 1.4 Iran 1.5 British India 1.6 Pakistan 1.7 Afghanistan 1.8 Indonesia 1.9 Yemen 1.10 Somalia 1.11 Algeria 2 Ideas and concepts Toggle Ideas and concepts subsection 2.1 Zakat 2.2 Welfare state 2.3 Guaranteed minimum income 3 Islamic socialist ideologies Toggle Islamic socialist ideologies subsection 3.1 Gaddafism 3.2 Anatolian Socialism (Kuva-yi Seyyare) 3.3 Islamic Marxism 3.4 Wäisi movement 3.5 Ba'athism 4 Islamic economy Toggle Islamic economy subsection 4.1 Islamic economics 5 Notable Muslim socialists 6 Islamic socialist or leftist organisations Toggle Islamic socialist or leftist organisations subsection 6.1 Sunni socialist groups 6.1.1 Current 6.1.2 Historical 6.2 Shia socialist groups 6.2.1 Current 6.2.2 Historical 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Islamic socialism 30 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Dansk Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский کوردی Suomi Svenska Türkçe اردو Vèneto 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of socialist philosophy Part of a series on Islamism Fundamentals Islam History Culture Economics Politics Secularism Ideologies Salafi movement Salafi jihadism International propagation By region Deobandi movement Deobandi jihadism Qutbism Khomeinism Shia Islamism Islamic fundamentalism Islamic nationalism Concepts Apostasy in Islam Takfir Islamic governance Caliphate Islamic democracy Islamic feminism Islamic liberalism Islamic socialism Islamic extremism Islamic state Islamic republic Spread of Islam ( of knowledge ) Jihad Islamic terrorism Jihadism Pan-Islamism Political Islam aspects Post-Islamism Sharia Shura Two-nation theory Ummah Influences Anti-communism Anti-imperialism Anti-Zionism Decolonization Islamic Golden Age Islamic revival Movements Scholastic Barelvi Dawat-e-Islami Deobandi Nurcu Salafism Madkhalism Ahl-i Hadith Sahwa movement Wahhabism International propagation by country/region Political Salafist Front Salafist Call Movement of Society for Peace Hamas Party of Democratic Action Jamaat-e-Islami Millî Görüş Muslim Brotherhood List of Islamic political parties Militant Militant Islamism based in MENA region South Asia Southeast Asia Sub-Saharan Africa Key texts The Caliphate or the Grand Imamate ( Rashīd Rīďha 1922 ) Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam ( Iqbal 1930s ) Principles of State and Government ( Asad 1961 ) Ma'alim fi al-Tariq ("Milestones") ( Qutb 1965 ) Islamic Government: Governance of the Jurist ("Velayat-e faqih") ( Khomeini 1970 ) Heads of state Ahmed al-Sharaa Recep Tayyip Erdoğan Ruhollah Khomeini Mohamed Morsi Muammar Gaddafi Alija Izetbegović Ismail Haniyeh Zia ul-Haq Ali Khamenei Omar al-Bashir Mohammed Omar House of Saud House of Thani Hibatullah Akhundzada Sadiq al-Mahdi Key ideologues Abu Hamza al-Masri Rabee al-Madkhali Muhammad Abduh Jamāl al-Dīn al-Afghānī Qazi Hussain Ahmad Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani Muhammad Asad Hassan al-Banna Rached Ghannouchi Safwat Hegazi Muhammad Iqbal Ali Khamenei Ruhollah Khomeini Necip Fazıl Kısakürek Abul A'la Maududi Abul Hasan Nadwi Taqi al-Din al-Nabhani Yusuf al-Qaradawi Sayyid Qutb Tariq Ramadan Ata Abu Rashta Rashid Rida Navvab Safavi Ali Shariati Haji Shariatullah Hassan Al-Turabi Ahmed Yassin Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Criticism Liberal and reform movements within Islam in Europe in North America Khaled Abu al-Fadl Farag Foda Abdelwahab Meddeb Maryam Namazie Maajid Nawaaz Sam Harris Olivier Roy Bassam Tibi Muhammad Sa'id al-Ashmawi Gilles Kepel Shiraz Maher Magnus Ranstorp Related topics Islam and modernity Modernism Islam and other religions Islamophobia Islam portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Islamic socialism is a political philosophy that incorporates elements of Islam into a system of socialism . As a term, it was coined by various left-wing Muslim leaders to describe a more spiritual form of socialism. Islamic socialists believe that the teachings of the Qur'an and hadith, citing aspects of the religion like zakat , are not only compatible with principles of socialism, but also very supportive of them. They draw inspiration from the first Islamic state , which was established by Muhammad in the city of Medina . This blend of Islam with socialist principles was popularized as a viable form of anti-imperialism that could be widely accepted in the Muslim world . This is especially seen in the works of Egyptian writer Salama Moussa , who wrote extensively about socialism and about Egyptian nationalism against British rule .

[ 1 ] Muslim socialist leaders believe in the derivation of political legitimacy from the public, and wish to implement a government based on social welfare and the concept of zakat. In practice, this has been seen through guaranteed incomes , pensions, and welfare. These practical applications of the idea of Islamic socialism have a history going back to Muhammad and the first few caliphates , and have persisted through to modern Islamic political parties founded in the 1970s.

Islamic socialists often use the Qur'an to defend their positions. For instance, in Pakistan , the verses "Man is entitled only to what is due to his effort" and "the land belongs to God " have been used to argue in favor of Islamic socialism, and as an argument against the accretion of wealth through the manipulation of capital.

[ 2 ] Anti-Capitalist Muslims , a political organization in Turkey , openly advocates socialism and frequently challenges right-wing Muslims to read the Qur'an and "try to disprove the fact that it is leftist".

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Early Islam [ edit ] Abū Dharr al-Ghifārī , a companion of Muhammad, is credited by some scholars, such as Muhammad Sharqawi and Sami Ayad Hanna, as a principal antecedent of Islamic socialism.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] He protested against the accumulation of wealth by the ruling class during Uthman 's caliphate and urged the equitable redistribution of wealth . The first Muslim Caliph Abu Bakr introduced a guaranteed minimum standard of income , granting each man, woman and child ten dirhams annually—this was later increased to twenty dirhams.

[ 9 ] Islamic Reformism [ edit ] In the 1890s, the Islamic Reformist thinker Jamal al-Din al-Afghani discussed topics of “Socialism and Social Justice” (Ar.

al-ishtirākiyya wa al-ʿadāla al-ijtimāʿiyya ) during his stay in Paris . However, his thought was only published in a collection edited by Muḥammad al-Makhzūmi in 1931 due to censorship issues in the late Ottoman Empire.

[ 10 ] Al-Makhzumi notes that al-Afghani conversed with divergent schools of thought, among them sympathisers with European Socialism whom he saw as "extravagant" and "wasteful".

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] He juxtaposed this with Islamic Socialism, which, he argued, was professed by the early caliphs and saḥāba (companions of the prophet), [ 13 ] among them Abu Dharr.

[ 14 ] As a response to a question about European socialism by "a prominent Turkish man of letters" [ 15 ] about the value of socialism in Europe, al-Afghani proclaimed that socialism had already been practiced by the Arabs even before the coming of Muhammad's revelation. He evokes the charitable Arab poet Hatim al-Ta'i as proof of the generosity during that time.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] This generosity, where the person retained their personal right to property, but saw it as their duty to provide for people in need, was retained and given divine ordinance in the Qur'an . Al-Afghani cites several Qur'anic verses to showcase the call for mutual responsibility, charity, and the opposition to improper profit or usury ( riba ; such as Q 8:41, 2:271, 2:275-276, 9:60).

[ 18 ] In al-Afghani's account of the formative period of Islam , he understands Abu Bakr and Umar to have successfully lived by the standards of Islamic Socialism.

[ 19 ] During the reign of Uthman , however, extravagance would have taken over the Muslim leaders of Egypt, Syria, and Iraq.

[ 20 ] Abu Dharr, one of the first converts to Islam, confronted the governor of Syria, Mu'awiyya , with this fact, but, after an attempt to bribe Abu Dharr, Mu'awiyya sent him away to the Caliph. It was over this matter that Abu Dharr chose to resign to al-Rabadha away from the Muslim community.

[ 21 ] This historical narrative would be expanded and resuscitated by later advocates of Islamic Socialism.

[ 22 ] Soviet Union [ edit ] According to Sami A. Hanna and Hanif Ramay , one of the first expressions of Islamic socialism was the Wäisi movement in Tatarstan , Russia, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The movement opposed the rule of the Russian Empire and was supported by Muslim farmers, peasants and petite bourgeoisie . It suffered repression by the Russian authorities and went underground in the early 20th century, when it started cooperating with communists, socialists and social democrats in anti-government activity, and started identifying itself as an Islamic socialist movement in the wake of the 1905 Russian Revolution . The movement aligned with the Bolsheviks during the Russian Revolution of 1917 , [ 23 ] during which the movement also established the first experimental Islamic commune. The Muslim Socialist Committee of Kazan was also active at this time. After the death of Lenin in 1924, the Wäisi movement asserted its independence from the Communist Party; however, it was suppressed during the Great Purge in the 1930s.

[ 23 ] Soviet decision makers recognized that revolutionary activity along the Soviet Union 's southern border would draw the attention of capitalist powers and invite them to intervene. It was this understanding which prompted the Russian representation at the Baku Congress in September 1920 to reject the arguments of the national communists as impractical and counterproductive to the revolution in general, without elaborating their fear that the safety of Russia lay in the balance. It was this understanding, coupled with the Russian Bolsheviks' displeasure at seeing another revolutionary center proposed in their own domain revolutionary, that galvanized them into action against the national communists.

[ 24 ] Iran [ edit ] The Iranian intellectual Muhammed Nakhshab is credited with the first synthesis between Shi'ism and European socialism.

[ 25 ] Nakhshab's movement was based on the tenet that Islam and socialism were not incompatible since both sought to accomplish social equality and justice. His theories had been expressed in his B.A.

thesis on the laws of ethics.

[ 26 ] In 1943, Nakhshab founded the Movement of God-Worshipping Socialists , one of six original member organizations of the National Front .

[ 27 ] The organization was founded through the merger of two groupings, Nakhshab's circle of high school students at Dar al-Fanoun and Jalaleddin Ashtiyani's circle of about 25 students at the Faculty of Engineering at Tehran University . The organization was initially known as League of Patriotic Muslims. It combined religious sentiments, nationalism and socialist thoughts.

[ 28 ] After the 1953 coup against the National Front-led government of Mohammad Mosaddegh , Islamic socialism in Iran took a more radical turn, with the Organization of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class , using Marxist ideas under the influence of Ali Shariati and engaging in armed struggle against the government of the Shah of Iran , culminating in its participation in the Iranian Revolution which overthrew the Shah in 1979.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] However, the movement fell foul of the Islamic Republic established after the Revolution.

[ 23 ] Influential figures such as Jalal Al-e-Ahmad and Ali Shariati have also been described as Muslim socialists.

British India [ edit ] In South Asia, the Deobandi scholar and Indian independence activist Ubaidullah Sindhi travelled to Russia via Afghanistan in the 1910s. He remained in post-revolution Russia until 1923, where he studied socialism and engaged in discussions with communist revolutionaries. From Russia he moved on to Turkey, where he developed his ideas on Islamic socialism, drawing parallels between Islam and communism in their emphasis on the fair distribution of wealth. Alongside Sindhi, during the 1920s and the 1930s another lesser known scholar, Hifzur Rahman Seoharwi , also found Islam and Marxism to be compatible, with multiple common ideas about social structure and economics.

[ 23 ] Pakistan [ edit ] Islamic socialism was also essential to the ideology of Pakistan , as its founder, Muhammad Ali Jinnah , to a crowd in Chittagong on 26 March 1948 declared that "you are only voicing my sentiments and the sentiments of millions of Musalmans when you say that Pakistan should be based on sure foundations of social justice and Islamic socialism which emphasizes equality and brotherhood of man", [ 32 ] while Pakistan's first Prime Minister, Liaquat Ali Khan , on 25 August 1949, said in the same vein that: There are a number of 'isms' being talked about now-a-days, but we are convinced that for us there is only one 'ism', namely Islamic Socialism, which in a nutshell, means that every person in this land has equal rights to be provided with food, shelter, clothing, education and medical facilities. Countries which cannot ensure these for their people can never progress. The economic programme drawn up some 1,350 years back is still the best economic programme for us. In fact, whatever systems people may try out they all ultimately return to Islamic Socialism by whatever name they may choose to call it.

[ 33 ] Jinnah's Muslim League , which was the first ruling party in Pakistan, contained a number of Islamic socialists, although they were relatively marginal in the party. Also influential in Pakistan was Ghulam Ahmed Perwez , an Islamic scholar who advocated Qur'anism and a focus on the study of modern sciences. Although he was criticised by more conservative scholars, he became aligned with Jinnah and Muhammad Iqbal , the former of whom appointed him as the editor of the magazine Talu-e-Islam , where he wrote and published articles espousing a socialistic interpretation of the Qur'an, arguing that "socialism best enforces Qur'anic dictums on property, justice and distribution of wealth", and advocating a progressive, non-theocratic government and the application of science and agrarian reform to further economic development.

[ 23 ] Perwez, as a part of his application of qur'anic thought to political ideology, stated that hell was a "... society in which men, dominated by its evil socio-economic system, struggle to accumulate wealth." [ 34 ] During the presidency of Muhammad Ayub Khan in Pakistan in the 1960s, Hanif Ramay led a group of intellectuals in Lahore in developing Islamic socialist ideas, drawing on the thought of Perwez and Khalifa Abdul Hakim , along with Ba'athist thinkers such as Michel Aflaq . Ramay and his co-thinkers influenced Zulfikar Ali Bhutto when he founded the Pakistan Peoples Party with Jalaludin Abdur Rahim , and they were the primary ideological influence on the party's manifesto. Ramay outlined the priorities for the PPP's brand of Islamic socialism as including elimination of feudalism and uncontrolled capitalism, greater state regulation of the economy, nationalisation of major banks, industries and schools, encouraging participatory management in factories and building democratic institutions. They contextualised these policies as a modern extension of principles of equality and justice contained in the Qur'an and practiced under the authority of Muhammad in Medina and Mecca . However, during Bhutto's time in power during the 1970s, he scaled back his reform programme and deepened Pakistan's ties with the conservative, oil-rich Gulf monarchies following the 1973 oil crisis , and purged the PPP's radical left and made concessions to Islamist parties in an effort to appease them.

[ 23 ] The party in 1967 adopted the slogan  "Islam is our faith; democracy is our politics; socialism is our economy; all power to the people ." [ 35 ] Afghanistan [ edit ] Although it was Marxist , the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (which took power after the country's Saur Revolution ) started utilising rhetoric stressing similarities between socialism and Islam after its reforms provoked opposition from religious conservatives and landowners.

[ 23 ] Nur Muhammad Taraki 's, first president of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan , most acute dilemma was establishing a party line on Islam , balancing respect for its principles with Marxist–Leninist ideals. Despite leading Ramadan prayers and making conciliatory speeches, Article I of a secret PDPA constitution affirmed the party's belief in Marxist–Leninist ideals. Taraki aimed to reconcile this with Islam by proposing a " progressive , modern, pure Islam," free from "bad traditions, superstition and erroneous belief." This indicated Taraki’s effort to merge Islamic values with socialist principles, reflecting a form of Islamic socialism, although it faced backlash from the Islamic clergy and the rural population.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Indonesia [ edit ] See also: Nasakom In Indonesia, former Communist Tan Malaka was an influential Islamic socialist thinker during the country's independence struggle , arguing that communism and Islam were compatible and that they should form the foundation for Indonesia's national revolution, and believing that Islam could be used to unify the working classes across the Muslim world. Although Malaka died in 1949, the same year that Indonesia achieved independence, the nation's first president Sukarno drew upon his ideas: he espoused ideological concepts which incorporated both religious and socialistic ideas, such as Pancasila and Nasakom .

[ 23 ] Yemen [ edit ] Ali Nasser , Abdel Fattah Ismail , and Abdullah Abdel Razzaq Badib at the Popular Vanguard Party Festival in the 1970s, with portraits of Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels , and Vladimir Lenin behind them Main articles: Yemeni Socialist Party and South Yemen In June 1969 a radical Marxist wing of the NLF gained power in an event known as the Corrective Move . This radical wing reorganised the country into the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY) on 30 November 1970.

[ 38 ] Subsequently, all political parties were amalgamated into the National Liberation Front , renamed the Yemeni Socialist Party , which became the only legal party. The People's Democratic Republic of Yemen established close ties with the Soviet Union , the German Democratic Republic , Cuba , and the Palestinian Liberation Organization .

East Germany 's constitution of 1968 even served as a kind of blueprint for the PDRY's first constitution.

[ 39 ] The major communist powers assisted in the building of the PDRY's armed forces. Strong support from Moscow resulted in Soviet naval forces gaining access to naval facilities in South Yemen.
The most significant among them, a Soviet naval and air base on the island of Socotra for operations in the Indian Ocean.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] Somalia [ edit ] Siad Barre c.

1969 , the longest serving head of state of the Somali Democratic Republic .

[ 43 ] Main article: Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party The Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP) was created by the military regime of Siad Barre in the Somali Democratic Republic under Soviet guidance in 1976 as an attempt to reconcile the official state ideology with the official state religion by adapting Marxist–Leninist precepts to local circumstances. Emphasis was placed on the Muslim principles of social progress, equality and justice, which the government argued formed the core of scientific socialism and its own accent on self-sufficiency , public participation and popular control as well as direct ownership of the means of production . As part of Barre's socialist policies, major industries and farms were nationalized , including banks, insurance companies and oil distribution farms. While the SRSP encouraged private investment on a limited scale, the administration still considered itself to be essentially socialist.

Algeria [ edit ] See National Liberation Front (Algeria) , Algerian nationalism Ideas and concepts [ edit ] Muslim socialists believe that socialism is compatible with Islamic teachings and usually embrace secular forms of socialism. However, some Muslim socialists believe that socialism should be applied within an Islamic framework and numerous Islamic socialist ideologies exist.

[ citation needed ] In the modern era, Islamic socialism can be divided into two: a left-wing and a right-wing form. The left wing ( Siad Barre , Haji Misbach , Ali Shariati, Yasser Arafat , Abdullah al-Alayli , Sukarno and Jalal Al-e Ahmad ) advocated proletarian internationalism , the implementation of Islamic Sharia, whilst encouraging Muslims to join or collaborate with international socialist or Marxist movements.

Right-wing socialists ( Mohammed Iqbal , Agus Salim , Jamal ad-Din Asad-Abadi , Musa al-Sadr , and Mahmud Shaltut ) are ideologically closer to third positionism , supporting not just social justice , egalitarian society and universal equality , but also Islamic revivalism and implementation of Sharia. They also reject a full adoption of a class struggle and keep a distance from other socialist movements.

Zakat [ edit ] Main article: Zakat One of the Five Pillars of Islam , zakāt is the practice of almsgiving based on accumulated wealth (approximately 2.5% of all financial assets owned over the course of one lunar year). Unlike ṣadaqah , charity, it is obligatory for all financially able Muslim adults and is considered to be an act of piety through which one expresses concern for the well-being of fellow Muslims as well as preserving social harmony between the wealthy and the poor.

[ 44 ] The zakat promotes a more equitable redistribution of wealth and fosters a sense of solidarity amongst members of the ummah (meaning "community").

[ 45 ] Zakat is meant to discourage the hoarding of capital and stimulate investment. Because the individual must pay zakat on the net wealth, wealthy Muslims are compelled to invest in profitable ventures, or otherwise see their wealth slowly erode. Furthermore, means of production such as equipment, factories and tools are exempt from zakat, which further provides the incentive to invest wealth in productive businesses.

[ 46 ] Personal assets such as clothing, household furniture and one residence are not considered zakatable assets.

According to the Qur'an, there are eight categories of people ( asnaf ) who qualify to receive zakat funds: [ 47 ] [ 48 ] Those living in absolute poverty ( Al-Fuqarā' ).

Those restrained because they cannot meet their basic needs ( Al-Masākīn ).

The zakat collectors themselves ( Al-Āmilīna 'Alaihā ).

Non-Muslims who are sympathetic to Islam or wish to convert to Islam ( Al-Mu'allafatu Qulūbuhum ).

People whom one is attempting to free from slavery or bondage. Also includes paying ransom or blood money, i.e.

diya ( Fir-Riqāb ).

Those who have incurred overwhelming debts while attempting to satisfy their basic needs ( Al-Ghārimīn ).

Those fighting for a religious cause or a cause of God ( Fī Sabīlillāh ) [ 48 ] or for the jihad in the way of Allah [ 49 ] or those not a part of salaried soldiers.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Children of the street, or travellers ( Ibnus-Sabīl ).

According to the Hadith, the family of Muhammad should not consume any zakat. Zakat should not be given to one's own parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, or spouses. Also it is forbidden to disburse zakat funds into investments instead of being directly given to those who are in need.

[ 52 ] Some scholars disagree whether the poor who qualify should include non-Muslims. Some state that zakat may be paid to non-Muslims, but only after the needs of Muslims have been met.

[ 52 ] Fi Sabillillah is the most prominent asnaf in Southeast Asian Muslim societies, where it broadly construed to include funding missionary work, Qur'anic schools, and anything else that serves the community in general.

[ 53 ] Zakat can be used to finance a jihad effort in the path of Allah. Zakat money should be used, provided the effort is to raise the banner of Islam.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Additionally, the zakat funds may be spent on the administration of a centralized zakat collection system.

Historically, Abul A'la Maududi championed the concept of Zakat.

[ 56 ] According to Maududi, Zakat should be primarily in the form of taxation from a position called the exchequer, who would manage the Zakat collected and make sure that it was distributed correctly.

[ 56 ] Should someone die with no family to pass on their wealth, then this wealth would be given to the exchequer for management.

[ 56 ] In the United Kingdom and according to a self-reported poll of 4000 people conducted by Zarine Kharas, Muslims today give more to charity than people of other religions.

[ 57 ] Today, conservative estimates of annual zakat are estimated to be 15 times global humanitarian aid contributions.

[ 58 ] Welfare state [ edit ] Main article: Bayt al-mal The concepts of welfare and pension were introduced in early Islamic law as forms of zakat, or charity. Zakat is one of the Five Pillars of Islam, and was implemented under the Rashidun Caliphate in the 7th century. This practice continued well into the Abbasid era of the caliphate. The taxes (including zakat and jizya ) collected in the treasury of an Islamic government were used to provide income for the needy , including the poor, elderly , orphans , widows and the disabled . According to the Islamic jurist Al-Ghazali (1058–1111), the government was also expected to stockpile food supplies in every region in case a disaster or famine occurred.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] During the Rashidun Caliphate, various welfare programs were introduced by Caliph Umar . Under his rule, equality was extended to all citizens, even to the caliph himself, as Umar believed that "no one, no matter how important, should live in a way that would distinguish him from the rest of the people." Umar himself lived "a simple life and detached himself from any of the worldly luxuries," like how he often wore "worn-out shoes and was usually clad in patched-up garments," or how he would sleep "on the bare floor of the mosque ." Limitations on wealth were also set for governors and officials, who would often be "dismissed if they showed any outward signs of pride or wealth which might distinguish them from the people." This was an early attempt at erasing "class distinctions which might inevitably lead to conflict." Umar also made sure that the public treasury was not wasted on "unnecessary luxuries" as he believed that "the money would be better spent if it went towards the welfare of the people rather than towards lifeless bricks." [ 60 ] Umar's innovative welfare reforms during the Rashidun Caliphate included the introduction of social security . This included unemployment insurance , which did not appear in the Western world until the 19th century. In the Rashidun Caliphate, whenever citizens were injured or lost their ability to work, it became the state's responsibility to make sure that their minimum needs were met, with the unemployed and their families receiving an allowance from the public treasury.

[ 60 ] Retirement pensions were provided to elderly people, [ 59 ] who had retired and could "count on receiving a stipend from the public treasury." Babies who were abandoned were also taken care of, with one hundred dirhams spent annually on each orphan's development. Umar also introduced the concept of public trusteeship and public ownership when he implemented the Waqf , or charitable trust , system, which transferred "wealth from the individual or the few to a social collective ownership," in order to provide "services to the community at large." For example, Umar bought land from the Banu Harithah and converted it into a charitable trust, which meant that "profit and produce from the land went towards benefiting the poor, slaves, and travelers." [ 60 ] During the great famine of 18 AH (638 CE ), Umar introduced further reforms such as the introduction of food rationing using coupons , which were given to those in need and could be exchanged for wheat and flour. Another innovative concept that was introduced was that of a poverty threshold , with efforts made to ensure a minimum standard of living . This made sure that no citizen across the empire would suffer from hunger. In order to determine the poverty line, Umar ordered an experiment to test how many seers of flour would be required to feed a person for a month. He found that 25 seers of flour could feed 30 people and so he concluded that 50 seers of flour would be sufficient to feed a person for a month. As a result, he ordered that the poor each receive a food ration of 50 seers of flour per month. In addition, the poor and disabled were guaranteed cash stipends. However, in order to avoid some citizens taking advantage of government services "begging and laziness were not tolerated" and "those who received government benefits were expected to be contributing members in the community." [ 60 ] Further reforms later took place under the Umayyad Caliphate . Registered soldiers who were disabled in service received an invalidity pension , while similar provisions were made for the disabled and poor in general. Caliph Al-Walid I assigned payments and services to the needy, which included money for the poor, guides for the blind, servants for the crippled, and pensions for all disabled people so that they would never need to beg. The caliphs Al-Walid II and Umar ibn Abdul-Aziz supplied money and clothes to the blind and crippled as well as servants for the latter. This continued with the Abbasid caliph Al-Mahdi .

[ 61 ] Tahir ibn Husayn , governor of the Khurasan province of the Abbasid Caliphate, stated in a letter to his son that pensions from the treasury should be provided to the blind, to look after the poor and destitute in general, to make sure not to overlook victims of oppression who are unable to complain and are ignorant of how to claim their rights and that pensions should be assigned to victims of calamities and the widows and orphans they leave behind. The "ideal city" described by the Islamic philosophers , Al-Farabi and Avicenna , also assigns funds to the disabled.

[ 62 ] When communities were stricken by famine, rulers would often support them though measures such as the remission of taxes, importation of food and charitable payments, ensuring that everyone had enough to eat. However, private charity through the trust institution often played a greater role in the alleviation of famines than government measures did.

[ 63 ] From the 9th century, funds from the treasury were also used towards the charitable trusts for the purpose of building and supporting public institutions, often Madrassah educational institutions and Bimaristan hospitals.

[ 64 ] Niqula Haddad , brother in law to Farah Antun , was a Syrian writer from an Orthodox Christian family who arguably wrote the first book on socialism in Arabic, entitled al-Ishtirakiyah .

[ 1 ] Haddad believed in a welfare state where the government would supply employment, medicine, school, and old age pensions.

[ 1 ] Haddad, along with Antun and Catholic -born Shibli Shumayyil , are credited with influencing the works of Salama Moussa , a well-known Egyptian writer, from a Coptic family that wrote about Egyptian Nationalism, and would later found a short-lived socialist party in Egypt.

[ 1 ] Guaranteed minimum income [ edit ] Main article: Guaranteed minimum income A guaranteed minimum income is a system [ 65 ] of social welfare provision that guarantees that all citizens or families have an income sufficient to live on, provided they meet certain conditions. Eligibility is typically determined by citizenship , a means test and either availability for the labour market or a willingness to perform community services . The primary goal of a guaranteed minimum income is to combat poverty . If citizenship is the only requirement, the system turns into a universal basic income . The first Muslim Caliph Abu Bakr introduced a guaranteed minimum standard of income, granting each man, woman and child ten dirhams annually—this was later increased to twenty dirhams.

[ 66 ] Some, but not all Islamic socialists advocate the renewal and expansion of this policy.

[ citation needed ] Islamic socialist ideologies [ edit ] Gaddafism [ edit ] Main articles: The Green Book (Gaddafi) and Third International Theory Gaddafi with Romanian communist leader Nicolae Ceaușescu in Bucharest, Romania, 1974.

Muammar Gaddafi outlined his version of Islamic socialism in The Green Book , which was published in three parts (1975, 1977, 1978).

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] The Green Book was heavily influenced by the pan-Arab, Egyptian leader Gamal Abdel Nasser and served as the basis for the Islamic Legion .

[ 69 ] The Green Book rejects modern liberal democracy based on electing representatives as well as capitalism and instead it proposes a type of direct democracy overseen by the General People's Committee which allows direct political participation for all adult citizens.

[ 70 ] The book states that " freedom of expression is the right of every natural person, even if a person chooses to behave irrationally, to express his or her insanity".

The Green Book states that freedom of speech is based upon public ownership of book publishers, newspapers, television and radio stations on the grounds that private ownership would be undemocratic.

A paragraph in the book about abolishing money is similar to a paragraph in Frederick Engels ' "Principles of Communism", [ 71 ] Gaddafi wrote: "The final step is when the new socialist society reaches the stage where profit and money disappear. "It is through transforming society into a fully productive society, and through reaching in production a level where the material needs of the members of society are satisfied. On that final stage, profit will automatically disappear and there will be no need for money".

[ 72 ] In practical terms, although Gaddafi opposed Islamist movements, he pursued socially conservative policies such as banning the sale and consumption of alcohol, closing nightclubs and suppressing Marxist activity in universities and colleges.

[ 23 ] According to Raymond D. Gastil, the RUF was influenced by Gaddafi's Islamic Socialist philosophy.

[ 73 ] Anatolian Socialism (Kuva-yi Seyyare) [ edit ] Main article: Kuva-yi Seyyare Anatolian Islamic Socialism was initially supported by Çerkes Ethem who was an Ottoman militia leader of Circassian origin who initially gained fame for fighting and gaining victories against the Allied powers invading Anatolia in the aftermath of World War I and afterwards during the Turkish War of Independence .

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] The Kuvâ-yi Seyyâre was established a force of Circassian and Abkhazian volunteers led by Çerkes Ethem. The group saw themselves as a police force to fight against those who cause disturbance to the greater good of Anatolia.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] In time, as Ethem's Islamic Socialist views grew more prevalent, it distanced itself from Kemal Atatürk 's Turkish National movement and eventually opposed it.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] Islamic Marxism [ edit ] Islamic Marxism attempts to apply Marxist economic, political, and social teachings within an Islamic framework. Traditional forms of Marxism are anti-religious and support atheism , which has led many Muslims to reject Marxism. However, the affinity between Marxist and Islamic ideals of social justice has led some Muslims to embrace their own forms of Marxism since the 1940s. Islamic Marxists believe that Islam meets the needs of society and can accommodate or guide the social changes Marxism hopes to accomplish. Islamic Marxists are also dismissive of traditional Marxist views on materialism and religion.

[ 81 ] As a term, it has been used to describe Ali Shariati (in Shariati and Marx: A Critique of an "Islamic" Critique of Marxism by Asef Bayat ). It is also sometimes used in discussions of the 1979 Iranian Revolution .

Wäisi movement [ edit ] Main article: Wäisi movement Founded by Bahawetdin Wäisev, the Wäisi movement was a religious, social, and political movement that took place in late-nineteenth and early-twentieth-century Tatarstan and other Tatar -populated parts of Russia. Wäisi doctrines promoted disobedience to civil law and authority in favor of following the Qur'an and Sharia. Supporters of the movement evaded military service and refused to pay imposition or carry a Russian passport. The movement also incorporated elements of class struggle and nationalism . The Wäisi movement united Tatar farmers, craftsmen and petty bourgeoisie and enjoyed widespread popularity across the region.

Despite going underground in the aftermath of Bahawetdin Wäisev's arrest in 1884, the movement continued to maintain a strong following. Bahawetdin Wäisev's son Ğaynan Wäisev led the movement after his death in 1893. An estimated 100 members were arrested and exiled in 1897 after encouraging people not to participate in the population census. The Wäisi movement increased in size after the first Russian revolution in 1905–1907 and by 1908 there were nearly 15,000 followers in the Kazan Governorate , Orenburg and other guberniyas in Central Asia . Wäisi followers supported the Soviet government in the aftermath of the October Revolution of 1917 and organized a regiment in the Red Army during the Russian Civil War . Members of the movement distanced themselves from the Russian Bolsheviks and founded the autonomous commune of Yaña Bolğar in Christopol during the 1920s, but were persecuted and disbanded during the Great Purge of the 1930s.

Ba'athism [ edit ] Main article: Ba'athism § Role of Islam Islamic economy [ edit ] Islamic economics [ edit ] Main article: Islamic economics Notable Muslim socialists [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Islamic socialism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Muslim Socialist Nationality Gamal Abdel Nasser Egyptian Ali Nasser Muhammad Yemeni Abdel Fattah Ismail Yemeni Ali Salem al-Beidh Yemeni Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto Pakistani Salemin Yemeni Siad Barre Somali Muammar Gaddafi Libyan Muhammad Ali Jinnah Pakistani Imran Khan Pakistani Houari Boumédiène Algerian Haidar Abu Bakr al-Attas Yemeni Malcolm X American Ethem Dipsheu Ottoman Bagautdin Vaisov Russian Abd al-Rahman al-Kawakibi (did not describe himself as a socialist, but has been interpreted as such by some authors) [ 82 ] Syrian Oemar Said Tjokroaminoto Indonesian Haji Misbach Indonesian Mullanur Waxitov Russian Mirsaid Sultan-Galiev Russian Tan Malaka Indonesian Agus Salim Indonesian Rafi Ahmed Kidwai Indian Mustafa al-Siba'i Syrian Mahmud Shaltut [ citation needed ] Egyptian Jalal Al-e-Ahmad Iranian Ali Shariati Iranian Abdul Hamid Khan Bhashani Bangladeshi Mohammad Natsir [ 83 ] Indonesian Sukarno Indonesian Kazem Sami Iranian Habibollah Peyman Iranian Yasser Arafat Palestinian Ibrahim Shoukry Egyptian Mohammad Najibullah Afghan Babrak Karmal Afghan Hasrat Mohani Indian Faiz Ahmed Faiz Pakistani Hanif Ramay Pakistani Raja Nasir Abbas Jafri Pakistani Ahmed ben Bella Algerian Islamic socialist or leftist organisations [ edit ] Sunni socialist groups [ edit ] Current [ edit ] Egyptian Arab Socialist Party Egyptian Islamic Labour Party National Liberation Front Social Justice Party Umma Party Young Egypt Party Islamic Socialist Party Anti-capitalist Muslims Yemeni Socialist Party Historical [ edit ] Homeland Party Sarekat Islam Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf Pakistan Muslim League (N) Muslim Socialist Committee of Kazan Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party Socialist Cooperation Party Kuva-yi Seyyare Green Army Organisation Young Bukharians Young Khivans Shia socialist groups [ edit ] Current [ edit ] Mojahedin of the Islamic Revolution of Iran Organization [ 84 ] Movement of Militant Muslims Majlis Wahdat-e-Muslimeen [ 85 ] Pakistan People's Party Historical [ edit ] Muslim Social Democratic Party Islamic Nations Party Liberation Movement of People of Iran Movement of God-Worshipping Socialists Office for the Cooperation of the People with the President Party of the Iranian People See also [ edit ] Islam portal Socialism portal Arab socialism Capitalism and Islam Christian communism Christian socialism Islamic economics Islamic feminism Islamo-leftism Jewish left Progressive Muslim vote Qarmatians Religious socialism Zanj Rebellion References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Reid, Donald M. (1974). "The Syrian Christians and Early Socialism in the Arab World".

International Journal of Middle East Studies .

5 (2): 177– 193.

doi : 10.1017/S0020743800027811 .

JSTOR 162588 .

S2CID 161942887 .

^ Conn, Harvie M. (1976).

"Islamic Socialism in Pakistan: An Overview" .

Islamic Studies .

15 (2): 111– 121.

ISSN 0578-8072 .

JSTOR 20846988 .

^ "Antikapitalist Müslümanlar: Hem muhafazakar hem de sol kesim kendisini sorgulamalı" [Anti-capitalist Muslims: Both conservatives and leftists should question themselves].

T24 (in Turkish) . Retrieved 22 December 2020 .

^ Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic World . New York: Oxford University Press . 1995. p.

19 .

ISBN 0-19-506613-8 .

OCLC 94030758 .

^ "Abu Dharr al-Ghifari" .

Oxford Islamic Studies Online . Archived from the original on 18 June 2013 . Retrieved 23 January 2010 .

^ And Once Again Abu Dharr . Retrieved 15 August 2011 .

^ Hanna, Sami A.; Gardner, George H. (1969).

Arab Socialism: A Documentary Survey . Leiden: E.J. Brill . pp.

273– 274 . Retrieved 23 January 2010 – via Google Books .

^ Hanna, Sami A. (1969).

"al-Takaful al-Ijtimai and Islamic Socialism" .

The Muslim World .

59 ( 3– 4): 275– 286.

doi : 10.1111/j.1478-1913.1969.tb02639.x . Archived from the original on 13 September 2010.

^ "Social Wage – Medialternatives" . Retrieved 4 May 2015 .

^ Hanna, Sami A.; Gardner, George H. (1969).

Arab Socialism: A Documentary Survey . Brill. p. 266.

^ al-Makhzūmī, Muḥammad Bāshā (1931).

Khāṭirāt Jamāl al-Dīn al-Ḥusaynī  al-Afghānī . Maktaba al-Shurūq al-Dawliyya. p. 160.

^ Hanna, Sami A.; Gardner, George H. (1969).

Arab Socialism: A Documentary Survey . Brill. p. 268.

^ al-Makhzūmī, Muḥammad Bāshā (1931).

Khāṭirāt Jamāl al-Dīn al-Ḥusaynī  al-Afghānī . Maktaba al-Shurūq al-Dawliyya. p. 160.

^ al-Makhzūmī, Muḥammad Bāshā (1931).

Khāṭirāt Jamāl al-Dīn al-Ḥusaynī  al-Afghānī . Maktaba al-Shurūq al-Dawliyya. pp.

165– 9.

^ Hanna, Sami A.; Gardner, George H. (1969).

Arab Socialism: A Documentary Survey . Brill. p. 267.

^ Hanna, Sami A.; Gardner, George H. (1969).

Arab Socialism: A Documentary Survey . Brill. p. 268.

^ "Arabia's Legendary Almsgiver Hatem al Tai - Destination KSA" . 4 May 2015 . Retrieved 30 July 2025 .

^ Hanna, Sami A.; Gardner, George H. (1969).

Arab Socialism: A Documentary Survey . Brill. p. 270.

^ Hanna, Sami A.; Gardner, George H. (1969).

Arab Socialism: A Documentary Survey . Brill. pp.

271– 272.

^ Hanna, Sami A.; Gardner, George H. (1969).

Arab Socialism: A Documentary Survey . Brill. p. 272.

^ Hanna, Sami A.; Gardner, George H. (1969).

Arab Socialism: A Documentary Survey . Brill. pp.

273– 274.

^ Ende, Werner (1977).

Arabische Nation und islamische Geschichte: die Umayyaden im Urteil Arabischer Autoren des 20. Jahrhunderts . Beiruter Texte und Studien (BTS). pp.

210– 221.

ISBN 978-3-89913-018-8 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Paracha, Nadeem F.

(21 February 2013).

"Islamic Socialism: A history from left to right" .

dawn.com . Retrieved 21 November 2020 .

^ Bennigsen, Alexandre A. (15 September 1980).

Muslim National Communism in the Soviet Union: A Revolutionary Strategy for the Colonial World .

University of Chicago Press . p. 76.

ISBN 978-0-226-04236-7 . Retrieved 10 July 2013 – via Google Books .

^ Abrahamian, Ervand (1982).

Iran between Two Revolutions . Princeton studies on the Near East. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press . p. 463.

ISBN 0691101345 – via Google Books .

^ Rāhnamā, ʻAlī (1998).

An Islamic Utopian: A Political Biography of Ali Shari'ati . London: I.B. Tauris . p. 26.

ISBN 9781860645525 – via Google Books .

^ Javadzadeh, Abdolrahim (2007).

Marxists into Muslims: the Iranian Irony (PDF) (PhD).

Florida International University . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 July 2011 . Retrieved 28 September 2022 .

^ Rāhnamā, ʻAlī (1998).

An Islamic Utopian: A Political Biography of Ali Shari'ati . London: I.B. Tauris . p. 25.

ISBN 9781860645525 – via Google Books .

^ Reisinezhad, Arash (2018).

The Shah of Iran, the Iraqi Kurds, and the Lebanese Shia .

Palgrave Macmillan . p. 8.

ASIN B07FBB6L8Y .

^ Maziar, Behrooz (2000).

Rebels With A Cause: The Failure of the Left in Iran .

I.B. Tauris . p. 72.

ISBN 1860646301 .

^ Zabir, Sepehr (2011).

Iran Since the Revolution (RLE Iran A) .

Routledge . p. 140.

ISBN 978-0-415-61069-8 .

^ Ispahani, Mirza Abol Hassan (1966).

Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah as I Knew Him . Forward Publications Trust. p. 236.

^ Kazimi, Muhammad Reza (2003).

Liaquat Ali Khan: His Life and Work .

Oxford University Press . pp.

326– 327.

^ Conn, Harvie M. (1976). "Islamic Socialism in Pakistan: An Overview".

Islamic Studies .

15 (2): 111– 121.

JSTOR 20846988 .

^ Shah, Aqil (2014).

The Army and Democracy Military Politics in Pakistan .

Harvard University Press . p. 327.

^ War in Afghanistan .

doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-20761-9 .

^ "Afghanistan's Two Party Communism" .

academic.oup.com . Retrieved 16 June 2024 .

^ "Yearbook of the United Nations 1970" . United Nations Office of Public Information. 31 December 1970 . Retrieved 31 October 2020 .

^ Müller, Miriam M. (2015).

A Spectre is haunting Arabia – How the Germans brought their Marxism to Yemen . Bielefeld: Transcript. pp. 257ff.

ISBN 978-3-8376-3225-5 .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2016 . Retrieved 30 May 2016 .

^ "32. South Yemen (1967–1990)" .

uca.edu . Retrieved 21 May 2022 .

^ Cohen, Saul Bernard (2003).

Geopolitics of the World System . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 197.

ISBN 978-0-8476-9907-0 .

^ "Jimmy Carter and the Second Yemenite War: A Smaller Shock of 1979?" .

www.wilsoncenter.org . Retrieved 21 May 2022 .

^ James, George (3 January 1995).

"Somalia's Overthrown Dictator, Mohammed Siad Barre, Is Dead" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 1 July 2017 .

^ Scott, James C. (1985).

Weapons of the weak: everyday forms of peasant resistance .

Yale University Press . p. 171.

ISBN 978-0-300-03641-1 .

^ Jawad, Rana (2009).

Social welfare and religion in the Middle East: a Lebanese perspective . The Policy Press. p. 60.

ISBN 978-1-86134-953-8 .

^ Abdallah al-Shiekh, Devin J. Stewart , "Zakāt", The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World .

^ Ariff, Mohamed (1991).

The Islamic voluntary sector in Southeast Asia: Islam and the economic development of Southeast Asia . Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. p. 38.

ISBN 981-3016-07-8 .

^ a b Salih, M.A. Mohamed (2004). De Waal, Alexander (ed.).

Islamism and its enemies in the Horn of Africa .

Indiana University Press . pp.

148– 149.

ISBN 978-0-253-34403-8 .

^ Jonsson, David J. (May 2006).

Islamic Economics and the Final Jihad . Xulon Press.

ISBN 9781597819800 . Retrieved 4 May 2015 .

^ Benda-Beckmann, Franz von (2007).

Social security between past and future: Ambonese networks of care and support . LIT Verlag, Münster. p. 167.

ISBN 978-3-8258-0718-4 .

Quote: Zakat literally means that which purifies. It is a form of sacrifice which purifies worldly goods from their worldly and sometimes impure means of acquisition, and which, according to God's wish, must be channelled towards the community.

^ T.W. Juynboll, Handleiding tot de Kennis van de Mohaamedaansche Wet volgens de Leer der Sjafiitische School, 3rd Edition, Brill Academic, pp 85–88 ^ a b Visser, Hans; Visser, Herschel (2009).

Islamic finance: principles and practice . Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 29.

ISBN 978-1-84542-525-8 .

^ Ariff, Mohamed (1991).

The Islamic voluntary sector in Southeast Asia: Islam and the economic development of Southeast Asia . Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. p. 39.

ISBN 981-3016-07-8 .

^ "Zakat (Alms)" .

^ "Islam Basics" . Archived from the original on 4 January 2005 . Retrieved 13 June 2014 .

^ a b c Maududi, Abul Ala (1955).

The Economic Problem of Man and Its Islamic Solution (PDF) . Lahore.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Muslims give more to charity than others, UK poll says" . nbcnews.com. 22 July 2013 . Retrieved 29 July 2013 .

^ "Analysis: A faith-based aid revolution in the Muslim world?" . irinnews.org. 1 June 2012 . Retrieved 2 December 2012 .

^ a b Crone, Patricia (2005), Medieval Islamic Political Thought , Edinburgh University Press , pp.

308– 9, ISBN 0-7486-2194-6 ^ a b c d e Hamid, Shadi (August 2003), "An Islamic Alternative? Equality, Redistributive Justice, and the Welfare State in the Caliphate of Umar", Renaissance: Monthly Islamic Journal , 13 (8) (see online ) ^ Crone, Patricia (2005), Medieval Islamic Political Thought , Edinburgh University Press , p. 307, ISBN 0-7486-2194-6 ^ Crone, Patricia (2005), Medieval Islamic Political Thought , Edinburgh University Press , p. 308, ISBN 0-7486-2194-6 ^ Crone, Patricia (2005), Medieval Islamic Political Thought , Edinburgh University Press , p. 309, ISBN 0-7486-2194-6 ^ Crone, Patricia (2005), Medieval Islamic Political Thought , Edinburgh University Press , pp. 309–310 and 312, ISBN 0-7486-2194-6 ^ History of Basic Income Archived 21 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine , Basic Income Earth Network (BIEN) , retrieved on 18 June 2009 ^ Grace Clark: Pakistan's Zakat and 'Ushr as a Welfare System ^ Esposito, John L. (7 October 1999).

The Islamic Threat: Myth Or Reality?

. Political Science.

Oxford University Press . pp.

77–78 .

^ Esposito, John L. (9 September 1993).

The Islamic Threat: Myth Or Reality?

. Political Science.

Oxford University Press . pp.

80–82 .

"Our socialism is both Arab".

^ "US Officials Regard Chad Conflict As Big Test Of Wills With Khadafy" .

Gainesville Sun . New York Times News Service. 19 August 1983.

^ Vandewalle, Dirk J. (2006).

A history of modern Libya . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 0-521-85048-7 . Retrieved 26 August 2011 .

revoutionary committees.

^ Engels, Friedrich (1847). "Section 18".

Principles of Communism – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Finally, when all capital, all production, all exchange have been brought together in the hands of the nation, private property will disappear of its own accord, money will become superfluous, and production will so expand and man so change that society will be able to slough off whatever of its old economic habits may remain.

^ al-Gaddafi, Muammar (1976).

The Green Book, The Solution of the Economic Problem: Socialism . Libya: People's Committee – via Internet Archive .

^ Gastil, Raymond D. (1 January 1997).

Freedom in the World: The Annual Survey of Political Rights & Civil Liberties 1997–1998 .

Transaction Publishers . p. 453.

ISBN 9781560004035 – via Google Books .

^ Çerkes Ethem [attributed] (2014).

Hatıralarım (Çerkes trajedisinin 150. yılında) [ My Memoirs ] (in Turkish). Istanbul: Bizim Kitaplar.

ISBN 9786055476465 .

^ "Çerkes Ethem Kendini Savunuyor: Vatan İçin İlk Ben Yola Çıktım" [Ethem the Circassian defends himself: I Took the Initiative for the Homeland].

Radikal (in Turkish). Istanbul. 9 November 2014.

^ Salihoğlu, M. Latif (21 September 2015).

"Çerkes Ethem'e Resmen İade-i İtibar" [Official Restoration of Honour for Ethem the Circassian].

Yeni Asya (in Turkish). Istanbul.

^ Uğurlu, Nurer (2007).

Çerkez Ethem Kuvvetleri Kuvayı Seyyare [ Circassian Ethem Forces Kuvayi Planet ] (in Turkish). Örgün Yayınları.

ISBN 9789757651574 .

^ a b Şener, Cemal (2007).

Çerkes Ethem Olayı [ Circassian Ethem Incident ] (in Turkish). Altın Kitaplar.

ISBN 9789752108356 .

^ Kurşun, Zekeriya.

"Çerkez Ethem" [Circassian Ethem].

TDV İslâm Ansiklopedisi (in Turkish) . Retrieved 15 July 2021 .

^ Uğurlu, Nurer (2007).

Kuvayı Seyyare [ Kuvayi Planet ] (in Turkish). Örgün Yayınevi. p. 357.

ISBN 9789757651574 .

^ "Marxism and Islam" . Archived from the original on 5 May 2015 . Retrieved 4 May 2015 .

^ Raz, Ronen (1996).

"Interpretations of Kawakibi's Thought, 1950-1980s" .

Middle Eastern Studies .

32 (1). Taylor & Francis, Ltd.: 179– 190.

doi : 10.1080/00263209608701097 .

ISSN 0026-3206 .

JSTOR 4283781 . Retrieved 1 June 2023 .

A third topic which was addressed in the literature about Kawakibi was socialism, in particular since the early 1960s when Arab socialism became a state-sponsored ideology in Egypt, Syria and Iraq. Most writers interpreted the social critique of Kawakibi and his calls for social justice as being socialist, with Abd al-Rahman Burj avoiding anachronism and noting that what Kawakibi had in mind was 'what we call today socialism'. Muhammad Sa'd al-'Uryan went further in his analysis to explain the differences between Arab socialism, presumably pioneered by Kawakibi, and Communism. This explanation, a common practice among Arab intellectuals at the time, focused on the attitude to religion as a core differentiating element of the two ideologies.

^ Kahin, George McT. (1993).

"In Memoriam: Mohammad Natsir (1907-1993)" .

Indonesia (56): 159– 165.

ISSN 0019-7289 .

^ Ashraf, Ahmad (5 April 2012) [15 December 2007].

"ISLAM IN IRAN xiii. ISLAMIC POLITICAL MOVEMENTS IN 20TH CENTURY IRAN" . In Yarshater, Ehsan (ed.).

Encyclopædia Iranica . Fasc. 2. Vol. XIV. New York City: Bibliotheca Persica Press. pp.

157– 172 . Retrieved 12 September 2016 .

^ The Islamic Politics For Future, The Ideology Agenda of Majlis Wahdat-e-Muslimeen (Pakistan) , (2016), p. 25 Esposito, John, ed. (1995).

"Socialism and Islam" .

Oxford Encyclopedia of the Modern Islamic World . Vol. 4.

Oxford University Press . pp.

81– 86.

ISBN 0-19-506613-8 .

OCLC 94030758 .

Maxime Rodinson , Marxism and the Muslim World , Zed Press, 1979, 229 pages, ISBN 978-0-905762-21-0 (transl. from the French reference book Maxime Rodinson, Marxisme et monde musulman, Paris, Éditions du Seuil, 1972, 698 pages).

v t e Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Gardens Geometric pattern Literature Music Poetry Pottery Influences on Western art Economics History Agency Banking Capitalism Poverty Socialism Trust Usury Welfare History Timeline Historiography Early social change Early conquests Golden Age Contributions to Medieval Europe Reception in early modern Europe Law and politics Democracy consensus consultation Feminism Jurisprudence use of analogy decision-making schools Peace Quietism Secularism Early social change State Philosophy Early Contemporary Theology dialectic Ethics Logic Astrology Early sociology solidarity Medieval science Timeline Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy cosmology Geography and cartography Inventions Mathematics Medicine ophthalmology Physics Psychology Other fields Arab Agricultural Revolution Education Ijazah elementary school Sufi studies mysticism cosmology philosophy v t e Islamism Outline Islamism Qutbism Khomeinism Salafism Salafi jihadism Shia Islamism Concepts Emirate Islamic governance Guardianship of the Islamic Jurists Islamic democracy Islamic feminism Islamic socialism Islamic state Islamic republic Islamistan Islamization of knowledge Pan-Islamism Post-Islamism Sharia Shura Turkish model Two-nation theory Ummah Movements Socio-political Deobandi Hizb ut-Tahrir in Britain in Central Asia Islamic Defenders Front Jamaat-e-Islami Millî Görüş Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt in Syria Ansar–Khatmiyya rivalry Ansar Khatmiyya Political parties Freedom and Justice Party Green Algeria Alliance Ennahda Felicity Party Free Cause Party Hadas Hezbollah Islamic Salvation Front Bangladesh Jamaat-e-Islami Jamaat-e-Islami Pakistan Jamiat-e Islami Justice and Construction Party Justice and Development Party (Morocco) Justice and Development Party (Turkey) National Congress National Iraqi Alliance New Welfare Party Malaysian Islamic Party Prosperous Justice Party Al Wefaq Welfare Party Fatah Alliance State of Law Coalition Islamic Action Front United Arab List Related Ansar Allah Taliban Islamic modernism Political leaders Muhammad Abduh Jamāl al-Dīn al-Afghānī Qazi Hussain Ahmad Hibatullah Akhundzada Muhammad Asad Hassan al-Banna Recep Tayyip Erdoğan Necmettin Erbakan Muammar Gaddafi Rached Ghannouchi Safwat Hegazi Muhammad Iqbal Alija Izetbegović Ali Khamenei Ruhollah Khomeini Abul A'la Maududi Abul Hasan Ali Hasani Nadwi Taqi al-Din al-Nabhani Mullah Omar Yusuf al-Qaradawi Sayyid Qutb Tariq Ramadan Ata Abu Rashta Rashid Rida Navvab Safavi Ali Shariati Haji Shariatullah Hassan al-Turabi Malcolm X Ahmed Yassin Zia-ul-Haq Rizieq Shihab Salafi movement Movements Scholastic Ahl-i Hadith Madkhalism Sahwa movement Wahhabism Political Al Asalah Authenticity Party Al-Islah Al-Nour Party Islamist Bloc People Party Young Kashgar Party Major figures Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Al-Albani Ibn Baz Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i Safar al-Hawali Rabee al-Madkhali Muhammad Al-Munajjid Zakir Naik Salman al-Ouda Ali al-Tamimi Al-Uthaymin Related International propagation of Salafism Islamic religious police Petro-Islam Salafi–Sufi relations Militant Islamism / Jihadism Ideology Qutbism Salafi jihadism Movements Militant Islamism based in MENA region Egyptian Islamic Jihad Fatah al-Islam Hamas Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant South Asia Taliban Lashkar-e-Taiba Southeast Asia Abu Sayyaf Sub-Saharan Africa Boko Haram al-Shabaab al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula in Iraq in North Africa Major figures Hibatullah Akhundzada Anwar al-Awlaki Abdullah Yusuf Azzam Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi Osama bin Laden Akhtar Mansour Mullah Omar Juhayman al-Otaybi Omar Abdel-Rahman Ayman al-Zawahiri Related Islam and violence Islamic extremism Islamic terrorism Jihad Mujahideen Slavery Talibanization Other topics Texts Reconstruction (Iqbal, 1930s) Forty Hadith (Khomeini, 1940) Principles (Asad, 1961) Milestones (Qutb, 1964) Islamic Government (Khomeini, 1970) Islamic Declaration (Izetbegović, 1969-1970) The Green Book (Gaddafi, 1975) Historical events Zia-ul-Haq's Islamization Iranian revolution Grand Mosque seizure Soviet invasion of Afghanistan Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam Popular Arab and Islamic Congress Algerian Civil War Faith Campaign September 11 attacks War on terror Arab Spring Arab Winter Influences Anti-imperialism Anti-Zionism Contemporary Islamic philosophy Islamic response to modernity Islamic revival by region Balkans Gaza Strip Sudan United Kingdom Related topics Criticism Political aspects of Islam Political Islam Islam in South Asia North Africa v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐qp56m
Cached time: 20250816162702
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.253 seconds
Real time usage: 1.463 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14319/1000000
Revision size: 65937/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 410130/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13947/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 338965/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.656/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9329765/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1050.140      1 -total
 48.01%  504.183      1 Template:Reflist
 22.31%  234.258     47 Template:Cite_book
  9.58%  100.651      1 Template:Islamism_sidebar
  8.32%   87.338      6 Template:Cite_journal
  6.85%   71.909     36 Template:Flagicon
  6.78%   71.249     10 Template:Navbox
  5.36%   56.296     14 Template:Cite_web
  4.92%   51.697      1 Template:Short_description
  3.07%   32.214      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:40478003:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816162702 and revision id 1306151489. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Islamic_socialism&oldid=1306151489 " Categories : Islamic socialism Islam and politics Islamic economics Islamism Types of socialism Religious socialism Hidden categories: CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) CS1 maint: location missing publisher Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2022 Use Oxford spelling from June 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Articles needing additional references from February 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 06:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Islamic socialism 30 languages Add topic

