Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Bibliography 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Göttingen State and University Library 11 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Cymraeg Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 51°32′23″N 9°56′11″E ﻿ / ﻿ 51.53972°N 9.93639°E ﻿ / 51.53972; 9.93639 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia University library Göttingen State and University Library Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen Central Library, Platz der Göttinger Sieben, Göttingen 51°32′23″N 9°56′11″E ﻿ / ﻿ 51.53972°N 9.93639°E ﻿ / 51.53972; 9.93639 Location Göttingen , Lower Saxony, Germany, Germany Type Academic library , regional library Collection Items collected 8 million Other information Website sub.uni-goettingen.de Extension of the library (1878 to 1882), now known as the Prinzenstraßen Building The Göttingen State and University Library (German: Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen or SUB Göttingen ) is the library for Göttingen University as well as for the Göttingen Academy of Sciences and is the state library for the German State of Lower Saxony . One of the largest German academic libraries, it has numerous national as well as international projects in librarianship and in the provision of research infrastructure services. In the year 2002, the SUB Göttingen won the German Library of the Year ( Bibliothek des Jahres ) award.

[ 1 ] The directors are Thomas Kaufmann, Bela Gipp (Scientific Director) and Kathrin Brannemann (Administrative Director).

[ 2 ] The library works under a dispersed system, with six branch libraries located in various academic departments, supplementing the central collection housed in the Central Library (construction completed in 1992) on the main campus and the Historical Library Building in downtown. The Historical Building holds manuscripts, rare books, maps, and a significant history-of-science collection and works in its special collections. In addition, its original core, the SS. Peter and Paul's Church, Göttingen , has been made into an exhibition and lecture center through adaptive reuse and reconstruction.

As of December 2016, the SUB Göttingen holds some 8 million media units, among which are 5.9 million volumes, 1.6 million microforms, 50,000 licensed electronic journals as well as 126,000 further digital media, 327,000 maps and more than 14,000 manuscripts, 3,100 incunabula and 400 Nachlässe (literary remains).

[ 3 ] [ failed verification ] [ 4 ] It possesses a Gutenberg Bible (one of only four perfect vellum copies known to exist).

The SUB Göttingen has maintained the Göttingen Center for Retrospective Digitization (GDZ) since 1997. It also operates the Göttingen University Press, which has been expanding since its foundation in 2003 and is committed to the Open access principle. Since its establishment in 2004, the library's Department for Research and Development has been instrumental in the development of new services such as the establishment of virtual research environments and infrastructures for scientific data and services.

Within the framework of the Collection of German Prints , the SUB Göttingen collects publications of the 18th century. Within the Specialised Information Services Programme funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG), it operates the specialised information services Mathematics (since 2015, with the German National Library of Science and Technology (TIB Hannover)), Anglo-American Culture (since 2016, with the Library of the J. F. Kennedy Institute of the Free University of Berlin), Geosciences of the Solid Earth (since 2016, with the German Research Centre for Geosciences (GFZ Potsdam)) and Finno-Ugric / Uralic Languages, Literature and Culture (since 2017). In cooperation with the University Library "Georgius Agricola" of the Technische Universität Bergakademie Freiberg (UBF), the SUB Göttingen maintains a large online collection of geoscience-related materials, the GEO-Library Experts Online, or GEO-LEO.

The SUB Göttingen coordinates the establishment of a nationwide competence center for the licensing of electronic resources (together with the Berlin State Library and the Head Office of the Common Library Network (GBV). Since 2014, it has operated the Göttingen eResearch Alliance (together with the University Computing Centre (GWDG). The library coordinates the DARIAH-DE project for the development of research infrastructures in Germany, and supports the consortial establishment of open access research infrastructures (OpenAIRE 2020, COAR) across Europe and worldwide.

History [ edit ] The Library was founded in 1734, three years before the university. Its first director was Johann Matthias Gesner , who remained in the position until his death in 1763. It soon was considered one of the leading research libraries in Germany, pioneering cataloging systems (then in large bound volumes).

Christian Gottlob Heyne 's directorship (1763–1812) laid the basis for the library's status. However, a half century of reduced financing then weakened the library's status. Only in 1866, with official Prussian sponsorship, did the library again begin to flourish. Both Heinrich Heine and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe used and commented on the library in their time.

Library hall (~1820) The library (~1800) Heyne Hall (2022) Bookshelves in the Heyne Hall (2022) In 1992, a new central library building located just outside the city center (Altstadt) was opened.

[ citation needed ] The previous main building, now the Historical Building, houses manuscripts, rare books and some other special collections.

[ citation needed ] Meanwhile, department-specific collections are still held in facilities at various academic departments.

Bibliography [ edit ] Fast, Jan-Jasper, Tobias Möller: The Future with Tradition: The Göttingen State and University Library . [Transl. Kim Dammers, Isabel D. Holowaty] Göttingen: Georg-August-Univ., 2003.

Elmar Mittler: "Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen," in Bernd Hagenau (ed.): Regionalbibliotheken in Deutschland.

Frankfurt am Main: Klostermann, 2000. pp. 187–195.

Fabian, Bernhard (ed.): Handbuch der historischen Buchbestände in Deutschland . Vol. 2, 1. Hildesheim: Olms-Weidmann, 1998. pp. 140–266.

Christiane Kind-Doerne: Die Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen. Ihre Bestände und Einrichtungen in Geschichte und Gegenwart . Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1986.

References [ edit ] ^ "Bibliothek des Jahres" .

Deutsche Bibliotheksverband (in German) . Retrieved 10 February 2023 .

^ Directors SUB Göttingen ^ "Bibliotheksstatistik — Hochschulbibliothekszentrum NRW" .

www.hbz-nrw.de (in German) . Retrieved 10 February 2023 .

^ "Manuscripts and Scholarly Collections" .

SUB Göttingen . Retrieved 27 June 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen .

Official website The Göttingen Gutenberg Bible in the Internet Göttingen Center for Retrospective Digitization Göttingen University Press Collection of German Prints Mathematics Information Service Library of Anglo-American Culture and History Fachinformationsdienst Geowissenschaften der festen Erde Kompetenzzentrum für die Lizenzierung elektronischer Ressourcen Göttingen eResearch Alliance DARIAH-DE OpenAIRE COAR v t e University of Göttingen Leadership President Metin Tolan Faculties Faculty of Agricultural Sciences Faculty of Biology and Psychology Faculty of Chemistry Faculty of Forest Sciences and Forest Ecology Faculty of Geoscience and Geography Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science Faculty of Physics Faculty of Law Faculty of Social Sciences Faculty of Economic Sciences Faculty of Humanities Faculty of Theology Medical Center Recognized institutes and centers German Aerospace Center (DLR) German Primate Center Center for European Governance and Economic Development Research Göttingen Observatory Center for Retrospective Digitization Johann Sebastian Bach Institute Partner institutions Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht Dieterich Publishing House Max Planck Institute for the Study of Religious and Ethnic Diversity Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Max Planck Institute for Experimental Medicine Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research Holdings and collections Göttingen State and University Library Paulinerkirche Göttingen manuscript Sammlung für Völkerkunde Forestry Botanical Garden and Arboretum New Botanic Garden of Göttingen University Old Botanical Garden of Göttingen University Theater im OP Major academic projects AnimalBase Germania Sacra New Bach Edition Deutsches Wörterbuch Encyclopedia of Fairy Tales Affiliated movements and developments Göttingen school of history History of religions school Ritschlianism Göttingen Manifesto Göttingen minipig Goettingen Journal of International Law Göttingen Register of Electronic Texts in Indian Languages Zentralblatt MATH The Göttingen Circle Kaiser Wilhelm Society Affiliated people List of University of Göttingen people University of Göttingen alumni University of Göttingen faculty Göttingen Seven Göttingen Eighteen Akademische Orchestervereinigung Göttingen Student associations Burschenschaft Hannovera Corps Hannovera Göttingen Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Australia Czech Republic 2 Spain Norway Latvia Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People ISIL Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Göttingen_State_and_University_Library&oldid=1297209155 " Categories : Göttingen Academic libraries in Germany University of Göttingen 1734 establishments in Europe Deposit libraries Libraries established in 1734 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2023 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from June 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Commons link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 19:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Göttingen State and University Library 11 languages Add topic

