Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biblical usage 2 Deontological ethics 3 Personal knowledge 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Maxim (philosophy) 24 languages Brezhoneg Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Ido עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rule or guideline for action A maxim is a moral rule or principle which can be considered dependent on one's philosophy . A maxim is often pedagogical and motivates specific actions.

Simon Blackburn , in the Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy defines it generally as: "any simple and memorable rule or guide for living ... associated with a simplistic 'folksy' or ' copy-book ' approach to morality", providing as examples: "neither a borrower nor a lender be"; Tennyson's "little hoard of maxims preaching down a daughter's heart", from his 1835 poem, Locksley Hall .

Blackburn also notes that in Immanuel Kant 's usage, "each action proceeds according to a maxim or subjective principle in accordance with which it is performed, and it is the maxim that determines the moral worth of any action[.] The first form of the categorical imperative asserts that one can tell whether an action is right by seeing whether its maxim can consistently be willed to be universal law." [ 1 ] Biblical usage [ edit ] The apochyphal Book of Sirach refers to the "maxims of the wise" as sayings to be treasured, because "from them you will learn discipline and how to serve princes".

[ 2 ] Deontological ethics [ edit ] In deontological ethics , mainly in Kantian ethics , maxims are understood as subjective principles of action. A maxim is thought to be part of an agent's thought process for every rational action, indicating in its standard form: (1) the action, or type of action; (2) the conditions under which it is to be done; and (3) the end or purpose to be achieved by the action, or the motive. The maxim of an action is often referred to as the agent's intention. In Kantian ethics, the categorical imperative provides a test on maxims for determining whether the actions they refer to are right, wrong, or permissible.

The categorical imperative is stated canonically as: "Act only according to that maxim whereby you can, at the same time, will that it should become a universal law." [ 3 ] In his Critique of Practical Reason , Immanuel Kant provided the following example of a maxim and of how to apply the test of the categorical imperative: I have, for example, made it my maxim to increase my wealth by any safe means. Now I have a deposit in my hands, the owner of which has died and left no record of it. . . . I therefore apply the maxim to the present case and ask whether it could indeed take the form of a law, and consequently whether I could through my maxim at the same time give such a law as this: that everyone may deny a deposit which no one can prove has been made. I at once become aware that such a principle, as a law, would annihilate itself since it would bring it about that there would be no deposits at all.

[ 4 ] Also, an action is said to have "moral worth" if the maxim upon which the agent acts cites the purpose of conforming to a moral requirement. That is, a person's action has moral worth when he does his duty purely for the sake of duty, or does the right thing for the right reason. Kant himself believed that it is impossible to know whether anyone's action has ever had moral worth. It might appear to someone that he has acted entirely "from duty", but this could always be an illusion of self-interest: of wanting to see oneself in the best, most noble light. This indicates that agents are not always the best judges of their own maxims or motives.

Personal knowledge [ edit ] Michael Polanyi , in his account of tacit knowledge , stresses the importance of the maxim in focusing both explicit and implicit modes of understanding. "Maxims are rules, the correct application of which is part of the art they govern... Maxims can only function within a framework of personal (i.e., experiential) knowledge".

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Aphorism Brocard Ethics Legal maxim Morality Paremiology Principle References [ edit ] ^ Blackburn, S. W., Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy , Maxim (Oxford University Press, 2008) p. 226 ^ Sirach 8:8 : New Revised Standard Version ; some other translations refer to "proverbs" in place of "maxims" ^ Kant, Immanuel (1993).

Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals 3rd ed . Translated by James W. Ellington. Hackett. pp.

30 .

ISBN 0-87220-166-X .

^ Kant, Immanuel (1997).

Critique of Practical Reason . Translated by Mary Gregor. Cambridge University Press. pp. 25/5:27.

ISBN 0-521-59051-5 .

^ Quoted in Guy Claxton, Live and learn , (1992) p. 116 External links [ edit ] Locksley Hall - Alfred Lord Tennyson Online works of Immanuel Kant at Gutenberg Maxims of Action Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maxim_(philosophy)&oldid=1289501562 " Categories : Ethical principles Kantianism Statements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 May 2025, at 01:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Maxim (philosophy) 24 languages Add topic

