Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Common causes of occupational fatality Toggle Common causes of occupational fatality subsection 1.1 Worldwide 1.2 United States 2 Incidence Toggle Incidence subsection 2.1 International differences 2.2 Gender differences 3 Diseases & illnesses 4 Prevention 5 Research, regulation, reporting and recommendations Toggle Research, regulation, reporting and recommendations subsection 5.1 United States 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Occupational fatality 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Death while performing a task An occupational fatality is a death that occurs while a person is at work or performing work related tasks. Occupational fatalities are also commonly called "occupational deaths" or "work-related deaths/fatalities" and can occur in any industry or occupation .

Common causes of occupational fatality [ edit ] Worldwide [ edit ] Among the most prevalent occupational risk factors, the highest attributable deaths in 2016 were long working hours (>50 hours per week) with over 745,000 deaths. In second place was occupational exposure to particulate matter, gases and fumes at over 450,000 deaths, followed by occupational injuries at over 363,000 deaths. In fourth place was occupational exposure to asbestos at over 209,000 deaths and in fifth place occupational exposure to silica at over 42,000 deaths [ 1 ] Common causes of occupational fatalities include falls, machine-related incidents, motor vehicle accidents, exposure to harmful substances or environment, homicides , suicides , fires, and explosions. In 2021, 3.6 of every 100,000 full-time workers experienced a fatal workplace injury.

[ 2 ] Oftentimes, occupational fatalities can be prevented.

United States [ edit ] In the United States in 2021, there were 5,190 workplace fatalities across all sectors.  Of these 5,190 fatalities 42% of occupational fatalities occurred as a result of roadway incidents, 16% occurred following a slip, trip, or fall in the workplace, 9% were the result of a homicide.

[ 3 ] Logging workers have the highest fatality rate with 82.2 of every 100,000 full-time workers experiencing a fatal workplace injury, followed by fishing and hunting workers with 75.2 of every 100,000 full-time workers experiencing a fatal workplace injury.

[ 2 ] Fatal work injury rates per 100,000 full-time equivalent workers by selected occupations from 2020 to 2021.

[ 2 ] Fatal work injuries by major event or exposure from 2017 to 2021.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Incidence [ edit ] Data on the number of occupational fatalities per 100,000 workers is available from the International Labor Organization for various countries; the ILO says for most countries the rate is less than ten per 100,000 each year. However, a 1999 paper says the ILO figures are underestimates—for example the agricultural sector, which has a higher than average fatality rate, is not reported by many countries.  The paper estimates that the number of fatal occupational accidents in the world in 1994 was 335,000, or 14 per 100,000 workers.  The paper also estimated there were 158,000 fatalities commuting  between work and home; and 325,000 fatal occupational diseases; for a total of 818,000 fatalities.

[ 5 ] International differences [ edit ] According to statistics from the International Labour Organization occupational fatalities per 100,000 workers ranges from 0.1 to 25, with a worldwide average of 4.0 per every 100,000 workers.  Panama and El Salvador have the lowest occupational fatality rates at 0.2 and 0.1 per 100,000 respectively.  The country of the highest occupational fatality rate is Cuba at 25 per every 100,000 workers.  Followed by Burudi and Egypt at 13.8 and 10.7 per 100,000 respectively.

[ 6 ] The World Health Organization and International Labour Organization estimate that over 1.9 million people died as a result of work-related injures and diseases in 2016.  81% of these deaths are contributed to a variety of non-communicable diseases, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, stroke, and ischemic heart disease accounting for 1.2 million deaths.  Over the course of 16 years (2000–2016) international workplace deaths fell by 14%.  During the same period heart disease related deaths associated with long working hours increased by 41%.

[ 7 ] Gender differences [ edit ] According to Bureau of Labor Statistics men made up 91.4 percent of all workplace fatalities and 85.5 percent of intentional injuries by a person in 2021.

[ 8 ] In European Union men made up 92.5 percent of all workplace fatalities in 2020 and 66.5 percent of all injuries that required 4 or more days of absence.

[ 9 ] Occupational Fatality per 100'000 workers by sex -- Americas, Africa, Arab States, Asia and the Pacific [ 10 ] Occupational Fatality per 100'000 workers by sex -- Europe and Central Asia [ 10 ] Diseases & illnesses [ edit ] According to the WHO/ILO Joint Estimates of the Work-related Burden of Disease and Injury, 2000-2016: Global Monitoring Report , the majority of work-related deaths were due to respiratory and cardiovascular disease. We may not realize it but there are many workplaces in the world that are full of harmful products for people to inhale them. When this occurs, it leads to various diseases and illnesses that are fatal to humans.

According to the World Health Organization, they found that diseases that are non-communicable accounted for the majority of occupational fatalities. The actual percentage is said to be 81 percent. Some of the largest causes of death are things like chronic obstructive pulmonary disease that accounted for 450,00 deaths. Strokes accounted for 400,000 deaths and ischaemic heart disease was 350,000 deaths. The remaining 19 percent of deaths were related to occupational injuries that tallied to 360,000 deaths. The WHO did many studies and realized that there are many factors and reasons for these illnesses to be so prevalent. Most of them strictly come from being exposed in the workplace to things such as carcinogens, air pollution, asthmagens, and many more. Many of these deaths come from being exposed for long periods of time due to long work days.

[ 7 ] Prevention [ edit ] Occupational fatalities are preventable. Prevention of occupational fatalities depends on the understanding that worker safety is not only the responsibility of the worker, but is the primary responsibility of the employer.  Employers must train all employees in the appropriate safety procedures and maintain a safe working environment so that fatalities are less likely to occur.

[ 11 ] An occupational fatality is not just the fault of the deceased worker; instead, it is the combination of unsafe work environments, insufficient safety training, and negligible employee supervision that contribute fatal incidents. As a result, it is imperative that an employer address all the potential [risk] factors at the workplace and educate all employees in safe work practices and risk awareness.

In order to perform adequate risk assessment of injuries that occur in the workplace, health and safety professionals use resources such as the Haddon Matrix .  This model assesses the risks leading up to, during, and after a death in order to prevent future incidents of a similar nature. Employers and employees can learn how to identify risk factors in their work environment in order to avoid incidents that may result in death.

Research, regulation, reporting and recommendations [ edit ] United States [ edit ] The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) requires that all employers maintain a record of occupational injuries, illnesses and fatalities.  Occupational fatalities must be reported to OSHA within eight hours of the incident.  Failure to do so can result in legal action against the employer including citations and fines.

[ 12 ] Employers are responsible for staying current on OSHA standards and enforcing them in their own workplace. State OSHA organizations exist in twenty-eight states and are required to have the same or more rigorous standards than the federal OSHA standards.  In these states, employers must abide by their state's regulations. It is not the responsibility of the employee to stay current on the OSHA standards.

In addition to OSHA, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) analyzes workplace injury and illness data from all fifty states as well as provides support for state-based projects in occupational health and safety.  Under NIOSH, the Fatality Assessment and Control Evaluation (FACE) Program tracks and investigates occupational fatalities in order to provide recommendations for prevention.  A voluntary program for individual states created in 1989, FACE is active in California , Iowa , Kentucky , Massachusetts , Michigan , New Jersey , New York , Oregon , and Washington . The primary responsibilities of the state FACE programs are to track occupational fatalities in their state, investigate select fatalities, and provide recommendations for prevention.

[ 13 ] As part of the prevention efforts, FACE programs also produce extensive prevention education materials that are disseminated to employees, employers, unions , and state organizations.

The Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries (CFOI), within the U.S.

Department of Labor , compiles national fatality statistics and is the key, comprehensive system in the surveillance of occupational fatalities in the United States.

Many other non-governmental organizations also work to prevent occupational fatalities.

Trade associations and unions play an active role in protecting workers and disseminating prevention information.  The National Safety Council also works to prevent occupational fatalities as well as provide resources to employers and employees.

References [ edit ] ^ "WHO/ILO Joint Estimates of the Work-related Burden of Disease and Injury, 2000–2016" (PDF) .

^ a b c d "National Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries in 2021" (PDF) .

Bureau of Labor Statistics . 16 December 2022 . Retrieved 28 March 2023 .

^ "IIF Latest Numbers : U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics" .

www.bls.gov . Retrieved 2023-03-28 .

^ "Statistics on safety and health at work" .

ILOSTAT . Retrieved 18 November 2024 .

^ Jukka Takala, 1999. "Global Estimates of Fatal Occupational Accidents", Epidemiology , Vol. 10 No. 5 (September) ^ "Statistics on safety and health at work" .

ILOSTAT . Retrieved 2023-04-04 .

^ a b "WHO/ILO: Almost 2 million people die from work-related causes each year" .

www.who.int . Retrieved 2023-04-05 .

^ Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries Summary, 2021 ^ Accidents at work by sex, age, severity, NACE Rev. 2 activity and workstation ^ a b "COVID-19 and the new meaning of safety and health at work" .

ILOSTAT . 2020-04-30. Archived from the original on 2023-04-05 . Retrieved 2023-04-05 .

^ "OSH Act 1970 - Section 5 Duties" .

United States Department of Labor . Retrieved March 28, 2023 – via OSHA.

^ "OSH Act of 1970 - Section 17 Penalties" .

United States Department of Labor . Retrieved March 28, 2023 – via OSHA.

^ "CDC - Fatality Assessment and Control Evaluation(FACE)Program: FACE Mission, History, and Objectives - NIOSH Workplace Safety and Health Topic" .

www.cdc.gov . 2019-12-03 . Retrieved 2020-02-03 .

External links [ edit ] World Health Organization Occupational Health Programmes International Labour Organization British Health and Safety Executive [ permanent dead link ] Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety Australian Safety and Compensation Council USA Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) USA National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) USA Fatality Assessment and Control Evaluation (FACE) Program Washington State Fatality Assessment and Control Evaluation (WA FACE) Program [ permanent dead link ] USA Census of Fatal Occupational Injury (CFOI) National Safety Council AFL-CIO California Fatality Assessment and Control Evaluation Program (CA FACE) [ permanent dead link ] v t e Employment Classifications Academic tenure Casual Contingent work Full-time job Gig worker Job sharing Part-time job Self-employment Side job Skilled worker Journeyman Technician Tradesperson Independent contractor Labour hire Temporary work Laborer Wage labour Hiring Application Background check Business networking Cover letter Curriculum vitae Drug testing Employment contract Employment counsellor Executive search list Induction programme Job fair Job fraud Job hunting Job interview Letter of recommendation Onboarding Overqualification Person–environment fit Personality–job fit theory Personality hire Probation Realistic job preview Recruitment Résumé Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates Underemployment Work-at-home scheme Roles Cooperative Employee Employer Internship Job Labour hire Permanent employment Supervisor Volunteering Working class Blue-collar Green-collar Grey-collar Pink-collar Precariat White-collar Red-collar New-collar No-collar Orange-collar Scarlet-collar Black-collar Gold-collar Career and training Apprenticeship Artisan Master craftsman Avocation Career assessment Career counseling Career development Coaching Creative class Education Continuing education E-learning Employability Further education Graduate school Induction training Knowledge worker Licensure Lifelong learning Overspecialization Practice-based professional learning Professional association Professional certification Professional development Professional school Reflective practice Retraining Vocational education Vocational school Vocational university Mentorship Occupational Outlook Handbook Practice firm Profession Operator Professional Tradesman Vocation Attendance Break Break room Career break Furlough Gap year Leave of absence Long service leave No call, no show Sabbatical Sick leave Stress leave Time clock Schedules 35-hour workweek Four-day week Eight-hour day 996 working hour system Flextime On-call Overtime Remote work Six-hour day Shift work Working time Workweek and weekend Wages and salaries Frisch elasticity of labor supply Global labor arbitrage Labour economics Labor share Labour supply Living wage Maximum wage National average salary World Europe Minimum wage Canada Hong Kong Europe United States Price elasticity of demand Progressive wage Singapore Overtime rate Paid time off Performance-related pay Remuneration Salary cap Benefits Annual leave Casual Friday Child care Disability insurance Health insurance Life insurance Marriage leave Parental leave Pension By country Sick leave United States Take-home vehicle Taxes Payroll tax Tax bracket Income tax Negative Disposable income Salary packaging Unreported employment Safety and health Crunch Epilepsy and employment Human factors and ergonomics Karoshi List of countries by rate of fatal workplace accidents Occupational burnout Occupational disease Occupational exposure limit Occupational health psychology Occupational injury Occupational noise Occupational stress Personal protective equipment Repetitive strain injury Right to sit United States Sick building syndrome Work accident Occupational fatality Workers' compensation Workers' right to access the toilet Workplace health promotion Workplace phobia Workplace wellness Equal opportunity Affirmative action Discrimination Equal pay for equal work Gender pay gap Glass ceiling Infractions Corporate collapses and scandals Accounting scandals Control fraud Corporate behaviour Corporate crime Exploitation of labour Dress code Employee handbook Employee monitoring Evaluation Labour law Sexual harassment Sleeping while on duty Wage theft Whistleblower Workplace bullying Workplace harassment Workplace incivility Willingness Boreout Careerism Civil conscription Conscription Critique of work Dead-end job Job satisfaction McJob Organizational commitment Refusal of work Slavery Bonded labour Human trafficking Labour camp Penal labour Peonage Truck wages Unfree labour Wage slavery Work ethic Work–life interface Downshifting Slow living Workaholic Termination At-will employment Dismissal Banishment room Constructive dismissal Wrongful dismissal Employee offboarding Exit interview Layoff Notice period Pink slip Resignation Letter of resignation Restructuring Retirement Mandatory retirement Microretirement Retirement planning Retirement spend-down Severance package Golden handshake Golden parachute Turnover Unemployment Barriers to entry Discouraged worker Economic depression Great Depression Long Depression Frictional unemployment Full employment Graduate unemployment Involuntary unemployment Jobless recovery Phillips curve Recession Great Recession Job losses caused by the Great Recession Lists of recessions Recession-proof job Reserve army of labour Structural unemployment Technological unemployment Types of unemployment Unemployment benefits Unemployment Convention, 1919 Unemployment extension List of countries by unemployment rate Employment-to-population ratio List Wage curve Youth unemployment Public programs Workfare Unemployment insurance Make-work job Job creation program Job creation index Job guarantee Employer of last resort Guaranteed minimum income Right to work Historical: U.S.A.: Civil Works Administration Works Progress Administration Comprehensive Employment and Training Act See also Bullshit job Busy work Credentialism and educational inflation Emotional labor Evil corporation Going postal Kiss up kick down Labor rights Make-work job Narcissism in the workplace Post-work society Presenteeism Psychopathy in the workplace Sunday scaries Slow movement (culture) Toxic leader Toxic workplace Wage compression Working poor Workhouse See also templates Aspects of corporations Aspects of jobs Aspects of occupations Aspects of organizations Aspects of workplaces Corporate titles Critique of work Organized labor v t e Aspects of occupations Apartheid Asthma Burnout Closure Crime Disease Fatality Hygiene Inequality Injury Injustice Medicine Prestige Psychology Psychosis Rehabilitation Repetitive strain injury Safety and health Science Stress Therapist Therapy Therapy in the United Kingdom See also templates Aspects of corporations Aspects of jobs Aspects of organizations Aspects of workplaces Occupational safety and health Employment Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Occupational_fatality&oldid=1301481894 " Categories : Occupational safety and health National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health Construction safety Line of duty deaths Occupational hazards Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 02:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Occupational fatality 1 language Add topic

