Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Australian garden design 2 Common plants Toggle Common plants subsection 2.1 Trees 2.2 Plants 3 Rare plants 4 Events 5 Organizations 6 Media coverage Toggle Media coverage subsection 6.1 Printed works 6.2 Television 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources Toggle the table of contents Gardening in Australia Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the ABC television program, see Gardening Australia .

Gardening in Australia reflects the different styles of Australian art , including influences from Roman , Islamic , Italian , French , and English gardens. Modern Australian gardening emphasize gardens and their surroundings, focusing heavily on both urban horticulture and landscape architecture .

There are many historical parks and gardens in Australia.

Auburn Botanical Gardens , with a view of its lake The first botanical gardens in Australia were founded early in the 19th century. The Royal Botanic Gardens, Sydney , 1816; the Royal Tasmanian Botanical Gardens , 1818; the Royal Botanic Gardens, Melbourne , 1845; Adelaide Botanic Gardens , 1854; and Brisbane Botanic Gardens , 1855. These were established essentially as colonial gardens of economic botany and acclimatisation.

[ 1 ] The Auburn Botanical Gardens , 1977, located in Sydney's western suburbs , are one of the popular and diverse botanical gardens in the Greater Western Sydney area.

[ 2 ] In 1942, Australia's prime minister John Curtin launched a "Dig for Victory" campaign as rationing, drought, and a shortage of agricultural workers began to affect food supplies. This encouraged homeowners all over Australia to grow crops to help the war effort. The campaign was well received by the media as well as the large populace, as many Australians were already self-sufficient in growing their own fruits and vegetables. The YWCA created "Garden Army Week" to advertise the newly created "Garden Army" which exclusively supported agriculture and crop production. The situation began to ease in 1943 as fear of invasion lessened; however, home gardens continued throughout the war.

[ 3 ] Australian garden design [ edit ] Colonial-style gardens are still popular, while understanding and use of Australian native gardening is becoming more widespread.

[ clarification needed ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The first formal gardens were influenced by the aesthetics of British settlers who were unfamiliar with Australia and often sought to recreate aspects of where they had come from, such as the English country garden . This included the importation of plants from Europe, initially for food, and the landscaping of broader lands for the cultivation of agriculture, forestry and grazing (displacing maintenance by Australian Aboriginal peoples). Informal and ornamental gardens would be established at private estates, such as small cottage gardens and Mediterranean-climate gardens, while land around settlements would be reserved for future public use and the establishment of important botanical gardens. However, Australia's diverse climate, along with more growth and immigration, meant more diverse styles and philosophies of garden could be grown, such as Japanese gardens .

[ citation needed ] Karawatha Forest Park Over time, interest in rediscovering traditional knowledge and expertise of the uses of Australia's native plants grew. New Australian-style gardens are inspired by combinations of almost any style and are now found across Australia and some other parts of the world. They are usually specific to the particular area they are grown in, whether as private gardens, as parts of or as entire public parks (often emphasising botanical exploration and re-establishment of wildlife habitat), in revegetation programmes for wetlands and grasslands, and as rain gardens utilising smaller spaces on streets. Common features include stone gardens , artworks and shade structures, cultural and historical information, and edible gardens .

Common plants [ edit ] See also: List of Australian plants termed "native" Some common plants are: [ 9 ] Trees [ edit ] Jacaranda Plants [ edit ] Eucalyptus Rare plants [ edit ] Mongarlowe mallee [ 10 ] Wollemi pine Events [ edit ] Floriade is the largest flower festival in the Southern Hemisphere, with over 400,000 visitors each year.

Almond Blossom Festival , Carnival of Flowers , Kings Park Festival , Melbourne International Flower and Garden Show and Tesselaar Tulip Festival are some others.

Organizations [ edit ] Australian Garden History Society Australian Institute of Horticulture Australian Native Plants Society Australian Organic Farming and Gardening Society Australian Society of Horticultural Science National Rose Society of Western Australia Royal Agricultural and Horticultural Society of South Australia The Seed Savers' Network Victorian College of Agriculture and Horticulture Village Community Co-operative Wildflower Society of Western Australia Media coverage [ edit ] A range of books , magazines [ 11 ] [ 12 ] and television programmes [ 13 ] are dedicated to the topic in Australia.

Printed works [ edit ] Australian House & Garden Better Homes and Gardens Gardening Australia NZ Gardener South Australian Vigneron and Gardeners' Manual Television [ edit ] Australia's Best Backyards Backyard Blitz Better Homes and Gardens (TV program) Burke's Backyard Costa's Garden Odyssey Domestic Blitz The Garden Gurus Gardening Australia Guerrilla Gardeners The Outdoor Room Vasili's Garden See also [ edit ] Gardening portal Plants portal Trees portal Australia portal Agriculture in Australia Heritage gardens in Australia Parks and gardens of Adelaide Parks and gardens of Brisbane Parks and gardens of Melbourne Parks and gardens of Sydney List of botanical gardens in Australia List of national parks of Australia List of parks and gardens in rural South Australia Category:Gardening by country References [ edit ] ^ Looker in Aitken & Looker 2002 , p. 98 ^ "Plan of Management for Auburn Botanic Gardens Precinct" (PDF) . Retrieved 12 December 2012 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Victory gardens, Second World War" . Australian War Memorial.

^ Jo Hambrett (28 July 2004).

"Rise of the Australian Plant Garden" (PDF) .

Australian Native Plants Society .

^ "Creating a Contemporary Australian Garden" . 10 September 2023.

^ "Features of Contemporary Australian Garden Design" .

^ "Does an Australian garden style exist? |" .

^ "Garden Style & Design Ideas: Native Australian Gardens" . 18 July 2022.

^ "Australia's native plants - Tourism Australia" . 23 May 2023.

^ "Scientists rush to save Australia's loneliest tree from extinction" .

ABC News . 30 September 2023.

^ "Gardening - Home & Garden Magazines - isubscribe.com.au" .

www.isubscribe.com.au .

^ "Gardening Magazine Subscription | Magshop" .

^ "Plant it and they will come: Why are gardening shows so popular?" . 6 December 2021.

Sources [ edit ] Aitken, Richard & Looker, Michael (2002).

The Oxford Companion to Australian Gardens . Melbourne: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-553644-7 .

v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Australian cuisine History Bushfood industry The English and Australian Cookery Book Dishes Anzac biscuit Avocado toast Battered sausage Caramel tart Caramel shortbread Chocolate crackles Cheese slaw Chiko Roll Devon (sausage) Smiley fritz Democracy sausage Frog cake Frozie cup Friand Halal snack pack Jelly slice Kitchener bun Lamb's fry Lamington Lemon chicken Lemon delicious pudding Meat pie Neenish tart Pavlova Pie floater Rissole Rocky road Saveloy Sticky toffee pudding Vanilla slice White Christmas Zucchini slice Breads Boston bun Bush bread Cheese and bacon roll Cheese on toast Cheesymite scroll Cruffin Crumpet Conti roll Damper English muffin Fairy bread Finger bun Hamdog Hot cross bun Prawn roll Puftaloon Savoury toast Scone Steak and oyster pie Steak sandwich Beverages Alcohol Beer Blow my skull Blue Heaven (flavour) Death Flip Flat white Japanese slipper Lemon, lime and bitters Long black Milo Tea Two Dogs Whisky Wine Ingredients Bush tucker Australian Aboriginal sweets Indigenous Australian food groups Citrus australasica Eucalyptus honey Flake (fish) Kangaroo meat List of Australian herbs and spices Mānuka honey Seafood Smallgoods Vegemite Wattleseed Witchetty grub Culture Australian pub Coffee culture Goon of Fortune Milk bar Pie shop Sausage sizzle Six o'clock swill Shrimp on the barbie Sly-grog shop The Great Aussie Pie Competition Regional and ethnic cuisines Australian Chinese cuisine Cuisine of Brisbane Christmas Island cuisine Cocos (Keeling) Islands cuisine Miscellaneous Bedourie oven Billycan List of Australian and New Zealand dishes List of breweries in Australia List of pizzerias in Australia List of pubs in Australia List of restaurant chains in Australia Related Agriculture in Australia Wheatbelt Alcoholism in rural Australia Bush medicine Gardening in Australia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐67cc48b65d‐d5k86
Cached time: 20250818114015
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.366 seconds
Real time usage: 0.455 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1421/1000000
Revision size: 9427/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 68557/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2077/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61170/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.222/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7216434/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  374.759      1 -total
 42.65%  159.843      1 Template:Reflist
 29.48%  110.487     11 Template:Cite_web
 23.51%   88.112      2 Template:Navbox
 22.16%   83.060      1 Template:Horticulture_and_Gardening
  8.64%   32.361      1 Template:Clarify
  7.67%   28.730      1 Template:Fix-span
  7.06%   26.445      1 Template:For
  6.63%   24.864      1 Template:Harvnb
  6.24%   23.373      6 Template:Category_handler Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:68843722:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818114015 and revision id 1306555846. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gardening_in_Australia&oldid=1306555846 " Category : Gardening in Australia Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 11:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gardening in Australia Add languages Add topic

