Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Score and profiles 3 Targeting of foreign policy officials 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Conservative Review 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American website and brand Conservative Review Abbreviation CR Formation 2014 Type News media Political commentary Headquarters Houston , Texas, U.S.

Region served United States Editor-in-chief Mark Levin Main organ Liberty Score Parent organization Blaze Media Website www .conservativereview .com The Conservative Review is an American website and brand owned and operated by Blaze Media . It was founded in 2014 by a group of conservative political operatives. The site's stated goal is to "cut through the talking points and the smoke and mirrors ... [by employing] two main tools: the Liberty Score and our conservative commentary." [ 1 ] History [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e On September 1, 2015, conservative commentator and radio host Mark Levin was announced as the editor-in-chief of Conservative Review .

[ 2 ] After starting his show Life, Liberty & Levin on Fox News Channel , Levin stepped away from his editor-in-chief position at Conservative Review .

In October 2016, Conservative Review announced the launch of CRTV, an online television network, with shows by Mark Levin, Michelle Malkin , Steven Crowder , Mark Steyn , Gavin McInnes , Steve Deace , [ 3 ] and Matt Kibbe .

[ 4 ] Steyn's show was cancelled in February 2017.

[ 5 ] Gavin McInnes joined the lineup in September 2017, and left in December 2018.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Duck Dynasty star Phil Robertson joined the lineup in October 2017.

[ 8 ] Eric Bolling joined the lineup in summer 2018.

[ 9 ] On December 3, 2018, CRTV, LLC – the owner of Conservative Review and CRTV – announced that it had merged with TheBlaze to form BlazeTV and the new underlying entity Blaze Media. The Conservative Review website continues to be operated separately.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Score and profiles [ edit ] Conservative Review assigns each federal officeholder a grade based on their "Liberty Score", which is a grade based on the top 50 votes that that officeholder has taken in the duration of a rolling 6-year window, rather than just the last election-cycle.

According to Conservative Review , the rolling six-year window is "a more accurate picture of a lawmaker’s performance than traditional one- or two-year scoring methods. Scores are determined by points earned divided by potential points. Voting with the conservative position earns one point; voting against the conservative position earns nothing. Missed votes are not included in a member’s score." [ 12 ] The Liberty Score has apparently not been updated since March of 2023.

[ 13 ] Targeting of foreign policy officials [ edit ] After Donald Trump took office, the Conservative Review was one of a number of conservative media outlets that engaged in a campaign to single out career government employees that they saw as being a part of a "deep state", or "so-called Obama holdovers".

[ 14 ] The Conservative Review accused Anne Patterson , former assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern affairs, of having "fully embraced the policies of President Obama that aligned with radical Islamic actors and alienated Israel." [ 14 ] It said that one State Department official was "leftist", citing as evidence retweets by the official of articles critical of Trump, but ignoring retweeted articles friendly to Trump.

[ 15 ] Many of the articles targeting foreign policy officials were written by Jordan Schachtel, who had previously written for the far-right website Breitbart News .

[ 15 ] In March 2017, the Conservative Review targeted an Iran expert at the State Department named Sahar Nowrouzzadeh , who was involved in crafting the Iran nuclear agreement. One article of this agreement, which had suggested that she was a traitorous stooge surreptitiously working on behalf of the Iranian regime, was then forwarded by former House Speaker Newt Gingrich to an aide of then-Secretary of State Rex Tillerson , with Gingrich writing, "I thought you should be aware of this." Internal emails show that White House staff then proceeded to look into how to fire Nowrouzzadeh, who was hired by the George W. Bush administration, worked nearly a decade in national security, and won awards from the Departments of Defense and State, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, and the F.B.I, emailed her supervisor where she explained that the article was "filled with misinformation". Nowrouzzadeh noted that she was hired by the Bush administration and that "I’ve adapted my work to the policy priorities of every administration I have worked for." While serving under Secretary of State John Kerry , she often advocated a harsher position vis-a-vis Iran than he did. A Trump administration deputy, Edward Lacey, dismissed her email, saying she was among "Obama/Clinton loyalists not at all supportive of President Trump’s foreign policy agenda." Following the publication of the Conservative Review article, Nowrouzzadeh received death threats. Nowrouzzadeh asked the State Department to publish a rebuttal to the article, but her request was rejected. In April 2017, the State Department reassigned her to the "bureaucratic equivalent of Siberia". Nowrouzzadeh alleged unlawful discrimination, and the State Department later settled with her.

[ 16 ] References [ edit ] ^ "About Conservative Review" .

Conservative Review . Retrieved 2019-10-17 .

^ "Firebrand talk host Mark Levin to lead Conservative Review" .

USA Today . Retrieved 2019-10-17 .

^ Calmes, Jackie (November 3, 2015).

"Steve Deace and the Power of Conservative Media" .

The New York Times Magazine .

^ CRTV.

"CRTV About Us" . PR Newswire. Archived from the original on 2017-01-28.

^ Markay, Lachlan (30 January 2017).

"Inside the Collapse of the Mark Steyn Show" .

The Daily Beast .

^ "Get Off My Lawn Debut Episode | Part 1 – CRTV" , Crtv.com , archived from the original on 2017-09-22 , retrieved 2017-09-22 ^ Levine, Jon (December 10, 2018).

"Blaze TV Hosts Michelle Malkin, Gavin McInnes Out After CRTV Merger" .

TheWrap . Retrieved April 22, 2019 .

^ "Phil Robertson is Back" , crtv.com . Retrieved 2017-11-02.

^ Pandolfo, Chris (May 3, 2018).

"Eric Bolling joins CRTV: 'I promise it will be bold, brash, and all Bolling' " . Conservative Review . Retrieved May 3, 2018 .

^ "TheBlaze and CRTV Merge to Create Conservative Media Powerhouse (Exclusive)" .

The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved 2018-12-04 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (3 December 2018).

"Glenn Beck's TheBlaze and CRTV merge to create conservative media company Oliver Darcy" . CNN.

^ "FAQ" .

Conservative Review . Retrieved 2018-08-05 .

^ "Example Liberty Score for Rep. Mike Carey (R-OH)" .

Conservative Review . Retrieved 2024-04-03 .

^ a b "Trump's Trolls Are Waging War on America's Civil Servants" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 2018-03-31 .

^ a b "Federal staffers panicked by conservative media attacks" .

Politico . Retrieved 2018-03-31 .

^ Osnos, Evan (2018-05-14).

"Trump vs. the "Deep State" " .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 2018-05-14 .

External links [ edit ] Official site Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservative_Review&oldid=1284082511 " Categories : American conservative websites American news websites Internet properties established in 2014 2014 establishments in the United States 2018 mergers and acquisitions Paleoconservatism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 April 2025, at 13:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conservative Review 1 language Add topic

