Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Earth, the classical element 3 The planet 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Earth symbol 6 languages العربية Deutsch Français Italiano Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Astronomical symbols for the planet Earth, alchemical symbol for the element Earth This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Earth symbol" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article contains special characters .

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols .

🜨 ♁ ☷ 🜃 Earth symbol In Unicode U+1F728 🜨 ALCHEMICAL SYMBOL FOR VERDIGRIS U+2641 ♁ EARTH ( Globus cruciger ) U+2637 ☷ TRIGRAM FOR EARTH U+1F703 🜃 ALCHEMICAL SYMBOL FOR EARTH Different from Different from U+23DA ⏚ EARTH GROUND Electrical earth (ground) A variety of symbols or iconographic conventions are used to represent Earth , whether in the sense of planet Earth , or the inhabited world , or as a classical element . A circle representing the round world, with the rivers of Garden of Eden separating the four corners of the world , or rotated 45° to suggest the four continents , remains a common pictographic convention to express the notion of "worldwide". The current astronomical symbols for the planet are a circle with an intersecting cross, , [ 1 ] and a globus cruciger , . Although the International Astronomical Union (IAU) now discourages the use of planetary symbols , this is an exception, being used in abbreviations such as M 🜨 or M ♁ for Earth mass .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The earliest type of symbols are allegories , personifications or deifications, mostly in the form of an Earth goddess (in the case of Egyptian mythology a god, Geb ).

[ 3 ] Before the recognition of the spherical shape of the Earth in the Hellenistic period , the main attribute of the Earth was its being flat .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The Egyptian hieroglyph for "earth, land" depicts a stretch of flat alluvial land with grains of sand ( Gardiner N16: 𓇾). The Sumerian cuneiform sign for "earth, place" KI (𒆠) originates as a picture of a "threshing floor", and the Chinese character (土) originated as a lump of clay on a potting wheel.

Earth, the classical element [ edit ] In Chinese mysticism, the classical element "Earth" is represented by the trigram of three broken lines in the I Ching (☷).

[ 6 ] The Western (early modern) alchemical symbol for earth is a downward-pointing triangle bisected by a horizontal line (🜃).

[ 7 ] Other symbols for the earth in alchemy or mysticism include the square and the serpent .

[ 8 ] The planet [ edit ] In the Roman period , the globe , a representation of the spherical Earth, became the main symbol representing the concept.
The globe depicted the "universe" (pictured as the celestial sphere ) as well as the Earth.

[ 9 ] 12th-century T-and-O representation of the world.

Byzantine Solidus coin with a Byzantine Emperor holding a globus cruciger in his right hand.

The globus cruciger (♁) is the globe surmounted by a Christian cross , held by Byzantine Emperors on the one hand to represent the Christian ecumene , on the other hand the akakia represented the mortal nature of all men.

In the medieval period, the known world was also represented by the T-and-O figure, representing an extremely simplified world map of the three classical continents of the Old World , viz.

Asia , Europe and Africa (in various orientations: , , , ).

Unicode encodes four characters representing the globe in the Miscellaneous Symbols and Pictographs block: EARTH GLOBE EUROPE-AFRICA  U+1F30D 🌍 EARTH GLOBE AMERICAS  U+1F30E 🌎 EARTH GLOBE ASIA-AUSTRALIA  U+1F30F 🌏 GLOBE WITH MERIDIANS  U+1F310 🌐 See also [ edit ] Planetary symbols – Graphical symbols used in astrology and astronomy Solar symbol – Symbol representing the Sun Earth in culture – Cultural perspectives about Earth Flag of Earth Radical 32 – Kangxi radical meaning 'earth' Terra (mythology) – Personification of Earth in ancient Rome Atlas (mythology) – Deity in Greek mythology Electrical earth – Reference point in an electrical circuit from which voltages are measured Sun cross – Circle containing four or more spokes T and O map – Type of medieval world map Astrological sign#Polarity and the four elements Crossed O , Cyrillic letter of similar appearance References [ edit ] ^ "Solar System Symbols" .

NASA . 18 March 2019 . Retrieved 8 December 2019 .

^ The IAU Style Manual (PDF) . 1989. p. 27. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-26 . Retrieved 2021-10-23 .

^ Tobin, Vincent Arieh (1988).

"Mytho-Theology in Ancient Egypt" .

Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt .

25 : 169– 183.

doi : 10.2307/40000877 .

ISSN 0065-9991 .

^ Dicks, D. R. (1970).

Early Greek astronomy to Aristotle . Internet Archive. Ithaca, N.Y. : Cornell University Press. pp.

72– 198.

ISBN 978-0-8014-0561-7 .

^ Numbers, Ronald L.; Kampourakis, Kostas (2015-11-04).

Newton's Apple and Other Myths about Science . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-91547-3 .

^ Knechtges, David Richard; Chang, Tai ping (2010).

Ancient and early medieval Chinese literature: a reference guide . Handbook of oriental studies. Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-18016-1 .

^ "Alchemical Symbols: Symbols for Aristotelian elements" .

unicode.org . Retrieved 2023-09-27 .

^ Jacobi, Jolande (2013).

Complex/Archetype/Symbol in The Psychology Of C G Jung . Routledge. pp.

146– 169.

ISBN 9780415209397 .

^ "The Sphere of the World: The Unchanging Celestial Region" .

www.loc.gov . September 27, 2023 . Retrieved 2023-09-27 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Earth symbols .

v t e Earth Outline History Atmosphere Atmosphere of Earth Prebiotic atmosphere Troposphere Stratosphere Mesosphere Thermosphere Exosphere Weather Climate Climate system Energy balance Climate change Climate variability and change Climatology Paleoclimatology Continents Africa Antarctica Asia Australia Europe North America South America Culture and society List of sovereign states dependent territories In culture Earth Day Flag Symbol World economy Etymology World history Time zones World Environment Biome Biosphere Biogeochemical cycles Ecology Ecosystem Human impact on the environment Evolutionary history of life Nature Geodesy Cartography Computer cartography Earth's orbit Geodetic astronomy Geomatics Gravity Navigation Remote Sensing Geopositioning Virtual globe Geophysics Earth structure Fluid dynamics Geomagnetism Magnetosphere Mineral physics Seismology Plate tectonics Signal processing Tomography Geology Age of Earth Earth science Extremes on Earth Future Geological history Geologic time scale Geologic record History of Earth Oceans Antarctic/Southern Ocean Arctic Ocean Atlantic Ocean Indian Ocean Pacific Ocean Oceanography Planetary science The Moon Evolution of the Solar System Geology of solar terrestrial planets Location in the Universe Solar System Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Earth_symbol&oldid=1301735878 " Categories : Alchemical symbols Astronomical symbols Earth in culture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2016 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 11:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Earth symbol 6 languages Add topic

