Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 By country Toggle By country subsection 1.1 Iraq 1.2 Kurdistan 1.3 Syria 1.4 Turkey 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Sources Toggle the table of contents Anti-Assyrian sentiment 1 language Հայերեն Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Aversion, prejudice and fear against Assyrians or their culture Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on Assyrians Assyrian culture Cuisine Dress Folk Dance ( Khigga ) History Music Sculpture Weddings By country Iran Iraq Syria Turkey Assyrian diaspora Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Australia Belgium Canada Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Israel Jordan Lebanon Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Palestine Russia Sweden United Kingdom United States Language Barwar Bohtan Hertevin Suret Turoyo Koy Sanjaq Qaraqosh Senaya Urmia Mlaḥsô Subgroups Citadel Christians Mhallami Tribes Religion Ancient Church of the East Assyrian Church of the East Assyrian Evangelical Church Assyrian Pentecostal Church Chaldean Catholic Church Syriac Catholic Church Syriac Orthodox Church By location Ethnic enclaves Settlements Persecution Assyrian genocide Anti-Assyrian sentiment Hakkari massacres Massacres of Diyarbekir (1895) Simele massacre Assyrian exodus from Iraq Bakhdida wedding fire v t e Anti-Assyrian sentiment , also known as anti-Assyrianism and Assyriophobia , refers to negative feelings, dislikes, fears, aversion, racism, derision and/or prejudice towards Assyria , Assyrian culture , Syriac Christianity , and Assyrians , as well as Chaldeans , Syriacs , and Arameans .

Anti-Assyrian sentiment largely manifested itself towards the end of the Ottoman Empire with the Assyrian genocide , and has continued in varying experiences by country where the indigenous Assyrian homeland lies ( Iraq , Syria , Turkey , Iran ). Notable instances include the Simele massacre , Anfal campaign , assimilation campaigns ( Arabization , Kurdification , Turkification ), and ISIS persecution. Like Anti-Armenian sentiment , Anti-Assyrian sentiment has historically also been fueled by an Anti-Christian sentiment .

By country [ edit ] Iraq [ edit ] Christian priests were prime targets; eight Assyrian priests were killed during the massacre, including one beheaded and another burned alive.

[ 1 ] Back in the city of Duhok , 600 Assyrians were killed by Sidqi's men.

[ 2 ] In the end, around 65 Assyrian villages were targeted in the Mosul and Dohuk districts.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The Simele massacre of the Assyrian people is often regarded as a phase of the Assyrian genocide beginning in August 1914 in the early days of what became World War I . Today, most of these villages are inhabited by Kurds. The main campaign lasted until August 16, but violent raids on Assyrians were being reported up to the end of the month. After the campaign, Bakr Sidqi was invited to Baghdad for a victory rally.

[ 7 ] The campaign resulted in one third of the Assyrian population of Iraq fleeing to Syria .

[ 8 ] After the Invasion of Iraq and fall of Saddam Hussein , Assyrians became victims of Islamist violence. During the period of 2003–2013, there were increasing amounts of Church attacks, beheadings, and bombings of Assyrians.

[ 9 ] After the Fall of Mosul , ISIS demanded that Assyrian Christians living in the city convert to Islam , pay jizyah , or face execution, by July 19, 2014.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi further noted that Christians who do not agree to follow those terms must "leave the borders of the Islamic Caliphate" within a specified deadline. This resulted in a complete Assyrian exodus from Mosul , marking the end of 1,800 years of continuous Christian presence.

[ 14 ] A church mass was not held in Mosul for the first time in nearly 2 thousand years.

[ 15 ] In 2020, a political party called " Hawpa " was established in Erbil . The party's ideology is based on the Hîwa Party (1939 – 1946) and the Kajik Party (1959 – 1975), both of whom were founded on the basis of fascism and Nazism .

[ 16 ] The party has previously used social media platforms to express beliefs that Arabs should be expelled from the Kurdish region, while Assyrians and Turkmen should be subject to genocide. In 2025, two Assyrian organizations in Europe sent a joint letter to the KRG denouncing their recognition of the party as an organization and continued targeting of Assyrians and non-Kurdish groups.

[ 17 ] On April 1, 2025, during Kha b'Nisan celebrations in the city of Duhok , two Assyrians were injured by a Syrian refugee in what is believed to have been an Islamist terror attack.

[ 18 ] The attacker initially hid the weapons in a bag until making his way to the scene of parades for the Assyrian New Year.

[ 19 ] An Assyrian flag that had been stained with blood was waved during the rest of the parade as a symbol of resilience and was also present in social media videos. After the attack, celebrations of Akitu continued as planned, with attendees continuing to wave flags and perform traditional dances.

[ 20 ] The attack was greatly condemned by members of the Assyrian community, particularly in the diaspora , who faced a wave of hate speech on social media following the attack.

[ 21 ] The event also sparked concerns about the safety of Assyrians who remain in Iraq, and the willingness of the diaspora to make returns to live in the country or visit for celebrations.

[ 22 ] Kurdistan [ edit ] In 1911, Jessie Payne Margoliouth , a British Assyriologist, while describing the Ottoman Empire, stated that the Kurds "are natural enemies of the Assyrians, and live side by side with them. Struggles are almost constantly going on between them, frequently producing actual conflicts." [ 23 ] In October 1917, the Ottomans launched the Persian campaign with the hopes of capturing more land. The Assyrians, led by Agha Petros held them off until June 1918, however, up to 100,000 Assyrians left Persia in 1918, but around half died of Turkish and Kurdish massacres, starvation, disease, or famine.  About 80 percent of Assyrian clergy and influential leaders had perished.

[ 24 ] The Associated Press reported that in the vicinity of Urmia, "Turkish regular troops and Kurds are persecuting and massacring Assyrian Christians." The victims included 800 massacred near Urmia, and 2,000 dead from disease. Two hundred Assyrians were burned to death inside a church, and the Russians had discovered more than 700 bodies of massacre victims in the village of Hafdewan outside Urmia, "mostly naked and mutilated", some with gunshot wounds, others decapitated, and others chopped to pieces.

The New York Times reported on 11 October that 12,000 Assyrian Christians had died of massacre, hunger, or disease; thousands of girls as young as seven had been raped in sex attacks, or forcibly converted to Islam; Christian villages had been destroyed, and three-fourths of these Christian villages were burned to the ground.

[ 25 ] In the Kurdistan Region , Assyrians claimed that Kurdish authorities often attempted to portray Assyrians as Christian Kurds.

[ 26 ] In 2008, Assyrians formed the Qaraqosh Protection Committee , [ 27 ] aiming to protect Assyrian towns, villages and regions. In 2008, the Paulos Faraj Rahho was assassinated. Some Assyrians accused the Kurds, while others accused Arabs. Some Assyrians have claimed that Kurdish forces, namely KDP, often used to practice shooting targets on Assyrian cultural heritage sites.

[ 28 ] In 2009, Benham Benoka, an Assyrian priest and community leader, complained that a group of Shabaks , supported by the Kurdish government, entered Assyrian neighborhoods in the Nineveh Plains and provocatively held Muharram mourning rituals in front of a church on Christmas .

[ 29 ] The United States Department of State reported that "Kurdish authorities abused and discriminated against minorities in the North, including Turcomen, Arabs, Christians, and Shabak", and that Kurdish authorities "denied services to some villages, arrested minorities without due process and took them to undisclosed locations for detention, and pressured minority schools to teach in the Kurdish language".

[ 30 ] Assyrians accused the Kurdish school curriculum of Kurdification , and accused the KRG of confiscating and occupying Assyrian lands, claiming that "the Kurds invent new and impossible laws when the legitimate owners ask for their lands".

[ 31 ] Some Assyrians claimed that while Kurds were well funded, the Assyrians received almost no funding for their schools. They also accused Kurdish authorities of changing traditional Christian names to Kurdish names, and even portraying Christian biblical figures as Kurds in some textbooks.

[ 32 ] Assyrian activists claimed that Kurds who attacked Assyrians were either allowed to walk freely or given light sentences.

[ 33 ] They claimed that Kurds also targeted Assyrians who supported the KRG.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] The US State government reported that in the KRG, Assyrian schools and classes were not permitted to teach in Syriac and were even prevented in some cases.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] There were also incidents of mob violence by the PKK against Christians.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Assyrian activists criticised the KRG for lack of investigation of bombings in 1998 and 1999 targetting Assyrians in Erbil.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] According to the US Department of State, the KDP had blockaded Assyrian villages in 1999 and "later entered the villages and beat villagers". However, the KDP withdrew from the villages after pressure from the Red Cross.

[ 36 ] Assyrian organizations accused Kurdish criminal organizations of forcing Assyrian girls into prostitution and threatening their families.

[ 28 ] Syria [ edit ] On 23 February 2015, 150 Assyrians from villages near Tell Tamer in northeastern Syria were kidnapped by ISIS.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] At Assyrian Christian farming villages on the banks of the Khabur River in Northeast Syria, 253 people, 51 of them children and 84 of them were women, with one account claiming that ISIS is demanding $22 million (or roughly $100,000 per person) for their release.

[ 40 ] On 8 October 2015, ISIS released a video showing three of the Assyrian men kidnapped in Khabur being murdered. It was reported that 202 of the 253 kidnapped Assyrians were still in captivity, each one with a demanded ransom of $100,000.

[ 41 ] On 25 October, hundreds of civilians were trapped in Sadad, Syria , with Archbishop Silwanos Al-Nemeh saying that the situation was dire and that they were in fear of a massacre.

[ 42 ] Also, opposition fighters entered the Mar Theodore Church damaging it and stealing Church items.

[ 43 ] More than 100 government soldiers and 100 rebels, including 80 jihadists from ISIS and al-Nusra, were killed in the fighting. Foreign rebel fighters were also among the dead.

[ 44 ] The rebels retreated to the surrounding farmland, with the military in pursuit, and the government news agency reported that the militants had vandalized Sadad's Saint Theodor Church and much of its infrastructure.

[ 45 ] Turkey [ edit ] George Aslan , an Assyrian-Turkish politician, was harassed in the Turkish parliament for speaking Turoyo . In 2023, around Christmas, he sent a Turoyo message to the Assyrians in Turkey, with permission from Sırrı Süreyya Önder , although members of the Good Party interrupted his speech with racial insults.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] He responded to the Good Party by stating "I want to repeat what I said in the Parliament: We did not bring this language from another planet. Syriac is a language of this land. We are the indigenous people of this land for 12,000 years. We were here when no one else was on these lands. Why they react so strongly is incomprehensible. However, we know that this is a denial of real history." In 2024, also around Christmas, he delivered another Turoyo message before Bekir Bozdağ turned off his microphone, to which Aslan replied that "Some deputies are reading Arabic verses from the Quran on the podium. Please turn it off when the verses are read. If it doesn't turn off, I, who never tease anyone, will tease you very much, believe me. If there is holiness, all holiness is given importance." [ 48 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-Armenian sentiment Simko Shikak Simele Massacre Anfal campaign 2015 Qamishli bombings 2008 attacks on Christians in Mosul 2010 Baghdad church massacre References [ edit ] ^ "Genocides Against the Assyrian Nation" . Retrieved 20 March 2015 .

^ "International Journal of Middle East Studies, "The Assyrian Affair of 1933", by Khaldun S. Husry, 1974" .

^ "Modern Aramaic Dictionary & Phrasebook" By Nicholas Awde. Page 11.

^ "The Fate Of Assyrian Villages Annexed To Today's Dohuk Governorate In Iraq And The Conditions In These Villages Following The Establishment Of The Iraqi State In 1921" . Retrieved 20 March 2015 .

^ International Federation for Human Rights — " Displaced persons in Iraqi Kurdistan and Iraqi refugees in Iran ", 2003.

^ "The Origins and Developments of Assyrian Nationalism", Committee on International Relations Of the University of Chicago , by Robert DeKelaita (PDF) ^ Stafford, R. S. (1934).

"Iraq and the Problem of the Assyrians" .

International Affairs .

13 (2): 159– 185.

doi : 10.2307/2603135 .

JSTOR 2603135 .

^ McCarthy, Justin (2001).

The Ottoman Peoples and the End of Empire . Bloomsbury Academic.

ISBN 9780340706572 . Retrieved 20 March 2015 .

^ "Iraq arrests 12 over church siege" .

BBC News . 27 November 2010 . Retrieved 2017-12-06 .

^ "Iraqi Christians flee after Isis issue Mosul ultimatum" .

BBC News . 18 July 2014 . Retrieved 13 February 2015 .

^ van Tets, Fernande (7 August 2014).

"Isis takes Iraq's largest Christian town as residents told – 'leave, convert or die' " .

The Independent . Retrieved 5 January 2015 .

^ Jadallah, Ahmed (18 July 2014).

"Convert, pay tax, or die, Islamic State warns Christians" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on January 19, 2016 . Retrieved 5 January 2015 .

^ "Convert, pay tax, or die, Islamic State warns Christians" .

Reuters . 18 July 2014.

It said that Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi , whom the group has now named Caliph Ibrahim, had set a Saturday deadline for Christians who did not want to stay and live under those terms to "leave the borders of the Islamic Caliphate". "After this date, there is nothing between us and them but the sword," it said.

^ "For the first time in 1,800 years, no Masses said in Mosul" . Catholicworldreport.com . Retrieved 16 October 2014 .

^ "Iraqi Christian church burnings confirmed by EU delegation" .

Iraq news, the latest Iraq news . 16 June 2014 . Retrieved 13 February 2015 .

^ Aprim, Fred (November 2023).

"Neo-Nazi Kurdish Hawpa Group Threatens to Exterminate Assyrians" (PDF) .

fredaprim.com . Retrieved 13 June 2025 .

^ "Assyrian Organizations Condemn Kurdish Regional Government's Recognition of Extremist Party" .

Syriac Press . 2025-06-15 . Retrieved 2025-06-25 .

^ Bechocha, Julian (April 1, 2025).

"Two injured in axe attack during Akitu celebrations in Duhok" .

Rudaw . Retrieved 27 April 2025 .

^ "Kurdistan Region security identify ISIS-linked assailant behind attack on Christians" .

www.rudaw.net . Erbil. 10 April 2025 . Retrieved 2025-06-04 .

^ Stella Martany (April 2, 2025).

"A man wielding an axe wounds 3 people at the Assyrian Christian new year parade in Iraq" .

Associated Press . Retrieved 2025-04-03 .

^ Martany, Stella (2025-04-01).

"Three injured in Iraq when an axe-wielding man attacks an Assyrian Christian new year parade" .

Associated Press .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2025-04-01 .

^ Bechocha, Julian (1 April 2025).

"Two injured in axe attack during Akitu celebrations in Duhok" .

www.rudaw.net . Retrieved 2025-04-02 .

^ Kurds & Christians, pp. 12-13, Jessie Payne Smith, 1911 ^ Baumer, Church of the East, at 263 ^ "Turkish Horrors in Persia" .

New York Times . 1915-10-11. p. 4 . Retrieved 2008-08-19 .

^ Annual Report on International Religious Freedom 2002: Report Submitted to the Committee on Foreign Relations, U.S. Senate and the Committee on International Relations, U.S. House of Representatives. United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. 2000. pp. 545 ^ "Christian Security Forces Growing Stronger In Iraq" .

NPR.org . National Public Radio . Retrieved 2012-06-18 .

^ a b Human Rights Report on Assyrians in Iraq 2013, by Assyria Council of Europe and the Assyria Foundation ^ Religious Minorities in Iraq: Co-Existence, Faith and Recovery After ISIS, Maria Rita Corticelli, 2022, p. 134, ISBN 9780755641352 ^ Iraq report , Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor 2005. March 8, 2006. "The Kurdish parties also control "the pursuit of formal education and the granting of academic positions". In 2015 Kurdish security forces in Bartalah reportedly broke up a peaceful demonstration by Shabak people, thereby assaulting several demonstrators. The US State department reported on allegations that the KRG discriminated against Christian minorities. Christians living in areas north of Mosul said that the KRG seized their property without compensation and that the KRG began building Kurdish settlements on their land. Assyrian Christians also said that the "KDP-dominated judiciary routinely discriminated against non-Muslims and legal judgments in their favor were not enforced". The Kurdish political parties "encouraged and supported resettlement of Kurds in Kirkuk outside the framework of the IPCC". However Arabs remained "in antagonistic and extremely poor conditions, facing pressure from Kurdish authorities to leave the province". In 2015 elections, many of the mostly Christian residents in the Nineveh Plain were unable to vote, "polling places did not open, ballot boxes were not delivered, and incidents of voter fraud and intimidation occurred". Kurdish militia refused to "allow ballot boxes to pass to predominantly Christian villages". The KRG also reportedly "pressured NGOs into hiring only Kurds and dismissing non-Kurds on security grounds"." ^ "The Genocide of Assyrians -- then and Now" .

^ "Kurden und Christen: Ein Krieg um Schulbücher bestimmt Syriens Zukunft" .

Die Welt . 20 May 2016.

^ "Murderers of Iraqi Kurdistan MP Francis Yousif Shabo lives in KDP controlled regions" .

ekurd.net .

^ "Syria Comment » Archives "The Assyrians of Syria: History and Prospets" by Mardean Isaac - Syria Comment" .

www.joshualandis.com . 21 December 2015. Archived from the original on 2015-12-24.

^ "To the General Public & Syriac-Assyrian-Chaldean People | Syriac International News AgencySyriac International News Agency" . Archived from the original on 20 March 2016.

^ a b c d Refugees, United Nations High Commissioner for.

"Refworld | The Leader in Refugee Decision Support" .

Refworld . Retrieved 2017-06-08 .

^ a b c "2000 County Reports on Human Rights Practices" .

^ Al-Khalidi, Suleiman; Holmes, Oliver (23 February 2015). Heneghan, Tom (ed.).

"Islamic State in Syria abducts at least 150 Christians" .

Reuters . Retrieved 23 February 2015 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Islamic State 'abducts dozens of Christians in Syria' " .

BBC . 23 February 2015 . Retrieved 23 February 2015 .

^ Fernandez, Alberto M. (June 16, 2015).

"The "Sayfo" Continues Responding to Global Christian Persecution" .

Berkeley Center Cornerstone . Georgetown University Religious Freedom Project . Retrieved 20 June 2015 .

^ "Isis appears to have killed three Christian hostages in Syria" .

The Guardian . 8 October 2015 . Retrieved 17 August 2018 .

^ "Syria says more than 40 rebels killed east of Damascus" .

Los Angeles Times . 25 October 2013 . Retrieved 25 October 2014 .

^ "Syria: Opposition Abuses During Ground Offensive" . 19 November 2013 . Retrieved 25 October 2014 .

^ "About 50 martyrs in the town is about Christianity" . Retrieved 25 October 2014 .

^ "Syrian troops retake Christian town from jihadists" .

The Daily Star Newspaper - Lebanon . Retrieved 25 October 2014 .

^ Yılmaz, Tuğçe (19 December 2023).

"Syriac MP George Aslan: 'Syriac language is a language of this land' " .

bianet.org .

Bianet . Retrieved 21 December 2024 .

^ Bozarslan, Mahmut; Sahinkaya, Ezel (22 December 2023).

"Syriac Christmas Message Stirs Debate in Turkish Parliament" .

Voice of America .

Voice of America . Retrieved 21 December 2024 .

^ "Bekir Bozdağ'dan Süryanice Noel kutlamasına yasak" .

bianet.org (in Turkish).

Bianet . 18 December 2024 . Retrieved 21 December 2024 .

Sources [ edit ] Biner, Zerrin Özlem (2019).

States of Dispossession: Violence and Precarious Coexistence in Southeast Turkey .

University of Pennsylvania Press .

ISBN 978-0-8122-9659-4 .

Biner, Zerrin Özlem (2011). "Multiple imaginations of the state: understanding a mobile conflict about justice and accountability from the perspective of Assyrian–Syriac communities".

Citizenship Studies .

15 ( 3– 4): 367– 379.

doi : 10.1080/13621025.2011.564789 .

S2CID 144086552 .

Gaunt, David (2020). "The Long Assyrian Genocide".

Collective and State Violence in Turkey: The Construction of a National Identity from Empire to Nation-State . Berghahn Books. pp.

56– 96.

ISBN 978-1-78920-451-3 .

v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Assyrian_sentiment&oldid=1306240853 " Categories : Persecution of Assyrians Anti-national sentiment Anti–Middle Eastern sentiment Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 18:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Assyrian sentiment 1 language Add topic

