Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Personal life 4 Legacy 5 Gallery 6 Works 7 References 8 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents János Bolyai 48 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latviešu Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Bolyai ) Hungarian mathematician (1802–1860) "Bolyai" redirects here. For the lunar crater, see Bolyai (crater) .

The native form of this personal name is Bolyai János . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

János Bolyai Portrait by Ferenc Márkos (2012) [ 1 ] Born ( 1802-12-15 ) 15 December 1802 Kolozsvár , Kingdom of Hungary , Habsburg Monarchy (today Cluj-Napoca, Romania ) Died 27 January 1860 (1860-01-27) (aged 57) Marosvásárhely , Kingdom of Hungary , Austrian Empire (today Târgu Mureș, Romania) Education TherMilAk ( diploma , 1822) Known for Non-Euclidean geometry Scientific career Fields Mathematics Academic advisors Farkas Bolyai János Bolyai; artwork by Attila Zsigmond [ 1 ] Memorial plaque of János Bolyai in Olomouc , Czech Republic János Bolyai ( / ˈ b ɔː l j ɔɪ / ; [ 2 ] Hungarian: [ˈjaːnoʃ ˈboːjɒi] ; 15 December 1802 – 27 January 1860) or Johann Bolyai , [ 3 ] was a Hungarian mathematician who developed absolute geometry —a geometry that includes both Euclidean geometry and hyperbolic geometry . The discovery of a consistent alternative geometry that might correspond to the structure of the universe helped to free mathematicians to study abstract concepts irrespective of any possible connection with the physical world.

[ 4 ] Early life [ edit ] The house in Cluj-Napoca where János Bolyai was born Bolyai was born in the town of Kolozsvár, Grand Principality of Transylvania , Kingdom of Hungary (now Cluj-Napoca in Romania ), the son of Zsuzsanna Benkő and the well-known mathematician Farkas Bolyai .

By the age of 13, he had mastered calculus and other forms of analytical mechanics , receiving instruction from his father. He studied at the Imperial and Royal Military Academy (TherMilAk) in Vienna from 1818 to 1822, and Bolyai received his commission as sub-lieutenant. At the age of 21, he was already a lieutenant, at the age of 22, a first lieutenant and at the age of 24, a captain.

[ 5 ] Career [ edit ] Bolyai became so obsessed with Euclid 's parallel postulate that his father, who had pursued the same subject for many years, wrote to him in 1820: "You must not attempt this approach to parallels. I know this way to the very end. I have traversed this bottomless night, which extinguished all light and joy in my life. I entreat you, leave the science of parallels alone...Learn from my example." [ 6 ] János, however, persisted in his quest and eventually came to the conclusion that the postulate is independent of the other axioms of geometry and that different consistent geometries can be constructed on its negation. In 1823, he wrote to his father: "I have discovered such wonderful things that I was amazed...out of nothing I have created a strange new universe." [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Between 1820 and 1823 he had prepared a treatise on parallel lines that he called absolute geometry . Bolyai's work was published in 1832 as an appendix to a mathematics textbook by his father.

Carl Friedrich Gauss , on reading the Appendix, wrote in a letter, "I regard this young geometer Bolyai as a genius of the first order." [ 8 ] To his old friend Farkas Bolyai, however, Gauss wrote: "To praise it would amount to praising myself. For the entire content of the work...coincides almost exactly with my own meditations which have occupied my mind for the past thirty or thirty-five years." [ 9 ] [ 6 ] [ 8 ] [ 7 ] Indeed, Gauss had disclosed his discovery of a consistent non-Euclidean geometry in a letter in 1827, and in 1829 wrote that he feared backlash if he published about it.

[ 10 ] János suspected that Gauss had been secretly informed about his discoveries by his father, causing a rift between him and his father.

[ 11 ] He later bitterly complained about Gauss's attitude.

[ 12 ] In 1848 Bolyai learned that Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky had published a piece of work similar to his appendix in 1829. Though Lobachevsky published his work a few years earlier than Bolyai, it contained only hyperbolic geometry . Working independently, Bolyai and Lobachevsky pioneered the investigation of non-Euclidean geometry .

In addition to his work in geometry, Bolyai developed a rigorous geometric concept of complex numbers as ordered pairs of real numbers . Although he never published more than the 24 pages of the Appendix, he left more than 20,000 pages of mathematical manuscripts when he died. These can now be found in the Teleki-Bolyai Library in Târgu Mureș , where Bolyai died. His grave lies in the Lutheran Cemetery in Târgu Mureș.

[ 13 ] Personal life [ edit ] He was an accomplished linguist, speaking several foreign languages beside his native Hungarian, these being German , Latin , French , Italian and Romanian . He learned the violin and performed in Vienna.

[ 14 ] It is related of him that he was challenged by thirteen officers of his garrison, a thing not unlikely to happen considering how differently he thought from everyone else. He fought them all in succession—making it his only condition that he should be allowed to play on his violin for an interval between meeting each opponent. He disarmed or wounded all his antagonists. It can be easily imagined that a temperament such as his was not one congenial to his military superiors. He was retired in 1833.

[ 15 ] No original portrait of Bolyai survives. An unauthentic picture appears in some encyclopedias and on a Hungarian postage stamp.

[ 1 ] Legacy [ edit ] The Babeș-Bolyai University in Cluj-Napoca , that was established in 1959, bears his name, as does the professional society of Hungarian mathematicians, the János Bolyai Mathematical Institute , at the University of Szeged . There is also a mathematical award given out every five years, named the Bolyai Prize . Bolyai is a minor character in the 1969 science-fiction/fantasy story "Operation Changeling" , where his unique abilities allow the protagonists to navigate the non-Euclidean geometry of Hell .

[ citation needed ] The crater Bolyai on the Moon [ 16 ] and 1441 Bolyai , a minor planet discovered in 1937, are also named after him.

Several primary and secondary schools in the Carpathian Basin also bear Bolyai's name; for instance, Bolyai János Műszaki Szakközépiskola in Budapest , Bolyai János Gyakorló Általános Iskola és Gimnázium in Szombathely , and the Bolyai János Általános Iskola in Debrecen .

[ citation needed ] Streets in Budapest, Cluj-Napoca, [ 17 ] and Timișoara [ 18 ] are named after Bolyai.

Gallery [ edit ] The Pseudosphere monument in Târgu Mureș Bust of János Bolyai in Cluj-Napoca Bust of János Bolyai in Nușeni Works [ edit ] "Appendix scientiam spatii absolute veram exhibens; a veritate aut falsitate axiomatis XI Euclidei, a priori haud unquam", appendix to Farkas Bolyai , Tentamen juventutem studiosam in elementa matheseos purae, elementaris ac sublimioris, methodo intuitiva, evidentiaque huic propria, introducendi (An Attempt to Introduce Studious Youths to the Elements of Pure Mathematics) , 1832.

English translation: "The Science Absolute of Space: Independent of the Truth or Falsity of Euclid's Axiom XI (Which Can Never Be Decided A Priori)" , The Neomon, Austin, 1896.

1896 copy of Bolyai's " The science absolute of space, independent of the truth or falsity of Euclid's axiom XI (which can never be decided a priori) " Appendix to " The science absolute of space " First page to " The science absolute of space " References [ edit ] ^ a b c Dénes, Tamás (January 2011).

"Real Face of János Bolyai" (PDF) .

Notices of the American Mathematical Society .

58 (1): 41– 51 . Retrieved 2011-06-18 .

^ "Bolyai" .

Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .

^ Tucker McElroy.

A to Z of Mathematicians ^ Encyclopædia Britannica: János Bolyai ^ "About Bolyai" . Miskolci Egyetem Bolyai Kollégium . Retrieved 2023-10-22 .

^ a b c Ellenberg, Jordan (May 2014).

How Not to Be Wrong .

New York, NY : Penguin Group . p. 365.

ISBN 978-0-14-312-753-6 .

^ a b Tóth, László Fejes (1965). "1.3.4. Anmerkungen".

Reguläre Figuren (in German) (1 ed.).

B. G. Teubner Verlagsgesellschaft [ de ] , Leipzig, East-Germany / Akadémiai Kiadó , Budapest, Hungary. pp.

97– 98. ES-No. 19 83. Kenn-No. 375. Lizenz-No. 294.

(2+316+6 pages, 12 anaglyph cards, 1 red-green glasses) ^ a b O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "János Bolyai" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ Letter from Gauss to Farkas Bolyai from 6 March 1832 ^ Greenberg 2008, p. 243-244 ^ Osserman, Robert (2005).

"Book Review: Non-Euclidean Geometry, and the Nature of Space" (PDF) .

Notices of the AMS .

52 (9).

^ Greenberg 2008, p. 242 ^ O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Janos Bolyai's birth house and original grave" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ Elemér, Kiss, "Matematikai kincsek Bolyai János kéziratos hagyatékából" ^ Hinton, Charles Howard (1912) [1904].

The Fourth Dimension . London: G. Allen & Unwin Ltd.

p. 46.

Sources cited, p. 41. Entire chapter V, "The Second Chapter in the History of Four Space", pp. 41–60, provides accessible, illustrated introduction to his life and work.

^ NASA website Archived 23 October 2005 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Strada Bolyai Janos" .

www.clujeni.com (in Romanian) . Retrieved 2022-01-04 .

^ "Strada Bolyai János, Timișoara" .

www.harti-orase.ro (in Romanian) . Retrieved 2022-01-04 .

Sources [ edit ] Martin Gardner (2001) Non-Euclidean Geometry , Chapter 14 of The Colossal Book of Mathematics , W. W. Norton & Company ISBN 0-393-02023-1 Jeremy Gray (2004) Janos Bolyai, Non-Euclidean Geometry, and the Nature of Space, MIT Press ISBN 0262571749 Marvin Greenberg (2008) Euclidean and Non-Euclidean Geometries: Development and History , 4th edition, W. H. Freeman Elemér Kiss (1999) Mathematical Gems from the Bolyai Chests. János Bolyai's discoveries in number theory and algebra as recently deciphered from his manuscripts . Translated by Anikó Csirmaz and Gábor Oláh.

Akadémiai Kiadó , Budapest; TypoTeX, Budapest, ISBN 963-05-7563-9 ; Tibor Weszely (2013) János Bolyai. Die ersten 200 Jahre , Birkhäuser , (translated from Hungarian by Manfred Stern), ISBN 978-3-0346-0046-0 Ana Todea, Maria Fűllop, Monica Avram (2004) Oameni de știință mureșeni - Dicționar biobibliografic , CJ Mureș Biblioteca Județeană Mureș, tipografia Mediaprint SRL (in Romanian) Silva Oliva (2018) Janos Bolyai. Uno sguardo psicoanalitico su genio matematico e follia , ed Mimesis.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to János Bolyai .

Media related to János Bolyai at Wikimedia Commons János Bolyai at the Mathematics Genealogy Project "The Bolyai Memorial Museum" .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=János_Bolyai&oldid=1301614596 " Categories : 1802 births 1860 deaths Hyperbolic geometers Scientists from Cluj-Napoca Mathematicians from the Austrian Empire Transylvanian Hungarians Theresian Military Academy alumni 19th-century Hungarian mathematicians Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Romanian-language sources (ro) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2017 Articles with hCards Pages with Hungarian IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013 Articles with Romanian-language sources (ro) Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 20:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents János Bolyai 48 languages Add topic

