Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Partial or full repeals 2 Repeal with or without re-enactment 3 Express or implied repeal 4 Repeals with or without savings 5 Parliamentary procedure Toggle Parliamentary procedure subsection 5.1 Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised (RONR) 5.2 The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure (TSC) 5.3 Legislative use 5.4 Rescind and expunge from the minutes 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Repeal 15 languages Català Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی हिन्दी Italiano Magyar Norsk nynorsk Română Simple English Svenska Vèneto 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Removal or reversal of a law "Repeal Bill" redirects here. For the specific UK bill previously known by that name, see European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 .

A repeal (O.F.

rapel , modern rappel , from rapeler , rappeler , revoke, re and appeler , appeal) [ 1 ] is the removal or reversal of a law . There are two basic types of repeal; a repeal with a re-enactment is used to replace the law with an updated, amended, or otherwise related law, or a repeal without replacement so as to abolish its provisions altogether.

Removal of secondary legislation is normally referred to as revocation rather than repeal in the United Kingdom and Ireland . Under the common law of England and Wales , the effect of repealing a statute was "to obliterate it completely from the records of Parliament as though it had never been passed." [ 2 ] This, however, is now subject to savings provisions within the Interpretation Act 1978 .

In parliamentary procedure , the motion to rescind, repeal, or annul is used to cancel or countermand an action or order previously adopted by the assembly .

Partial or full repeals [ edit ] A partial repeal occurs when a specified part or provision of a previous Act is repealed but other provisions remain in force. For example, the Acts of Union 1800 , providing for the union between the formerly separate kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland as the United Kingdom , was partially repealed in 1922, when (as a consequence of the 1921 Anglo-Irish Treaty ), twenty-six of the thirty-two counties of Ireland were constituted as the Irish Free State , and ceased to form part of the United Kingdom.

A full repeal occurs where the entire Act in question is repealed.

Repeal with or without re-enactment [ edit ] A typical situation where an Act is repealed and re-enacted is where the law in the area is being updated but the law being repealed needs to be replaced with one suitable for the modern era.  Re-enactment can be with or without amendment, although repeal and re-enactment without amendment normally occurs only in the context of a consolidation bill (a bill to consolidate the law in a particular area).

For example, the repeal of the Poor Laws in England in 1948 reflected their replacement by modern social welfare legislation.

A repeal without replacement is generally done when a law is no longer effective, or it is shown that a law is having far more negative consequences than were originally envisioned.

If a campaign for the repeal of a particular law gains particular momentum, an advocate of the repeal might become known as a "repealer". The Repeal Association in 19th-century Ireland advocated Irish independence through repeal of the Acts of Union 1800 .

Many repeals without replacement are the result of significant changes in society .  Major examples include: The old Jim Crow laws or blue laws in the US The Corn Laws in England , repealed in 1846 after a passionate campaign.

Repeal of Prohibition in the United States . Enacted by the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , prohibition of alcoholic beverages was repealed by the Twenty-first Amendment . This is the only constitutional amendment to have ever been repealed in the United States .

The massive Statute Law Revision Act 2007 in the Republic of Ireland , through which 3,225 Acts were repealed, dating back over eight centuries to 1171 and the earliest laws enacted by England when it began its invasion of Ireland . The statutes repealed include a number of Acts of significant historical interest, including an Act of 1542 providing that the Kings of England shall be Kings of Ireland. This Act is the largest single repealing statute in the history of Ireland.

Express or implied repeal [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( June 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The repeal of a statute may be either express or implied .

[ 3 ] Express repeal occurs where express words are used in a statute to repeal an earlier statute. They are now usually included in a table in a schedule to the statute, for reasons of convenience.

In the United States, when a bill is passed by the House and Senate and signed by the president, or Congress overrides a presidential veto, the various provisions contained within the newly enacted law are rearranged according to their policy content and cataloged in the United States Code —a compilation of the general and permanent federal laws of the United States.  To repeal any element of an enacted law, Congress must pass a new law containing repeal language and the codified statute's location in the U.S. Code (including the title, chapter, part, section, paragraph and clause).  In this way, Congress (and the president) must follow the same rules and procedures for passing any law.  When statutes are repealed, their text is simply deleted from the Code and replaced by a note summarizing what used to be there.  Once deleted, the repealed statute no longer has the force of law.  All repeals of parts of the US Code are, therefore, express repeals.

Implied repeal occurs where two statutes are mutually inconsistent. The effect is that the later statute repeals the earlier statute pro tanto (in so far as it is inconsistent).

[ 3 ] As past and future parliaments are equally sovereign, later parliaments can carry out implied repeal of earlier statute by passing an inconsistent statute, but inconsistency needs to be established before implied repeal can occur.

[ 4 ] Repeals with or without savings [ edit ] Repeals can be with or without savings.

A repeal without savings eliminates the repealed statute completely.

A repeal with savings preserves the effect of the repealed statute for limited purposes, such as preventing the reversal of any repeals contained within it, or ensuring that rights granted under its authority are retained. In England and Wales, sections 15 to 17 and 19(2) of the Interpretation Act 1978 set out general savings for all repeals. These re-enact similar provisions from the Interpretation Act 1889 , and before 1953 all Statute Law Revision Acts contained a different general savings provision deemed the Westbury saving , which has now fallen out of use. Similar provisions exist in the law of Ireland and other common law countries.

Parliamentary procedure [ edit ] Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised (RONR) [ edit ] Rescind, repeal, or annul or Amend something previously adopted (RONR) Class Motion that brings a question again before the assembly In order when another has the floor ?

No Requires second ?

Yes Debatable ?

Yes May be reconsidered ?

Negative vote only Amendable ?

Yes Vote required Majority with notice; or two-thirds; or majority of entire membership In meetings of a deliberative assembly, the motions to rescind (or "repeal" or "annul") and amend something previously adopted are used to change action that was taken. They are two forms of the same incidental main motion and they follow the same rules.

[ 5 ] A motion to postpone an event or action previously scheduled is a particular case of the motion to amend something previously adopted.

[ 6 ] Under Robert's Rules of Order , the rules for this motion protect against instability arising from small variations in attendance from one meeting to the next. For this reason, the requirements for changing a previous action are greater than those for taking the action in the first place.

[ 7 ] A motion to rescind, repeal, annul or amend something already adopted requires a two-thirds vote , a majority vote with previous notice , or a vote of a majority of the entire membership , any one of which would suffice.

[ 8 ] Demeter's Manual imposes a similar requirement.

[ 9 ] When this motion is used in a committee , RONR requires a two-thirds vote unless all committee members who voted for the motion to be rescinded or amended are present or have received ample notice; in which case a majority vote is required.

[ 8 ] The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure (TSC) [ edit ] Under The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure , a repeal or amendment of something already adopted requires only the same vote (usually a majority) and notice that was needed to adopt it in the first place.

[ 10 ] This book states, "As a general rule, fewer than a majority should not be authorized to decide anything, and more than a majority should not be required for most decisions"; the book further states that the problem with situations in which a supermajority is required is that "the minority, not the majority, controls." [ 11 ] Legislative use [ edit ] In legislative bodies, the motion to rescind is used for much the same purpose as the motion to reconsider ; many court decisions treat the two motions as one motion. However, in legislative contexts, it is not the same as a motion to repeal. The difference between rescind and reconsider is that the motion to rescind is ordinarily applied to actions that have been taken and are already in effect. It has been described as being in the nature of a motion to amend by striking out the entire proposal and leaving nothing remaining. It is not in order when the question can be reached by a motion to reconsider. Once legislation has been actually enacted, it is too late to rescind. The vote required to rescind is the same as would be required to repeal the act which it sought to rescind (usually a majority).

[ 12 ] Rescind and expunge from the minutes [ edit ] The motion to rescind and expunge from the minutes is used to express the strongest disapproval about action previously taken by a deliberative assembly. Using Roberts Rules of Order Newly Revised , this motion requires a vote of a majority of the entire membership.

[ 13 ] Using The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure , the motion to expunge requires a majority vote (of those voting). The secretary does not erase the expunged motion, but draws a line around it, marks it "expunged by order of this assembly," gives the date of the expunging, and signs the notation.

[ 13 ] The expunged motion is not included in any minutes published thereafter.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Reconsideration of a motion Obrogation References [ edit ] ^ One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Repeal ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

^ Kay v. Goodwin (1830) 6 Bing. 576, per Tindal C.J.

^ a b Vauxhall Estates, Ltd. v. Liverpool Corporation [1932] 1 KB 733 ^ Ellen Street Estates v. Minister of Health [1934] 1 KB 590 ^ Robert, Henry M.; et al. (2011).

Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised (11th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Da Capo Press. p. 305.

ISBN 978-0-306-82020-5 .

^ Robert 2011 , p. 180 ^ Robert 2011 , p. li ^ a b Robert 2011 , pp. 306–307 ^ Demeter, George
    (1969).

Demeter's Manual of Parliamentary Law and Procedure , Blue Book, p. 165 ^ a b Sturgis, Alice
    (2001).

The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure , 4th ed., p. 43

 (TSC) ^ TSC, p. 130 ^ National Conference of State Legislatures
    (2000).

Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure , 2000 ed., p. 321–323 ^ a b Robert 2011 , p. 310 v t e Parliamentary procedure Major concepts History of parliamentary procedure Principles of parliamentary procedure Deliberative assembly Committee Chair Gridlock Filibuster Floor Recognition Motion Second Debate Majority Main motion Minutes Obstructionism Order of business Quorum Session Unanimous consent Voting methods in deliberative assemblies Subsidiary motions Postpone indefinitely Amend Commit Postpone to a certain time Limit or extend limits of debate Previous question Cloture Lay on the table Privileged motions Call for the orders of the day Raise a question of privilege Recess Adjourn Fix the time to which to adjourn Incidental motions Point of order Appeal Suspend the rules Objection to the consideration of a question Division of a question Consideration by paragraph or seriatim Division of the assembly Motions relating to methods of voting and the polls Motions relating to nominations Prayer motion Request to be excused from a duty Requests and inquiries ( Parliamentary inquiry , Request for information , Request for permission to withdraw or modify a motion , Request to read papers , Request for any other privilege ) Motions that bring a question again before the assembly Take from the table Rescind, repeal, annul or amend something previously adopted Discharge a committee Reconsider Legislative procedures Call of the house Hoist Motion to pass on Recall of Parliament Disciplinary procedures Censure Declare the chair vacant Impeach Naming Parliamentary authorities Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised (RONR) The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure (TSC or Sturgis) Demeter's Manual of Parliamentary Law and Procedure Riddick's Rules of Procedure Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure Erskine May: Parliamentary Practice Jefferson's Manual Lex Parliamentaria Odgers' Australian Senate Practice House of Representatives Practice Bourinot's Rules of Order Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms Morin code ABC of Chairmanship Politics portal v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Repeal&oldid=1235441010 " Categories : Motions that bring a question again before the assembly Statutory law Legislative legal terminology Repealed legislation Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles that cite the 2000 edition of Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 19 July 2024, at 08:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Repeal 15 languages Add topic

