Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Preamble 2 Criteria 3 Nomination procedure 4 Members 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citation 5.2 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art 16 languages العربية Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Civil Bavarian order Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art Awarded by the Minister-President of Bavaria Type Order of Merit Established 28 November 1853 ; 171 years ago ( 28 November 1853 ) 18 March 1980 ; 45 years ago ( 18 March 1980 ) ( re-established ) Country Bavaria , Germany Eligibility Preferably German scientists and artists Awarded for Outstanding achievements in the field of science and art Status Currently awarded Founder Maximilian II Statistics First induction 1853 Total inductees 573 ( as of 2018 ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Precedence Next (higher) none ( highest ) Next (lower) Bavarian Order of Merit Ribbon bar of the order The Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art (German: Bayerischer Maximiliansorden für Wissenschaft und Kunst ) was first established on 28 November 1853 by King Maximilian II von Bayern . It is awarded to acknowledge and reward excellent and outstanding achievements in the field of science and art. From 1933 onwards (with the beginning of the Nazi regime ) the order was no longer awarded, until 1980 when it was reinstated by the then Minister-President of the Free State of Bavaria Franz Josef Strauß .

[ 3 ] Munich jewellers Hemmerle have been responsible for making the medal since 1905.

[ 4 ] Preamble [ edit ] In continuation of a Bavarian tradition, the Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art was created. It is awarded to reward outstanding achievements in the field of science and art. ( In Fortsetzung alter bayerischer Tradition wird der Bayerische Maximiliansorden für Wissenschaft und Kunst geschaffen. Mit ihm sollen herausragende Leistungen auf dem Gebieten von Wissenschaft und Kunst ausgezeichnet werden.

) [ 3 ] Criteria [ edit ] The Maximilian Order is preferably awarded to German scientists and artists. It is not restricted to citizens of Bavaria . The order was instituted in one class and two sections (science and art). The order is restricted to 100 living members.

[ 5 ] Nomination procedure [ edit ] The Minister-President, the minister of state for their respective portfolio, and the two sections of the order are eligible to nominate new members. These proposals are evaluated by an advisory committee (Ordensbeirat). It gives its recommendation to the Minister-President for the final decision.

[ 6 ] The advisory committee consists of: the President of the Landtag of Bavaria , the member of the government who is deputy of the Minister-President, the State Minister of Sciences, Research and the Arts, the President of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities , the President of the Bavarian Academy of Fine Arts , the President of one of the Bavarian Art Colleges (Kunsthochschulen), the President of one of the Bavarian Universities and a representative of the applied sciences , who is named by the Minister-President.

All members of the advisory committee are selected for a period of five years. The committee decides with the majority of its members.

[ 6 ] Members [ edit ] Main article: Members of the Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art From 1980 to 2018 the order has been awarded to 222 recipients.

[ 2 ] The number of living members of the order cannot exceed 100.

[ 2 ] As of December 2018 there are 95 living members of the order.

[ 2 ] From 1853 to 1932 the order has been issued 351 times.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] Citation [ edit ] ^ a b Körner 1984, p. 350.

^ a b c d "Terminhinweis: Ministerpräsident Dr. Markus Söder verleiht Bayerischen Maximiliansorden" (Press release) (in German). Munich: Bayerische Staatsregierung. 11 December 2018. Archived from the original on 26 October 2019 . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ a b Gesetz über den Bayerischen Maximiliansorden für Wissenschaft und Kunst vom 18. März 1980, Artikel 1 (German) ^ Royce-Greensill, Sarah (9 March 2018).

"Hemmerle celebrates 125 years with a collection inspired by its past as a medal-maker" .

The Telegraph . Telegraph . Retrieved 18 April 2018 .

^ Gesetz über den Bayerischen Maximiliansorden für Wissenschaft und Kunst vom 18. März 1980, Artikel 2 und 3 (German) ^ a b Gesetz über den Bayerischen Maximiliansorden für Wissenschaft und Kunst vom 18. März 1980, Artikel 6 (German) Sources [ edit ] Schreiber, Georg (1964).

Die Bayerischen Orden und Ehrenzeichen (in German). Munich: Prestel-Verlag.

Körner, Hans (1984).

"Der Bayerische Maximiliansorden für Wissenschaft und Kunst und seine Mitglieder" .

Zeitschrift für Bayerische Landesgeschichte (in German).

47 : 299– 398. Archived from the original on 19 July 2018 . Retrieved 24 July 2012 .

; as book: Hefte zur Bayerischen Landesgeschichte (in German). Vol. 2. Kommission für bayerische Landesgeschichte bei der Akademie der Wissenschaften. 2001.

ISBN 3-7696-9700-6 .

"Gesetz über den Bayerischen Maximiliansorden für Wissenschaft und Kunst" (PDF) .

Bayerische Staatsregierung (in German). München. 18 March 1980. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 25 February 2018 .

(The law) External links [ edit ] Official website www.ordenmuseum.de: Der Bayerische Verdienstorden und Bayerischen Maximiliansorden für Wissenschaft und Kunst (German) v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of the German Empire Kingdom of Prussia Order of the Black Eagle Order of Merit of the Prussian Crown Order of the Red Eagle Order of the Crown House Order of Hohenzollern Pour le Mérite Order of Saint John (Bailiwick of Brandenburg) Order of Louise Wilhelm-Orden Kingdom of Bavaria Order of Saint Hubert Military Order of Max Joseph Military Merit Order (Bavaria) Order of Theresa Order of Saint Elizabeth Royal Order of Saint George Order of Merit of the Bavarian Crown Order of Saint Michael (Bavaria) Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art Order of Louis (Bavaria) Medical military Order Kingdom of Saxony Order of the Rue Crown Military Order of St. Henry Albert Order Civil Order of Saxony Order of Sidonia Order of Maria Anna Kingdom of Württemberg Order of the Crown (Württemberg) Military Merit Order (Württemberg) Friedrich Order Order of Olga Kingdom of Hanover Order of St. George Royal Guelphic Order Order of Ernst August Grand Duchy of Baden Military Karl-Friedrich Merit Order Order of Berthold the First Order of the Zähringer Lion House Order of Fidelity Grand Duchy of Hesse House Order of the Golden Lion Ludwig Order Order of Philip the Magnanimous Order of the Star of Brabant General Honor Decoration Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel House Order of the Golden Lion Wilhelm Order Order of the Iron Helmet Landgraviate of Hesse-Darmstadt Order of Philip the Magnanimous Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin Order of the Griffon (Mecklenburg) House Order of the Wendish Crown Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz Order of the Griffon (Mecklenburg) House Order of the Wendish Crown Grand Duchy of Oldenburg House and Merit Order of Peter Frederick Louis Friedrich-August Cross Duchy of Saxe-Weimar Order of the White Falcon Duchy of Brunswick Order of Henry the Lion Duchy of Nassau Order of the Gold Lion of the House of Nassau Order of Adolphe of Nassau Duchy of Saxe-Altenburg Saxe-Ernestine House Order Duchy of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha Saxe-Ernestine House Order (2006: Saxe-Coburg-Gotha House Order) Duchy of Saxe-Meiningen Saxe-Ernestine House Order Duchy of Anhalt Order of Albert the Bear Order of Merit for Science and Art Principality of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen House Order of Hohenzollern Principality of Hohenzollern-Hechingen House Order of Hohenzollern Principality of Lippe-Detmold Order of the Cross of Honour (Lippe) Order of Leopold (Lippe) Order of Berta Order of the Rose of Lippe Principality of Schaumburg-Lippe Order of the Cross of Honour (Lippe) Principality of Reuss Princely Reuss Honour Cross Principality of Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt Princely Schwarzburg Honor Cross Principality of Schwarzburg-Sondershausen Princely Schwarzburg Honor Cross Principality of Waldeck and Pyrmont Order of Merit (Waldeck and Pyrmont) Free cities Hanseatic Cross v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of the States of Germany Orders of merit of the Republic of Germany Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Orders of merit of the states of Germany Baden-Württemberg Bavaria Berlin Brandenburg Hesse Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania Lower Saxony North Rhine-Westphalia Rhineland-Palatinate Saarland Saxony Saxony-Anhalt Schleswig-Holstein Thuringia Other Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art Pour le Mérite Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bavarian_Maximilian_Order_for_Science_and_Art&oldid=1292590345 " Categories : Arts awards in Germany German science and technology awards Orders, decorations, and medals of Bavaria History of Bavaria Kingdom of Bavaria Awards established in 1853 Awards disestablished in the 1930s Awards established in 1980 1853 establishments in Bavaria 1933 disestablishments in Germany 1980 establishments in West Germany Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 20:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art 16 languages Add topic

