Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Uniquely pure flavor states 2 Backbone of meson spectroscopy 3 List of vector mesons Toggle List of vector mesons subsection 3.1 Hypothetical 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Vector meson 5 languages Español Français 한국어 Русский Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Meson with total spin 1 and odd parity This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Vector meson" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The vector mesons consisting of light quarks form a nonet .

In high energy physics , a vector meson is a meson with total spin 1 and odd parity (usually noted as J P = 1 − ). Vector mesons have been seen in experiments since the 1960s, and are well known for their spectroscopic pattern of masses.

[ 1 ] The vector mesons contrast with the pseudovector mesons , which also have a total spin 1 but instead have even parity. The vector and pseudovector mesons are also dissimilar in that the spectroscopy of vector mesons tends to show nearly pure states of constituent quark flavors , whereas pseudovector mesons and scalar mesons tend to be expressed as composites of mixed states.

Uniquely pure flavor states [ edit ] Since the development of the quark model by Murray Gell-Mann (and also independently by George Zweig ), [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] the vector mesons have demonstrated the spectroscopy of pure states. The fact that the I = 1 rho meson (ρ) and I = 0 omega meson (ω) have nearly equal mass centered on 770– 780 MeV/ c 2 , while the phi meson (φ) has a higher mass around 1020 MeV/ c 2 , indicates that the light-quark vector mesons appear in nearly pure states, with the φ meson having a nearly 100 percent amplitude of hidden strangeness .

These nearly pure states characteristic of the vector mesons are not at all evident in the pseudoscalar meson or scalar meson multiplets , and may be only slightly realized among the tensor meson and pseudovector meson multiplets. This fact makes the vector mesons an excellent probe of the quark flavor content of other types of mesons, measured through the respective decay rates of non-vector mesons into the different types of vector mesons. Such experiments are very revealing for theorists who seek to determine the flavor content of mixed state mesons.

Backbone of meson spectroscopy [ edit ] At higher masses, the vector mesons include charm and bottom quarks in their structure. In this realm, the radiative processes tend to stand out, with heavy tensor and scalar mesons decaying dominantly into vector mesons by photon emission . Pseudovector mesons transition by a similar process into pseudoscalar mesons. Because much of the spectrum of heavy mesons is tied by radiative processes to the vector mesons, one may think of vector mesons as forming a sort of backbone to the spectroscopy of mesons in general.

Some vector mesons can, compared to other mesons, be measured to a very high precision. This stems from the fact that they have the same quantum numbers as the photon, J PC = 1 −− , where J = angular momentum quantum number , P = parity , C = C parity . Therefore they appear in electron-positron collisions in the process e − − e + → → γ γ → → q q ¯ ¯ {\displaystyle e^{-}e^{+}\to \gamma \to q{\bar {q}}} , which provides experimentally a clear signal compared to other measurements, which have to use hadronic processes. Vector mesons play a huge role in the study of the strong hadronic force.

List of vector mesons [ edit ] ρ meson ω meson φ meson K*(892) meson D* meson J/ψ meson ϒ meson Hypothetical [ edit ] θ meson See also [ edit ] List of mesons Vector meson dominance Vector boson References [ edit ] ^ Nichitiu, F. (November 2, 1995).

"An Introduction to the Vector Meson" (PDF) . Retrieved June 1, 2021 .

^ Gell-Mann, M.

(4 January 1964). "A Schematic Model of Baryons and Mesons".

Physics Letters .

8 (3): 214– 215.

Bibcode : 1964PhL.....8..214G .

doi : 10.1016/S0031-9163(64)92001-3 .

^ Zweig, G.

(17 January 1964).

An SU(3) Model for Strong Interaction Symmetry and its Breaking (PDF) (Report). CERN Report No.8182/TH.401.

^ Zweig, G.

(1964).

An SU(3) Model for Strong Interaction Symmetry and its Breaking: II (PDF) (Report). CERN Report No.8419/TH.412.

v t e Particles in physics Elementary Fermions Quarks Up (quark antiquark) Down (quark antiquark) Charm (quark antiquark) Strange (quark antiquark) Top (quark antiquark) Bottom (quark antiquark) Leptons Electron Positron Muon Antimuon Tau Antitau Neutrino Electron neutrino Electron antineutrino Muon neutrino Muon antineutrino Tau neutrino Tau antineutrino Bosons Gauge Photon Gluon W and Z bosons Scalar Higgs boson Ghost fields Faddeev–Popov ghosts Hypothetical Superpartners Gauginos Gluino Gravitino Photino Others Axino Chargino Higgsino Neutralino Sfermion ( Stop squark ) Others Axion Curvaton Dilaton Dual graviton Graviphoton Graviton Inflaton Leptoquark Magnetic monopole Majoron Majorana fermion Dark photon Preon Sterile neutrino Tachyon W′ and Z′ bosons X and Y bosons Composite Hadrons Baryons Nucleon Proton Antiproton Neutron Antineutron Delta baryon Lambda baryon Sigma baryon Xi baryon Omega baryon Mesons Pion Rho meson Eta and eta prime mesons Bottom eta meson Phi meson J/psi meson Omega meson Upsilon meson Kaon B meson D meson Quarkonium Exotic hadrons Tetraquark ( Double-charm tetraquark ) Pentaquark Others Atomic nuclei Atoms Exotic atoms Positronium Muonium Tauonium Onia Pionium Protonium Antihydrogen Superatoms Molecules Hypothetical Baryons Hexaquark Heptaquark Skyrmion Mesons Glueball Theta meson T meson Others Mesonic molecule Pomeron Diquark R-hadron Quasiparticles Anyon Davydov soliton Dropleton Exciton Fracton Hole Magnon Phonon Plasmaron Plasmon Polariton Polaron Roton Trion Lists Baryons Mesons Particles Quasiparticles Timeline of particle discoveries Related History of subatomic physics timeline Standard Model mathematical formulation Subatomic particles Particles Antiparticles Nuclear physics Eightfold way Quark model Exotic matter Massless particle Relativistic particle Virtual particle Wave–particle duality Particle chauvinism Physics portal This particle physics –related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vector_meson&oldid=1161305662 " Categories : Mesons Subatomic particles with spin 1 Particle physics stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2021 All articles needing additional references All stub articles This page was last edited on 21 June 2023, at 22:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vector meson 5 languages Add topic

