Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophy of canon law Toggle Philosophy of canon law subsection 1.1 Aristotelian-Thomistic jurisprudence 1.2 Jus Publicum Ecclesiasticum 1.3 Communitas Perfecta 2 Theology of canon law Toggle Theology of canon law subsection 2.1 Ecclesiological inspiration of the 1983 Code 3 Fundamental theory of canon law 4 Notes 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Footnotes 5.2 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law 2 languages Čeština Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on the Canon law of the Catholic Church Ius vigens (current law) 1983 Code of Canon Law Omnium in mentem Magnum principium Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Ad tuendam fidem Ex corde Ecclesiae Indulgentiarum Doctrina Praedicate evangelium Veritatis gaudium Custom Matrimonial nullity trial reforms of Pope Francis Documents of the Second Vatican Council Christus Dominus Lumen gentium Optatam totius Orientalium ecclesiarum Presbyterorum ordinis Sacrosanctum concilium Precepts of the Church Legal history Jus antiquum ( c.

33 –1140) Ancient Church Orders Didache The Apostolic Constitutions Canons of the Apostles Collections of ancient canons Collectiones canonum Dionysianae Collectio canonum quadripartita Collectio canonum Quesnelliana Collectio canonum Wigorniensis Gelasian Decree Symmachian forgeries Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals Donation of Constantine Gregorian Reform Lay investiture controversy Dictatus papae Libertas ecclesiae Plenitudo potestatis Jus novum ( c.

1140 –1563) Corpus Juris Canonici Decretum Gratiani Decretist Canon Episcopi Margaritae Jus commune Decretals of Gregory IX Decretalist Regulæ Juris Extravagantes Liber Septimus Jus novissimum ( c.

1563 –1918) Council of Trent Benedictus Deus Tametsi Apostolicae Sedis moderationi Jus codicis (1918-present) 1917 Code of Canon Law Ecclesiae Sanctae 1983 Code of Canon Law Other Contractum trinius Papal judge-delegate Right of option Eastern law Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII Nomocanon Eparchy Exarchate Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Protosyncellus Liturgical law Latin Church General Roman Calendar Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite General Instruction of the Roman Missal Code of Rubrics Sacrosanctum Concilium Mysterii Paschalis Musicam sacram Scripturarum thesaurus Liturgiam authenticam Quattuor abhinc annos Ecclesia Dei Summorum Pontificum Magnum principium Traditionis custodes Red Mass Holy day of obligation Sacramental law Communicatio in sacris Ex opere operato Omnium in mentem Validity and liceity Sacraments Holy Orders Impediment (Catholic canon law) Abstemius Defect of birth Obligation of celibacy Nullity of Sacred Ordination Apostolicae curae Dimissorial letters Episcopal consecrators Approbation (Catholic canon law) Confession Penitential canons Paenitentiale Theodori Seal of the Confessional Internal and external forum Note on the importance of the internal forum and the inviolability of the Sacramental Seal Apostolic Penitentiary Canon penitentiary Complicit absolution Sacramentum Poenitentiae Eucharist Eucharistic discipline Canon 915 Celebret Mass stipend Sacramentals Indulgence Indulgentiarum doctrina Sacred places Altars Major basilica Minor basilica Oratory (chapel) Sacred times Feast days Fast days and abstinence Paenitemini Holy day of obligation Matrimonial law Canonical form (Latin Church) Tametsi Ne Temere Banns of marriage Declaration of Nullity Dignitas connubii Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis Vetitum Defender of the Bond Impediments to Marriage Affinity Clandestinity Impediment of crime Disparity of cult Ligamen Public propriety Matrimonial dispensation Ratum sed non consummatum Sanatio in radice Natural marriage Pauline privilege Petrine privilege Supreme authority, particular churches , and canonical structures Supreme authority of the Church Roman Pontiff Papal conclave College of Bishops Supra-diocesan/eparchal structures College of Cardinals Conference of bishops Synod of Bishops Particular churches Churches sui juris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Local particular churches Appointment of bishops Abbacy nullius Apostolic vicariate Apostolic vicar Apostolic administration Apostolic administrator Diocese/Archdiocese Aeque principaliter Cathedraticum In persona episcopi Diocesan Curia Moderator of the Curia Chancery Deanery Vicar forane Eparchy Eparchal curia Military ordinariate Mission sui juris Personal ordinariate Anglicanorum Coetibus Juridic persons Parish Team of priests in solidum Collegiate church Parish register Lay trusteeism Roman Curia Dicastery Congregation Pontifical council Personal prelature Types of membership of Opus Dei Association of the Christian faithful Vicar general Quinquennial visit ad limina Jurisprudence Canonical coronation Canonically crowned images Computation of time Custom Delegata potestas non potest delegari Derogation Dispensation Taxa Innocentiana Faculty Indult Impediment Donation Interpretation Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts Jurisdiction Peritus Obreption & subreption Obrogation Promulgation Resignation of the Roman Pontiff Sede vacante Simony Vacatio legis Validity and liceity Visitation Apostolic visitor Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Theology Ecclesiology Treatise on Law Determinatio Temporal goods (property) Benefice Cathedraticum Contract law Mass stipend Stole fee Temporalities Law of persons Person (Catholic canon law) Formal act of defection from the Catholic Church Canonical age Emancipation Exemption Heresy Clerics Secular clergy Regular clergy Obligation of celibacy Clerics and public office Incardination and excardination Laicization (dispensation) Canonical faculties Office Canonical provision Canonical election Juridic and physical persons Jus patronatus Associations of the faithful Consecrated life Canonical documents Acta Apostolicae Sedis Acta Sanctae Sedis Censor librorum Imprimatur Imprimi potest Notary Protonotary apostolic Apostolic constitution Canon Concordat Decree Decretal Encyclical Motu proprio Ordinance Papal brief Papal bull Penitential Positive law Rescript Parish register Ecclesiastical Latin Penal law Canon 1324 Canon 1397 §2 Censure (Catholic canon law) De delictis gravioribus Complicit absolution Crimen sollicitationis Excommunication List of excommunicable offences in the Catholic Church List of people excommunicated by the Catholic Church List of cardinals excommunicated by the Catholic Church Interdict Laicization (penal) Latae sententiae and ferendae sententiae Lifetime of prayer and penance Canonical admonitions Ecclesiastical prison Procedural law Pars statica (tribunals & ministers/parties) Tribunals Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura Tribunal of the Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Ministers of Justice Judicial Vicar / Officialis Auditor Parties Defender of the Bond Procurator Pars dynamica (trial procedure) Dignitas connubii (matrimonial causes) Appeal as from an abuse Presumption Penal procedure Vos estis lux mundi Canonization Congregation for the Causes of Saints Maiorem hac dilectionem Advocatus Diaboli Oblatio vitae Positio Beatification and canonization process in 1914 Election of the Roman Pontiff Current law Universi Dominici gregis Papal renunciation Reforms of Pope Benedict XVI Historical Cum proxime Jus exclusivae Papal appointment Aeterni Patris Filius Romano Pontifici eligendo Ingravescentem aetatem Ubi periculum Quia propter Legal practice and scholarship List of legal abbreviations Academic degrees Licentiate of Canon Law Doctor of Canon Law Doctor of both laws Journals and Professional Societies Canon Law Society of America The Jurist Faculties of canon law Catholic University of America School of Canon Law Canonists Medieval Gratian Hostiensis Jean Lemoine Raymond of Penyafort Rufinus Johannes Teutonicus Geoffrey of Trani Burchard of Worms Brocard Modern & Contemporary Eugenio Corecco John D. Faris Pietro Gasparri Ladislas Orsy Edward N. Peters Law of consecrated life Solemn vow Exclaustration Manifestation of Conscience Canonical erection of a house of religious Pontifical right Diocesan right Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Institute of consecrated life Religious institute Congregation Order Monasticism Canons regular Mendicant orders Clerics regular Secular institute Cum Sanctissimus Primo Feliciter Provida Mater Ecclesia Society of apostolic life Decretum laudis Catholicism portal v t e The philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law are the fields of philosophical , theological ( ecclesiological ), and legal scholarship which concern the place of canon law in the nature of the Catholic Church , both as a natural and as a supernatural entity. Philosophy and theology shape the concepts and self-understanding of canon law as the law of both a human organization and as a supernatural entity, since the Catholic Church believes that Jesus Christ instituted the church by direct divine command, while the fundamental theory of canon law is a meta-discipline of the "triple relationship between theology, philosophy, and canon law".

[ 1 ] Philosophy of canon law [ edit ] See also: Philosophy of law A triple species of human [positive] law is distinguished: ecclesiastical or canon law, civil law , and the law of nations . Canon law ( jus canonicum ) and civil law differ among themselves partly by nature of origin, partly by nature of object, and partly by nature of end: They differ in origin: for the origin of the civil power is from God the author of nature; while the origin of the ecclesiastical power is from God the contributor of supernatural grace.

They differ in object: because canon law regulates spiritual and sacred matters, while civil law regulates matters temporal and political.

They differ in end: for canon law especially aims at the eternal happiness ( beatitudo ) of people; civil law, however, aims at their temporal happiness ( felicitas ).

[ 2 ] Aristotelian-Thomistic jurisprudence [ edit ] Main articles: Politics (Aristotle) , Treatise on Law , and Determinatio Summa theologica , Pars secunda, prima pars. (copy by Peter Schöffer, 1471) Although canonical jurisprudential theory generally follows the principles of Aristotelian - Thomistic legal philosophy , [ 3 ] Thomas Aquinas never explicitly discusses the place of canon law in his Treatise on Law [ 4 ] (a small section of his Summa Theologiæ ). However, Aquinas himself was influenced by canon law; the fourth clause of his famous 4-part definition of law—the requirement of promulgation —is taken from the canonists, and the sed contra of his article on promulgation cites Gratian (the "Father of Canon Law") as an authority.

[ 5 ] According to René A. Wormser, Gratian 's service in assembling and co-ordinating [sic.] the mass of canon law was of inestimable value; but the man to whom the Church and canon law are most indebted is St. Thomas Aquinas ...And it is largely upon the thesis of St. Thomas Aquinas that the Church jurists went so far as to pronounce that laws were of absolutely no force whatever if they were not for the common good.

[ 6 ] While the term "law" ( lex ) is never explicitly defined in the 1983 Code , [ 7 ] the Catechism of the Catholic Church cites Aquinas in defining law as "...an ordinance of reason for the common good, promulgated by the one who is in charge of the community" [ 8 ] and reformulates it as "...a rule of conduct enacted by competent authority for the sake of the common good." [ 9 ] Some authors, however, dispute the applicability of the Thomistic definition of law ( lex ) to canon law, arguing that its application would impoverish ecclesiology and corrupt the very supernatural end of canon law.

[ 10 ] Jus Publicum Ecclesiasticum [ edit ] With the birth of the omni-competent sovereign nation-state in the seventeenth century, [ 11 ] which claimed exclusive jurisdiction over all its citizens, the dual or concurrent jurisdiction of the Catholic Church and the sovereign state was intellectually and legally challenged. In the new legal and politico-religious climate in the period following the Protestant Reformation , the newly formed sovereign states of Europe claimed more jurisdiction over areas of law and legal practice which had traditionally been under the jurisdiction of the church.

[ 12 ] In this post-Reformation period of political change, canonical jurists sought to defend within the categories of the public law the right of the Catholic Church to make and enforce the law .

[ 13 ] Hence the name, jus publicum ecclesiasticum —"public ecclesiastical law".

The Church is not merely a corporation ( collegium ) or part .of civil society. Hence, the maxim is false, " Ecclesia est in statu ," or, the Church is placed under the power of the state. The Church is rightly named a Sovereign State. This is proved by Soglia 13 in these words : " Ex defmitione Pufiendorfii, Status est conjunctio plurium hominum, quae imperio per homines administrate, sibi proprio, et aliunde non dependente, continetur. Atqui ex institutione Christi, Ecclesia est conjunctio hominum, quae per homines, hoc est, per Petrum et Apostolos, eorumque successores administratur cum imperio sibi proprio, nee aliunde dependente ; ergo Ecclesia est Status ." [ 14 ] The justification of the legal powers of the Catholic Church would now be defended along the lines of the sovereign state 's justification for its own legal powers, and the Catholic Church would be considered a concurrent and complementary Communitas Perfecta in the realm of the supernatural end of man to that of the civil sovereign state in the realm of the natural end of man.

[ 15 ] Communitas Perfecta [ edit ] Main article: Communitas Perfecta Many canonists, in the years preceding the Second Vatican Council , considered the justification and basis for canon law being a true legal system to be that the Catholic Church was established by Jesus Christ as a Communitas Perfecta , and as such was a true human society which had the right to make human law.

the Church is a Sovereign State, that is, a perfect and supreme society, established by our Lord for the purpose of leading men to heaven. We say, a society; now what is a society? Speaking in general, it is a number of persons associated together, in order to attain, by united efforts, some common end. We say, perfect; because she is complete of herself, and therefore has within her own bosom all the means sufficient to enable her to attain her end. We say, supreme, because she is subject to no other society on earth. Like every society, the Church is an external organization. For she is composed of human beings, who have a body as well as a soul. She is, in fact, by the will of her divine Founder, a community, an association of men, governed by men. Like every external organization, the Church must be governed by laws and regulations that will enable her to fulfill her mission and attain her end. The aim and end of the Church is the worship of God and the salvation of souls. Any action or omission, therefore, on the part of her members, which hinders her from carrying out her mission or reaching her end, and, consequently, whatever contravenes the regulations made by her concerning the worship of God and the sanctification of her children, is punishable by her. For God, having given her a mission, also gave her the means or the power to fulfill it. Hence she can establish, in fact has established, laws, and regulations, obligatory on her members. If the members violate those laws, they not only sin against God, but they offend also against the order, discipline, laws, or regulations established by the Church.

[ 16 ] Fernando della Rocca asserted that it is a "fundamental principle of canon law which insists on the right of the Church as a perfect society , [ Note 1 ] to determine, particularly in the field of legislation, the limits of its own power." [ 17 ] Even Pope Benedict XV , in his apostolic constitution promulgating the 1917 Code of Canon Law , attributed the legislative authority of the church to it being founded by Jesus Christ with all the requirements for a Communitas Perfecta .

[ 18 ] Theology of canon law [ edit ] See also: Catholic theology and Catholic ecclesiology In the decades following the Second Vatican Council , many canonists called for a more theological, rather than philosophical, conception of canon law, [ 19 ] acknowledging the "triple relationship between theology, philosophy, and canon law".

[ 1 ] Pope Benedict XVI , in his address of 21 January 2012 before the Roman Rota , taught that canonical laws can only be interpreted and fully understood within the Catholic Church in the light of her mission and ecclesiological structure.

[ 20 ] Were one to tend to identify Canon Law with the system of the laws of the canons, the understanding of that which is juridical in the Church would essentially consist in the comprehending of that which the legal texts establish. At first glance, this approach would appear to hold Human Law entirely in value. However the impoverishment which this conception would bring about becomes manifest: with the practical oblivion of the Natural Law and of the Divine Positive Law , as well as the vital relationship of every Law with the communion and the mission of the Church, the work of the interpreter becomes deprived of vital contact with ecclesial reality.

[ 20 ] Some authors conceive of canon law as essentially theological and the discipline of canon law as a theological subdiscipline, [ 19 ] but Msgr. Carlos José Errázuriz contends that "in a certain sense, all postconciliar canonical scholarship has shown a theological concern in the widest sense, that is, a tendency to determine more clearly the place of the juridical in the mystery of the Church." [ 19 ] Ecclesiological inspiration of the 1983 Code [ edit ] Main articles: Catholic ecclesiology and 1983 Code of Canon Law In view of the decision to reform the existing 1983 Code , the Second Vatican Council , in the decree Optatam totius (§16), ordered that "the teaching of canon law [...] should take into account the mystery of the Church, according to the dogmatic constitution De Ecclesia ".

[ 21 ] The 1917 Code was structured according to the Roman law division of "norms, persons, things, procedures, penalties", while the 1983 Code, in total contrast, was deliberately given a much more doctrinal-theological structure.

John Paul II described the ecclesiological inspiration of the new code of canon law in this way: [ 22 ] The instrument, which the Code is, fully corresponds to the nature of the Church , especially as it is proposed by the teaching of the Second Vatican Council in general, and in a particular way by its ecclesiological teaching. Indeed, in a certain sense, this new Code could be understood as a great effort to translate this same doctrine, that is, the conciliar ecclesiology, into canonical language. If, however, it is impossible to translate perfectly into canonical language the conciliar image of the Church, nevertheless, in this image there should always be found as far as possible its essential point of reference.

[ 22 ] Thus the 1983 Code is configured, as far as possible, according to the "mystery of the Church", the most significant divisions—Books II, III, and IV—corresponding to the munus regendi , the munus sanctificandi , and the munus docendi (the "missions" of governance, of worship/sanctification, and of teaching) which in turn derive from the kingly, the priestly and the prophetic roles or functions of Christ .

[ 23 ] Fundamental theory of canon law [ edit ] See also: Catholic ecclesiology The fundamental theory of canon law is a discipline covering the basis of canon law in the very nature of the church.

[ 24 ] Fundamental theory is a newer discipline that takes as its object "the existence and nature of what is juridical in the Church of Jesus Christ ." [ 25 ] The discipline seeks to provide a theoretical basis for the coexistence and complementarity of canon law and the Catholic Church , and it seeks to refute the "canonical antijuridicism" (the belief that law of the church constitutes a contradiction in terms; that law and church are radically incompatible) [ 26 ] of the various heretical movements and of the Protestant Reformation [ 27 ] on the one hand, and on the other, the antijuridicism deriving from a belief that all law is identifiable with the law of the state; that in order to be true law, the state must be its maker.

[ 28 ] The discipline seeks to better explain the nature of law in the church and engages in theological discussions in post- conciliar Catholicism [ 29 ] and seeks to combat "postconciliar antijuridicism".

[ 30 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ In the context of ecclesiological discourse, "perfect society ( societas perfecta )" and "perfect community ( communitas perfecta )" have the same meaning and are used interchangeably.

References [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b Ladislas Orsy, "Towards a Theological Conception of Canon Law" (published in Jordan Hite & Daniel J. Ward, "Readings, Cases, Materials in Canon Law: A Textbook for Ministerial Students, Revised Edition" (Collegeville, MN: The Liturgical Press, 1990), pg. 11 ^ Bargilliat, M., “Prælectiones Juris Canonici—Tomus Primus” (Parisiis: Berche et Tralin, Editores, 1909), pg. 3.

^ CanonLaw.info, main page . Accessed 9 April 2016.

^ J. Budziszewski, The Architecture of Law According to Thomas Aquinas ; accessed 14 March 2016 ^ Blackfriars Summa Theologiæ Vol. 28, pg. 16 [notes by Thomas Gilby on Summa Ia-IIæ, q. 90, a. 4] ^ René A. Wormser, The Story of the LAW, pp. 187-188 ^ "JCL Comprehensive Exam References Book I" .

JGray.org .

Archived from the original on May 10, 2023 . Retrieved June 8, 2013 .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church §1976 , citing Summa Theologiae I-II, 90, 4 ^ Catechism of the Catholic Church §1951 ^ Exegetical Commentary on the Code of Canon Law, Vol. I, pg. 261-262 (commentary on 1983 CIC, Book I, Title I) ^ Ferguson & McHenry, The American Federal Government , pg. 2 ^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory , pg. 27-28.

^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory , pg. 43.

^ S. B. SMITH, ELEMENTS ECCLESIASTICAL LAW, 9th Edition (1895), §185 ^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory , pg. 42.

^ S. B. SMITH, ELEMENTS OF ECCLESIASTICAL LAW, VOL. III. ECCLESIASTICAL PUNISHMENTS. SECOND, REVISED EDITION.

(New York: Benziger Brothers, 1888), §§1658-1659 (accessed 31 January 2018) ^ Della Rocca, Manual of Canon Law , pg. 60.

^ Benedict XV, ap. const.

Providentissima Mater Ecclesia , (found in Peters [trans.], 1917 Code of Canon Law , pg. 21.

^ a b c Errázuriz, Fundamental Theory , pg. 71 ^ a b Benedict XVI, 2012 Roman Rota Address : ^ Optatam totius §16, accessed 14 April 2016.

^ a b Sacrae Disciplinae Leges , accessed Jan-11-2013 ^ Confer "CANON LAW AND COMMUNIO 
Writings on the Constitutional Law of the Church", 1, 1, at "Home" . Archived from the original on 2014-03-26 . Retrieved 2014-03-26 .

.

^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory, 3 ^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory, xvii.

^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory, 4-5.

^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory, 7, 20.

^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory, 26.

^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory, 59 et seq.

^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory, 62 Bibliography [ edit ] Aquinas, Thomas . "St. Thomas Aquinas: Summa Theologiæ, Volume 28: Law and Political Theory (Ia2æ. 90-97); Latin text. English translation, Introduction, Notes, Appendices & Glossary [by] Thomas Gilby O.P.", Blackfriars (Cambridge: Eyre and Spottiswoode Limited, 1966).

Aymans, Winfried.

Ecclesiological Implications of the New Legislation (essay published in Jordan Hite & Daniel J. Ward, Readings, Cases, Materials in Canon Law: A Textbook for Ministerial Students, Revised Edition (Collegeville, MN: The Liturgical Press, 1990).

Bargilliat, M., “Prælectiones Juris Canonici—Tomus Primus” (Parisiis: Berche et Tralin, Editores, 1909).

Benedict XVI .

Address of His Holiness Benedict XVI for the Inauguration of the Judicial Year of the Tribunal of the Roman Rota , Clementine Hall, 21 January 2012.

https://w2.vatican.va/content/benedict-xvi/en/speeches/2012/january/documents/hf_ben-xvi_spe_20120121_rota-romana.html Accessed 29 March 2016.

Caparros, Ernest.

Exegetical Commentary on the Code of Canon Law, Volume I: Prepared under the Responsibility of the Martín de Azpilcueta Institute, Faculty of Canon Law, University of Navarre (Chicago, Illinois: Midwest Theological Forum, 2004) Edited by Ángel Marzoa, Jorge Miras and Rafael Rodríguez-Ocaña (English language edition General editor: Ernest Caparros; Review coordinator: Patrick Lagges).

Della Rocca, Fernando.

Manual of Canon Law (Milwaukee: The Bruce Publishing Company, 1959) translated by Anselm Thatcher Errázuriz M., Carlos José.

Justice in the Church: A Fundamental Theory of Canon Law (Montreal: Wilson & Lefleur Ltée, 2009) trans. Jean Gray in collaboration with Michael Dunnigan.

Ferguson, John H., and McHenry, Dean E.

The American Federal Government: Third Edition (McGraw-Hil Series in Political Science) (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1953).

Orsy, Ladislas.

Towards a Theological Conception of Canon Law (essay published in Jordan Hite & Daniel J. Ward, Readings, Cases, Materials in Canon Law: A Textbook for Ministerial Students, Revised Edition (Collegeville, MN: The Liturgical Press, 1990).

Peters, Edward N., translator, The 1917 or Pio-Benedictine Code of Canon Law : in English Translation with Extensive Scholarly Apparatus (Ignatius Press, 2001).

Peters, Edward N.

, CanonLaw.info Wormser, René A., The Story of the LAW and the Men Who Made It—From the Earliest Times to the Present: Revised and Updated Edition of The Law (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1962).

Catechism of the Catholic Church at Vatican.va v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐m85mf
Cached time: 20250815002816
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.643 seconds
Real time usage: 0.862 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2666/1000000
Revision size: 20772/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 175827/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6784/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 60736/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.339/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21131207/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  579.507      1 -total
 20.14%  116.707      1 Template:Canon_law
 19.46%  112.799      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.84%  109.158      7 Template:Lang
 17.62%  102.096      2 Template:Reflist
 14.19%   82.215      2 Template:Cite_web
 12.85%   74.470      1 Template:Short_description
 11.58%   67.129      2 Template:Navbox
  8.65%   50.133      1 Template:Law
  7.57%   43.860      1 Template:Catholicism Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:50104106:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815002816 and revision id 1293318708. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophy,_theology,_and_fundamental_theory_of_Catholic_canon_law&oldid=1293318708 " Categories : Canon law of the Catholic Church Jurisprudence of Catholic canon law Philosophy of law Thomistic jurisprudence Hidden categories: Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 01:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law 2 languages Add topic

