Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methods for studying nonlinear partial differential equations Toggle Methods for studying nonlinear partial differential equations subsection 1.1 Existence and uniqueness of solutions 1.2 Singularities 1.3 Linear approximation 1.4 Moduli space of solutions 1.5 Exact solutions 1.6 Numerical solutions 1.7 Lax pair 1.8 Euler–Lagrange equations 1.9 Hamilton equations 1.10 Integrable systems 1.11 Symmetry 2 List of equations 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Nonlinear partial differential equation 2 languages Español 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Partial differential equation with nonlinear terms Differential equations Scope Fields Natural sciences Engineering Astronomy Physics Chemistry Biology Geology Applied mathematics Continuum mechanics Chaos theory Dynamical systems Social sciences Economics Population dynamics List of named differential equations Classification Types Ordinary Partial Differential-algebraic Integro-differential Fractional Linear Non-linear By variable type Dependent and independent variables Autonomous Coupled / Decoupled Exact Homogeneous / Nonhomogeneous Features Order Operator Notation Relation to processes Difference (discrete analogue) Stochastic Stochastic partial Delay Solution Existence and uniqueness Picard–Lindelöf theorem Peano existence theorem Carathéodory's existence theorem Cauchy–Kowalevski theorem General topics Initial conditions Boundary values Dirichlet Neumann Robin Cauchy problem Wronskian Phase portrait Lyapunov / Asymptotic / Exponential stability Rate of convergence Series / Integral solutions Numerical integration Dirac delta function Solution methods Inspection Method of characteristics Euler Exponential response formula Finite difference ( Crank–Nicolson ) Finite element Infinite element Finite volume Galerkin Petrov–Galerkin Green's function Integrating factor Integral transforms Perturbation theory Runge–Kutta Separation of variables Undetermined coefficients Variation of parameters People List Isaac Newton Gottfried Leibniz Jacob Bernoulli Leonhard Euler Joseph-Louis Lagrange Józef Maria Hoene-Wroński Joseph Fourier Augustin-Louis Cauchy George Green Carl David Tolmé Runge Martin Kutta Rudolf Lipschitz Ernst Lindelöf Émile Picard Phyllis Nicolson John Crank v t e In mathematics and physics, a nonlinear partial differential equation is a partial differential equation with nonlinear terms . They describe many different physical systems, ranging from gravitation to fluid dynamics, and have been used in mathematics to solve problems such as the Poincaré conjecture and the Calabi conjecture . They are difficult to study: almost no general techniques exist that work for all such equations, and usually each individual equation has to be studied as a separate problem.

The distinction between a linear and a nonlinear partial differential equation is usually made in terms of the properties of the operator that defines the PDE itself.

[ 1 ] Methods for studying nonlinear partial differential equations [ edit ] Existence and uniqueness of solutions [ edit ] A fundamental question for any PDE is the existence and uniqueness of a solution for given boundary conditions. For nonlinear equations these questions are in general very hard: for example, the hardest part of Yau's solution of the Calabi conjecture was the proof of existence for a Monge–Ampere equation . The open problem of existence (and smoothness) of solutions to the Navier–Stokes equations is one of the seven Millennium Prize problems in mathematics.

Singularities [ edit ] The basic questions about singularities (their formation, propagation, and removal, and regularity of solutions) are the same as for linear PDE, but as usual much harder to study. In the linear case one can just use spaces of distributions, but nonlinear PDEs are not usually defined on arbitrary distributions, so one replaces spaces of distributions by  refinements such as Sobolev spaces .

An example of singularity formation is given by the Ricci flow : Richard S. Hamilton showed that while short time solutions exist, singularities will usually form after a finite time.

Grigori Perelman 's solution of the Poincaré conjecture depended on a deep study of these singularities, where he showed how to continue the solution past the singularities.

Linear approximation [ edit ] The solutions in a neighborhood of a known solution can sometimes be studied by linearizing the PDE around the solution. This corresponds to studying the tangent space of a point of the moduli space of all solutions.

Moduli space of solutions [ edit ] Ideally one would like to describe the (moduli) space of all solutions explicitly, and 
for some very special PDEs this is possible. (In general this is a hopeless problem: it is unlikely that there is any useful description of all solutions of the Navier–Stokes equation for example, as this would involve describing all possible fluid motions.) If the equation has a very large symmetry group, then one is usually only interested in the moduli space of solutions modulo the symmetry group,  and this is sometimes a finite-dimensional compact manifold, possibly with singularities; for example, this happens in the case of the Seiberg–Witten equations . A slightly more complicated case is the self dual Yang–Mills equations, when the moduli space is finite-dimensional but not necessarily compact, though it can often be compactified explicitly. Another case when one can sometimes hope to describe all solutions is  the case of completely integrable models, when solutions are sometimes a sort of superposition of solitons ; this happens e.g. for the Korteweg–de Vries equation .

Exact solutions [ edit ] It is often possible to write down some special solutions explicitly in  terms of elementary functions (though it is rarely possible to describe all solutions like this). One way of finding such explicit solutions is to reduce the equations to equations of lower dimension, preferably ordinary differential equations, which can often be solved exactly. This can sometimes be done  using separation of variables , or by  looking for highly symmetric solutions.

Some equations have several different exact solutions.

Numerical solutions [ edit ] Main article: Numerical partial differential equations Numerical solution on a computer is almost the only method that can be used for getting information about arbitrary systems of PDEs. There has been a lot of work done, but a lot of work still remains on solving certain systems numerically, especially  for the Navier–Stokes and other equations related to weather prediction .

Lax pair [ edit ] If a system of PDEs can be put into Lax pair form d L d t = L A − − A L {\displaystyle {\frac {dL}{dt}}=LA-AL} then it usually has an infinite number of first integrals, which help to study it.

Euler–Lagrange equations [ edit ] Systems of PDEs often arise as the Euler–Lagrange equations for a variational problem. Systems of this form can sometimes be solved by finding an extremum of the original variational problem.

Hamilton equations [ edit ] Further information: Hamiltonian mechanics Integrable systems [ edit ] Main article: integrable systems PDEs that arise from integrable systems are often the easiest to study, and can sometimes be completely solved. A well-known example is the Korteweg–de Vries equation .

Symmetry [ edit ] Some systems of PDEs have large symmetry groups. For example, the Yang–Mills equations are invariant under an infinite-dimensional gauge group , and many systems of equations (such as the Einstein field equations ) are invariant under diffeomorphisms of the underlying manifold. Any such symmetry groups can usually be used to help study the equations; in particular if one solution is known one can trivially generate more by acting with the symmetry group.

Sometimes equations are parabolic or hyperbolic "modulo the action of some group": for example, the Ricci flow equation is not quite parabolic, but is "parabolic modulo the action of the diffeomorphism group", which implies that it has most of the good properties of parabolic equations.

List of equations [ edit ] See the extensive List of nonlinear partial differential equations .

See also [ edit ] Euler–Lagrange equation Nonlinear system Integrable system Inverse scattering transform Dispersive partial differential equation References [ edit ] ^ Logan, J. David (1994).

An Introduction to Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations . New York: John Wiley & Sons. pp.

8– 11.

ISBN 0-471-59916-6 .

Calogero, Francesco ; Degasperis, Antonio (1982), Spectral transform and solitons. Vol. I. Tools to solve and investigate nonlinear evolution equations , Studies in Mathematics and its Applications, vol. 13, Amsterdam-New York: North-Holland Publishing Co., ISBN 0-444-86368-0 , MR 0680040 Pokhozhaev, S.I. (2001) [1994], "Non-linear partial differential equation" , Encyclopedia of Mathematics , EMS Press Polyanin, Andrei D.; Zaitsev, Valentin F. (2004), Handbook of nonlinear partial differential equations , Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC, pp. xx+814, ISBN 1-58488-355-3 , MR 2042347 Roubíček, T. (2013), Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations with Applications , International Series of Numerical Mathematics, vol. 153 (2nd ed.), Basel, Boston, Berlin: Birkhäuser, doi : 10.1007/978-3-0348-0513-1 , ISBN 978-3-0348-0512-4 , MR 3014456 Scott, Alwyn, ed. (2004), Encyclopedia of Nonlinear Science , Routledge, ISBN 978-1-57958-385-9 . For errata, see this Zwillinger, Daniel (1998), Handbook of differential equations (3rd ed.), Boston, MA: Academic Press, Inc., ISBN 978-0-12-784396-4 , MR 0977062 External links [ edit ] EqWorld, The World of Mathematical Equations dispersive PDE wiki NEQwiki, the nonlinear equations encyclopedia Archived 2018-12-12 at the Wayback Machine Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nonlinear_partial_differential_equation&oldid=1278247947 " Categories : Partial differential equations Solitons Differential geometry Exactly solvable models Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 1 March 2025, at 09:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nonlinear partial differential equation 2 languages Add topic

