Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aims 2 History 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Global Forest Information Service 1 language Igbo Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Global Forest Information Service" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Global Forest Information Service ( GFIS ) was an initiative of the Collaborative Partnership on Forests (CPF) and was a 
collaborative effort of 14 major forest -related international organizations, institutions and convention secretariat, aiming to maximize the value of all forest information resources and providers worldwide through the sharing of forest-related information through a single gateway. The effort was discontinued in 2021.

Aims [ edit ] In the global policy context, the vision and mission of GFIS are consistent with the resolutions of the United Nations Forum on Forests [ 1 ] (UNFF) and the priorities of the CPF. GFIS was led by the International Union of Forest Research Organizations (IUFRO); together with FAO, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; the Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR); [ 2 ] the UNFF Secretariat; and the Biological Informatics Office of the United States Geological Survey (USGS/BIO).

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] In 1998, the International Consultation on Research and Information Systems in Forestry which was held in Gmunden , Austria , recommended that the Intergovernmental Forum on Forests (IFF) should endorse and promote the development of a Global Forest Information Service to enhance access to all forest-related information, ensuring that it is accessible to all stakeholders including policy-makers, forest managers, non-governmental organizations, community groups and the public at large.

[ 4 ] Consequently, the IFF requested Inter-agency Task Force on Forests member organizations to work with International Union of Forest Research Organizations (IUFRO) in exploring possibilities for a global forest information service. In implementing this request, IUFRO initiated various activities to establish GFIS. These included the establishment of a GFIS Task Force, the development of a GFIS information server and web-interface as well as the implementation of the "GFIS Africa" project to strengthen institutional capacities in developing countries.

The first version of GFIS was presented at the IUFRO European Conference in Copenhagen, Denmark , in August 2002 and successfully demonstrated at the XII World Forestry Congress in Quebec, Canada , in September 2003. It included contributions from over 60 forestry institutions from all regions of the world.

In May 2004, the Collaborative Partnership on Forests (CPF) agreed that GFIS should become a joint initiative. In response, IUFRO, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations , the Center for International Forestry Research and the United Nations Forum on Forests laid the ground work for further development of GFIS as a joint CPF initiative which was approved September 2004 at the 13th Meeting of the CPF in New York.

In August 2005, the new GFIS search service was launched the XXII IUFRO World Congress held in Brisbane, Australia . The GFIS gateway catalogued key information resources, such as news, events, publications and job vacancies supplied by information providers. Since 2007, there have been continual technological advances to GFIS carried out by Finnish Forest Research Institute (Metla) which features improved search tool and windows to the news, events, publications, forest-related jobs & educational resources.

Since 2007 there have been continual technological advances to GFIS carried out by Finnish Forest Research Institute (Metla) which features improved search tool and windows to the news, events, publications and job opportunities, and educational resources.

[ 5 ] In 2021 IUFRO decided not to continue GFIS as a separate entity and instead focus on creating its own online information resources centre, so the www.gfis.net website was taken down. They have created a webpage describing the history of the effort.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] European Forest Downstream Services (EUFODOS) Forestknowledge.net World Forestry Center References [ edit ] ^ United Nations Forum on Forests ^ Center for International Forestry Research ^ Biological Informatics Office of the United States Geological Survey ^ "About Global Forest Information Service (GFIS)" . www.fs.fed.us . Retrieved 15 June 2016 .

^ "Background" . Global Forest Information System. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 18 April 2011 .

^ "Global Forest Information Service" . IUFRO . Retrieved 17 December 2022 .

External links [ edit ] IUFRO description of program end & history Collaborative Partnership on Forests (CPF) Archived 2023-03-21 at the Wayback Machine This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Global_Forest_Information_Service&oldid=1296848637 " Categories : International forestry organizations Intergovernmental organizations World forestry Environmental websites Forestry initiatives Finnish websites Hidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from December 2015 All articles lacking reliable references Webarchive template wayback links Source attribution This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 17:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Global Forest Information Service 1 language Add topic

