Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Influences 3 Work Toggle Work subsection 3.1 History of science 3.2 Philosophy of science 3.3 Philosophy of symbolic forms 3.4 The Cassirer–Heidegger debate 3.5 Philosophy of the Enlightenment 3.6 The Logic of the Cultural Sciences 3.7 The Myth of the State 4 Partial bibliography 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Ernst Cassirer 50 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Scots Seeltersk Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German philosopher (1874–1945) Ernst Cassirer Cassirer c.

1935 Born Ernst Alfred Cassirer ( 1874-07-28 ) July 28, 1874 Breslau , Silesia , Prussia , German Empire (now Wrocław , Poland) Died April 13, 1945 (1945-04-13) (aged 70) New York City, U.S.

Education Education University of Marburg (PhD, 1899) University of Berlin ( Dr. phil. habil.

, 1906) Theses Descartes' Critique of Mathematical and Scientific Knowledge (1899) The Problem of Knowledge in Philosophy and Science in the Modern Age: Volume I (1906) Academic advisors Hermann Cohen Paul Natorp Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Neo-Kantianism ( Marburg School ) Institutions Yale University Columbia University Main interests Epistemology , aesthetics , semiotics , history of philosophy Notable ideas Philosophy of symbolic forms Animal symbolicum Ernst Alfred Cassirer ( / k ɑː ˈ s ɪər ər , k ə ˈ -/ kah- SEER -ər, kə- ; [ 1 ] German: [ˈɛʁnst kaˈsiːʁɐ] ; [ 2 ] [ 3 ] July 28, 1874 – April 13, 1945) was a German philosopher and historian of philosophy. Trained within the Neo-Kantian Marburg School, he initially followed his mentor Hermann Cohen in attempting to supply an idealistic philosophy of science .

After Cohen's death in 1918, Cassirer developed a theory of symbolism and used it to expand the " logic and psychology of thought " into a more general " logic of the cultural sciences ". Cassirer was one of the leading 20th-century advocates of philosophical idealism . His most famous work is the Philosophy of Symbolic Forms (1923–1929).

Though his work received a mixed reception shortly after his death, more recent scholarship has remarked upon Cassirer's role as a strident defender of the moral idealism of the Enlightenment era and the cause of liberal democracy at a time when the rise of fascism had made such advocacy unfashionable. Within the international Jewish community, Cassirer's work has additionally been seen as part of a long tradition of thought on ethical philosophy.

[ 4 ] Biography [ edit ] Cassirer was born in Breslau in Silesia (modern-day southwest Poland) into a Jewish family. After graduating from Johannesgymnasium Breslau he studied Jurisprudence at Friedrich Wilhelms Universität Berlin and Leipzig University , Germanic Philology, Contemporary Literary History, and Philosophy at Ruprecht Karls Universität Heidelberg and Friedrich Wilhelms Universität Berlin , and Philosophy and Psychology at Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich . He then did his doctoral work at the University of Marburg where he studied Philosophy under Hermann Cohen and Paul Natorp and Mathematics under Friedrich Schottky .

[ 5 ] In 1899 he graduated with a dissertation on René Descartes 's analysis of mathematical and natural scientific knowledge entitled Descartes' Kritik der mathematischen und naturwissenschaftlichen Erkenntnis ( Descartes' Critique of Mathematical and Scientific Knowledge ) and completed his habilitation in 1906 at the University of Berlin with the dissertation Das Erkenntnisproblem in der Philosophie und Wissenschaft der neueren Zeit: Erster Band ( The Problem of Knowledge in Philosophy and Science in the Modern Age: Volume I ).

[ 6 ] Politically, Cassirer supported the liberal German Democratic Party (DDP).

[ 7 ] After working for many years as a Privatdozent at the Friedrich Wilhelm University in Berlin, Cassirer was elected in 1919 to the philosophy chair at the newly founded University of Hamburg , where he lectured until 1933, supervising amongst others the doctoral theses of Joachim Ritter and Leo Strauss . 
On 30 January 1933, the Nazi Regime came to power . Cassirer left Germany on 12 March 1933 – one week after the first Reichstagswahl under that Regime – because he was Jewish.

[ 8 ] After leaving Germany he taught for a couple of years at the University of Oxford , before becoming a professor at University of Gothenburg . When Cassirer considered Sweden too unsafe, he applied for a post at Harvard University , but was rejected because thirty years earlier he had rejected a job offer from them.

[ citation needed ] In 1941 he became a visiting professor at Yale University , then moved to Columbia University in New York City, where he lectured from 1943 until his death in 1945.

Cassirer died of a heart attack in April 1945 in New York City. The young rabbi Arthur Hertzberg , who was a student of Cassirer's at Columbia University, conducted the funeral service.

[ 9 ] His grave is located in Westwood, New Jersey , on the Cedar Park Beth–El Cemeteries in the graves of the Congregation Habonim. His son, Heinz Cassirer , was also a Kantian scholar.

Other members of his prominent family included the neurologist Richard Cassirer , the publisher and gallery owner Bruno Cassirer and the art dealer and editor Paul Cassirer .

Influences [ edit ] Donald Phillip Verene, who published some of Cassirer's papers kept at Yale University , gave this overview of his ideas: "Cassirer as a thinker became an embodiment of Kantian principles, but also of much more, of an overall movement of spirit stretching from the Renaissance to the Enlightenment , and on to Herder 's conception of history, Goethe 's poetry, Wilhelm von Humboldt 's study of the Kavi language , Schelling 's Philosophie der Mythologie , Hegel 's Phenomenology of Spirit , and Vischer's conception of the aesthetic symbol , among many others. Cassirer's own position is born through a mastery of the whole development of this world of the humanistic understanding, which included the rise of the scientific world view — a mastery evident both in his historical works and in his systematic philosophy ." [ 10 ] Work [ edit ] History of science [ edit ] Cassirer's first major published writings were a history of modern thought from the Renaissance to Kant . In accordance with his Marburg neo-Kantianism he concentrated upon epistemology. His reading of the Scientific Revolution , in books such as The Individual and the Cosmos in Renaissance Philosophy (1927), as a "Platonic" application of mathematics to nature, influenced historians such as E. A. Burtt , E. J. Dijksterhuis , and Alexandre Koyré .

Philosophy of science [ edit ] In Substance and Function (1910), he writes about late nineteenth-century developments in physics including relativity theory and the foundations of mathematics . In Einstein's Theory of Relativity (1921) he defended the claim that modern physics supports a neo-Kantian conception of knowledge . He also wrote a book about Quantum mechanics called Determinism and Indeterminism in Modern Physics (1936).

Philosophy of symbolic forms [ edit ] At Hamburg Cassirer discovered the Library of the Cultural Sciences founded by Aby Warburg . Warburg was an art historian who was particularly interested in ritual and myth as sources of surviving forms of emotional expression. In Philosophy of Symbolic Forms [ de ] (1923–29) Cassirer argues that man (as he put it in his more popular 1944 book Essay on Man ) is a " symbolic animal ". Whereas animals perceive their world by instincts and direct sensory perception , humans create a universe of symbolic meanings. Cassirer is particularly interested in natural language and myth. He argues that science and mathematics developed from natural language, and religion and art from myth.

The Cassirer–Heidegger debate [ edit ] Main article: Cassirer–Heidegger debate In 1929 Cassirer took part in a historically significant encounter with Martin Heidegger in Davos during the Second Davos Hochschulkurs (the Cassirer–Heidegger debate ). Cassirer argues that while Kant's Critique of Pure Reason emphasizes human temporality and finitude, he also sought to situate human cognition within a broader conception of humanity. Cassirer challenges Heidegger's relativism by invoking the universal validity of truths discovered by the exact and moral sciences.

Philosophy of the Enlightenment [ edit ] Cassirer believed that reason's self-realization leads to human liberation.

Mazlish (2000) [ citation needed ] , however, notes that Cassirer in his The Philosophy of the Enlightenment (1932) focuses exclusively on ideas, ignoring the political and social context in which they were produced.

The Logic of the Cultural Sciences [ edit ] In The Logic of the Cultural Sciences (1942) Cassirer argues that objective and universal validity can be achieved not only in the sciences, but also in practical, cultural, moral, and aesthetic phenomena. Although inter-subjective objective validity in the natural sciences derives from universal laws of nature, Cassirer asserts that an analogous type of inter-subjective objective validity takes place in the cultural sciences.

The Myth of the State [ edit ] Cassirer's last work, The Myth of the State (1946), was published posthumously; at one level it is an attempt to understand the intellectual origins of Nazi Germany . Cassirer sees Nazi Germany as a society in which the dangerous power of myth is not checked or subdued by superior forces. The book discusses the opposition of logos and mythos in Greek thought, Plato 's Republic , the medieval theory of the state, Machiavelli , Thomas Carlyle 's writings on hero worship , the racial theories of Arthur de Gobineau , and Hegel . Cassirer claimed that in 20th-century politics there was a return, with the passive acquiescence of Martin Heidegger , to the irrationality of myth, and in particular to a belief that there is such a thing as destiny. Of this passive acquiescence, Cassirer says that in departing from Husserl's belief in an objective, logical basis for philosophy, Heidegger attenuated the ability of philosophy to oppose the resurgence of myth in German politics of the 1930s.

The Myth of the State discusses the surrender of rational logic to fascist mythology.

[ 11 ] : 62 Cassirer wrote that while fascist propaganda mythmaking flagrantly contradicted empirical reality, it provided a simple and direct answer to the anxieties of the secular present.

[ 11 ] : 63 Partial bibliography [ edit ] Leibniz' System in seinem wissenschaftlichen Grundlagen (1902) The Problem of Knowledge: Philosophy, Science, and History since Hegel [ Das Erkenntnisproblem in der Philosophie und Wissenschaft der neueren Zeit ] (1906–1920), English translation 1950 ( online edition Archived 2011-06-05 at the Wayback Machine ) "Kant und die moderne Mathematik." Kant-Studien 12, 1–40 (1907) Substance and Function [ Substanzbegriff und Funktionsbegriff ] (1910) and Einstein's Theory of Relativity [ Einsteinschen Relativitätstheorie ] (1921), English translation 1923 ( online edition ) Freedom and Form [ Freiheit und Form ] (1916) Kant's Life and Thought [ Kants Leben und Lehre ] (1918), English translation 1981 Philosophy of Symbolic Forms [ Philosophie der symbolischen Formen ] (1923–29), English translation 1953–1957 Volume One: Language [ Erster Teil: Die Sprache ] (1923), English translation 1955 Volume Two: Mythical Thought [ Zweiter Teil: Das mythische Denken ] (1925), English translation 1955 Volume Three: The Phenomenology of Knowledge [ Dritter Teil: Phänomenologie der Erkenntnis ] (1929), English translation 1957 Language and Myth [ Sprache und Mythos ] (1925), English translation 1946 by Susanne K. Langer The Individual and the Cosmos in Renaissance Philosophy [ Individuum und Kosmos in der Philosophie der Renaissance ] (1927), English translation 1963 by Mario Domandi "Erkenntnistheorie nebst den Grenzfragen der Logik und Denkpsychologie" ["Epistemology along with Border Questions of Logic and the Psychology of Thought"].

Jahrbücher der Philosophie , 3, 1927, pp. 31–92 Die Idee der republikanischen Verfassung (1929) "Kant und das Problem der Metaphysik. Bemerkungen zu Martin Heideggers Kantinterpretation." Kant-Studien 26, 1–16 (1931) Philosophy of the Enlightenment [ Die Philosophie der Aufklärung ] (1932), English translation 1951 Determinism and Indeterminism in Modern Physics: Historical and Systematic Studies of the Problem of Causality [ Determinismus und Indeterminismus in der modernen Physik ] (1936), English translation 1956 The Logic of the Cultural Sciences [ Zur Logik der Kulturwissenschaften ] (1942), English translation 2000 by Steve G. Lofts (previously translated in 1961 as The Logic of the Humanities ) An Essay on Man (written and published in English) (1944) ( books.google.com ) The Myth of the State (written and published in English) (posthumous) (1946) ( Internet Archive ) Symbol, Myth, and Culture: Essays and Lectures of Ernst Cassirer, 1935–1945 , ed. by Donald Phillip Verene (March 11, 1981) Ernst Cassirer: Gesammelte Werke. Hamburger Ausgabe. Electronic Edition.

(2016) – The electronic version of the definitive edition of Cassirer's works, published in print by Felix Meiner Verlag, and electronically in the Past Masters series .

The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms, Vol. 4, The Metaphysics of Symbolic Forms . Edited and translated by John Michael Krois and Donald Philip Verene from manuscripts left after Cassirer's death. Published 1996, New Haven & London: Yale University Press.

The Warburg Years (1919–1933): Essays on Language, Art, Myth, and Technology . Translated and with an Introduction by S. G. Lofts with A. Calcagno. New Haven & London: Yale University Press.

See also [ edit ] Ontic structural realism [ 12 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Cassirer" .

Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .

^ "Duden | Ernst | Rechtschreibung, Bedeutung, Definition" .

Duden (in German) . Retrieved 20 October 2018 .

Ẹrnst ^ "Duden | Cassirer | Rechtschreibung, Bedeutung, Definition" .

Duden (in German) . Retrieved 20 October 2018 .

Cass i rer ^ Gordon, Peter E. (8 September 2009).

"(Book 1) Ernst Cassirer: The Last Philosopher of Culture; (Book 2) The Symbolic Construction of Reality: The Legacy of Ernst Cassirer" .

Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews . Retrieved April 13, 2020 .

^ 1945 Curriculum Vitae, Ernst Cassirer Papers - Addition. General Collection, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University.

^ A second volume appeared in 1907, a third one in 1920, and a fourth one in 1957.

^ Jones, Larry Eugene (2001).

Crossing Boundaries: The Exclusion and Inclusion of Minorities in Germany and the United States . Berghahn Books. p. 125.

^ Die Zeit 4/2020: Der Geistesgegenwärtige ^ Arthur Hertzberg: A Reminiscence of Ernst Cassirer The Leo Back Institute Year Book, Volume 15, Issue 1, January 1970, pp.245-246, [1] ^ Cassirer, Ernst (1979). Verene, Donald Phillip (ed.).

Symbol, Myth, and Culture: Essays and Lectures of Ernst Cassirer 1935-1945 . New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press. pp.

6–7 .

ISBN 0-300-02666-8 .

^ a b Tu, Hang (2025).

Sentimental Republic: Chinese Intellectuals and the Maoist Past .

Harvard University Asia Center .

ISBN 9780674297579 .

^ "Structural Realism" : entry by James Ladyman in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Further reading [ edit ] Aubenque, Pierre, et al. "Philosophie und Politik: Die Davoser Disputation zwischen Ernst Cassirer und Martin Heidegger in der Retrospektive." Internationale Zeitschrift für Philosophie, 2: 290-312 Barash, Jeffrey Andrew.

The Symbolic Construction of Reality: The Legacy of Ernst Cassirer (2008) ( excerpt and text search ) Burtt, Edwin Arthur .

The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science, London: Paul Trencher (2000) Eilenberger, Wolfram.

Time of the Magicians: The invention of modern thought, 1919–29 ,  Allen Lane (2020) Folkvord Ingvild & Hoel Aud Sissel (eds.), Ernst Cassirer on Form and Technology: Contemporary Readings , (2012), Basingstoke, Palgrave MacMillan ( ISBN 978-0-230-36547-6 ).

Friedman, Michael .

A Parting of the Ways: Carnap, Cassirer, and Heidegger (2000) ( excerpt and text search ) Gordon, Peter Eli.

Continental Divide: Heidegger, Cassirer, Davos (2010) Krois, John Michael.

Cassirer: Symbolic Forms and History (Yale University Press 1987) Lassègue, Jean.

Cassirer's Transformation: From a Transcendental to a Semiotic Philosophy of Forms . Springer, 2020. (Studies in Applied Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics book series. volume 55) ISBN 978-3-030-42905-8 Lipton, David R.

Ernst Cassirer: The Dilemma of a Liberal Intellectual in Germany, 1914–1933 (1978) Lofts. Steve G.

Ernst Cassirer: A "Repetition" of Modernity (2000) SUNY Press , ISBN 978-0-791-44495-5 : at Google Books Magerski, Christine. "Reaching Beyond the Supra-Historical Sphere: from Cassirer's Philosophy of Symbolic Forms to Bourdieu's Sociology of Symbolic Forms." ´´Pierre Bourdieu and the Field of Cultural Production.´´ Ed. J. Browitt. University of Delaware Press (2004): 21-29.

Schilpp, Paul Arthur (ed.).

The Philosophy of Ernst Cassirer (1949) archive.org Schultz, William.

Cassirer & Langer on Myth (2nd ed. 2000) ( excerpt and text search ) Skidelsky, Edward.

Ernst Cassirer: The Last Philosopher of Culture (Princeton University Press, 2008), 288 pp.

ISBN 978-0-691-13134-4 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Ernst Cassirer .

Library resources about Ernst Cassirer Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Friedman, Michael.

"Ernst Cassirer" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

History of the Cassirer Family Ernst Cassirer in family context Centre for Intercultural Studies Works by Ernst Cassirer at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Ernst Cassirer at the Internet Archive Newspaper clippings about Ernst Cassirer in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW Ernst Cassirer Papers . General Collection, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library. Yale University.

Ernst Cassirer Papers – Addition . General Collection, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University.

v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH MathSciNet Artists ULAN RKD Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ernst_Cassirer&oldid=1294670098 " Categories : Ernst Cassirer Kantian philosophers 1874 births 1945 deaths People from the Province of Silesia Writers from Wrocław Humboldt University of Berlin alumni Academic staff of the Humboldt University of Berlin Academic staff of the University of Hamburg Academics of the University of Oxford Columbia University faculty Yale University faculty University of Gothenburg alumni Academic staff of the University of Gothenburg 20th-century German philosophers German historians of philosophy German semioticians Idealists Jewish philosophers Jewish emigrants from Nazi Germany to the United States Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 03:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ernst Cassirer 50 languages Add topic

