Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In linguistics 2 In linguistic anthropology 3 In natural language processing 4 Contextual variables 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Context 51 languages العربية Asturianu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Non-language factors that enhance understanding of communication For other uses, see Context (disambiguation) .

"Focal event" redirects here. For focal seizural events, see focal seizure .

In semiotics , linguistics , sociology and anthropology , context refers to those objects or entities which surround a focal event , in these disciplines typically a communicative event, of some kind. Context is "a frame that surrounds the event and provides resources for its appropriate interpretation".

[ 1 ] : 2–3 It is thus a relative concept, only definable with respect to some focal event within a frame, not independently of that frame.

In linguistics [ edit ] In the 19th century, it was debated whether the most fundamental principle in language was contextuality or compositionality , and compositionality was usually preferred.

[ 2 ] Verbal context refers to the text or speech surrounding an expression (word, sentence, or speech act ). Verbal context influences the way an expression is understood; hence the norm of not citing people out of context . Since much contemporary linguistics takes texts, discourses, or conversations as the object of analysis, the modern study of verbal context takes place in terms of the analysis of discourse structures and their mutual relationships, for instance the coherence relation between sentences.

Neurolinguistic analysis of context has shown that the interaction between interlocutors defined as parsers creates a reaction in the brain that reflects predictive and interpretative reactions. It can be said then that mutual knowledge, co-text, genre, speakers, hearers create a neurolinguistic composition of context.

[ 3 ] Traditionally, in sociolinguistics , social contexts were defined in terms of objective social variables, such as those of class, gender, age or race. More recently, social contexts tend to be defined in terms of the social identity being construed and displayed in text and talk by language users.

[ citation needed ] The influence of context parameters on language use or discourse is usually studied in terms of language variation , style or register (see Stylistics ). The basic assumption here is that language users adapt the properties of their language use (such as intonation, lexical choice, syntax, and other aspects of formulation ) to the current communicative situation. In this sense, language use or discourse may be called more or less 'appropriate' in a given context.

[ citation needed ] In linguistic anthropology [ edit ] In the theory of sign phenomena, adapted from that of Charles Sanders Peirce , which forms the basis for much contemporary work in linguistic anthropology , the concept of context is integral to the definition of the index , one of the three classes of signs comprising Peirce's second trichotomy. An index is a sign which signifies by virtue of "pointing to" some component in its context, or in other words an indexical sign is related to its object by virtue of their co-occurrence within some kind of contextual frame.

[ 4 ] In natural language processing [ edit ] In word-sense disambiguation , the meanings of words are inferred from the context where they occur.

[ 5 ] Contextual variables [ edit ] Communicative systems presuppose contexts that are structured in terms of particular physical and communicative dimensions, for instance time, location, and communicative role.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Aberrant decoding Context principle Context-sensitive language Conversational scoreboard Deixis Opaque context References [ edit ] ^ Goodwin, Charles; Duranti, Alessandro, eds. (1992).

"Rethinking context: an introduction" (PDF) .

Rethinking context: Language as an interactive phenomenon . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

1– 42. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 12, 2003 . Retrieved February 19, 2017 .

^ Janssen, T. M. (2012) Compositionality: Its historic context , in M. Werning, W. Hinzen, & E. Machery (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of compositionality , pp. 19-46, Oxford University Press.

^ Finkbeiner, Rita; Meibauer, Jörg; Schumacher, Petra B. (2012).

What is a Context?: Linguistic Approaches and Challenges . John Benjamins Publishing.

ISBN 978-9027255792 .

^ Silverstein, Michael (1992).

"The Indeterminacy of Contextualization: When Is Enough Enough?" . In Auer, Peter; Di Luzio, Aldo (eds.).

The Contextualization of Language . Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. pp.

55– 76.

ISBN 978-9027250346 . Retrieved February 19, 2017 .

^ Anind Dey; Boicho Kokinov; David Leake; Roy Turner (24 June 2005).

Modeling and Using Context: 5th International and Interdisciplinary Conference, CONTEXT 2005, Paris, France, July 5-8, 2005, Proceedings . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-3-540-26924-3 .

Further reading [ edit ] For a review of the history of the principle of contextuality in linguistics, see Scholtz, Oliver Robert (1999) Verstehen und Rationalität: Untersuchungen zu den Grundlagen von Hermeneutik und Sprachphilosophie v t e Formal semantics (natural language) Central concepts Compositionality Denotation Entailment Extension Generalized quantifier Intension Logical form Presupposition Proposition Reference Scope Speech act Syntax–semantics interface Truth conditions Topics Areas Anaphora Ambiguity Binding Conditionals Definiteness Disjunction Evidentiality Focus Indexicality Lexical semantics Modality Negation Propositional attitudes Tense–aspect–mood Quantification Vagueness Phenomena Antecedent-contained deletion Cataphora Coercion Conservativity Counterfactuals Crossover effects Cumulativity De dicto and de re De se Deontic modality Discourse relations Donkey anaphora Epistemic modality Exhaustivity Faultless disagreement Free choice inferences Givenness Homogeneity (linguistics) Hurford disjunction Inalienable possession Intersective modification Logophoricity Mirativity Modal subordination Opaque contexts Performatives Polarity items Privative adjectives Quantificational variability effect Responsive predicate Rising declaratives Scalar implicature Sloppy identity Subsective modification Subtrigging Telicity Temperature paradox Veridicality Formalism Formal systems Alternative semantics Categorial grammar Combinatory categorial grammar Discourse representation theory (DRT) Dynamic semantics Generative grammar Glue semantics Inquisitive semantics Intensional logic Lambda calculus Mereology Montague grammar Segmented discourse representation theory (SDRT) Situation semantics Supervaluationism Type theory TTR Concepts Autonomy of syntax Context set Continuation Conversational scoreboard Downward entailing Existential closure Function application Meaning postulate Monads Plural quantification Possible world Quantifier raising Quantization Question under discussion Semantic parsing Squiggle operator Strawson entailment Strict conditional Type shifter Universal grinder See also Cognitive semantics Computational semantics Distributional semantics Formal grammar Inferentialism Logic translation Linguistics wars Philosophy of language Pragmatics Semantics of logic Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Context&oldid=1279578500 " Categories : Sociolinguistics Discourse analysis Pragmatics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 This page was last edited on 9 March 2025, at 10:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Context 51 languages Add topic

