Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Ancient civilizations 2.2 Beginnings of environmental science 2.2.1 18th century 2.2.2 19th century 2.2.3 20th century 2.2.4 21st century 3 Components Toggle Components subsection 3.1 Atmospheric sciences 3.2 Ecology 3.3 Environmental chemistry 3.4 Geosciences 4 Regulations driving the studies 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Environmental science 61 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Кыргызча Latgaļu Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Environmental scientist ) Study of the environment "Environmental research" redirects here. For the academic journal, see Environmental Research .

For the TV series episode, see Environmental Science (Community) .

Environment Human impact on the climate Issues Environmentalism Stewardship Environmental studies Environment in Consulting Education Engineering Humanities Law Policy Science Social science Article index Lists Portal Category Commons v t e Environmental science is an interdisciplinary academic field that integrates physics , biology , meteorology , mathematics and geography (including ecology , chemistry , plant science , zoology , mineralogy , oceanography , limnology , soil science , geology and physical geography , and atmospheric science ) to the study of the environment, and the solution of environmental problems. Environmental science emerged from the fields of natural history and medicine during the Enlightenment .

[ 1 ] Today it provides an integrated, quantitative, and interdisciplinary approach to the study of environmental systems .

[ 2 ] Environmental Science is the study of the environment, the processes it undergoes, and the issues that arise generally from the interaction of humans and the natural world.

It is an interdisciplinary science because it is an integration of various fields such as: biology, chemistry, physics, geology, engineering, sociology, and most especially ecology. All these scientific disciplines are relevant to the identification and resolution of environmental problems.

Environmental science came alive as a substantive, active field of scientific investigation in the 1960s and 1970s driven by (a) the need for a multi-disciplinary approach to analyze complex environmental problems, (b) the arrival of substantive environmental laws requiring specific environmental protocols of investigation and (c) the growing public awareness of a need for action in addressing environmental problems. Events that spurred this development included the publication of Rachel Carson 's landmark environmental book Silent Spring [ 3 ] along with major environmental issues becoming very public, such as the 1969 Santa Barbara oil spill , and the Cuyahoga River of Cleveland, Ohio, "catching fire" (also in 1969), and helped increase the visibility of environmental issues and create this new field of study.

Terminology [ edit ] See also: Glossary of environmental science In common usage, "environmental science" and "ecology" are often used interchangeably, but technically, ecology refers only to the study of organisms and their interactions with each other as well as how they interrelate with environment. Ecology could be considered a subset of environmental science, which also could involve purely chemical or public health issues (for example) ecologists would be unlikely to study. In practice, there are considerable similarities between the work of ecologists and other environmental scientists.  There is substantial overlap between ecology and environmental science with the disciplines of fisheries, forestry, and wildlife.

[ citation needed ] Environmental studies incorporates more of the social sciences for understanding human relationships, perceptions and policies towards the environment.

Environmental engineering focuses on design and technology for improving environmental quality in every aspect.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] Ancient civilizations [ edit ] Historical concern for environmental issues is well documented in archives around the world.

[ 4 ] Ancient civilizations were mainly concerned with what is now known as environmental science insofar as it related to agriculture and natural resources. Scholars believe that early interest in the environment began around 6000 BCE when ancient civilizations in Israel and Jordan collapsed due to deforestation .

[ 5 ] As a result, in 2700 BCE the first legislation limiting deforestation was established in Mesopotamia .

[ 5 ] Two hundred years later, in 2500 BCE, a community residing in the Indus River Valley observed the nearby river system in order to improve sanitation.

[ 5 ] This involved manipulating the flow of water to account for public health. In the Western Hemisphere, numerous ancient Central American city-states collapsed around 1500 BCE due to soil erosion from intensive agriculture.

[ 5 ] Those remaining from these civilizations took greater attention to the impact of farming practices on the sustainability of the land and its stable food production. Furthermore, in 1450 BCE the Minoan civilization on the Greek island of Crete declined due to deforestation and the resulting environmental degradation of natural resources.

[ 5 ] Pliny the Elder somewhat addressed the environmental concerns of ancient civilizations in the text Naturalis Historia , written between 77 and 79 ACE, which provided an overview of many related subsets of the discipline.

[ 6 ] Although warfare and disease were of primary concern in ancient society, environmental issues played a crucial role in the survival and power of different civilizations. As more communities recognized the importance of the natural world to their long-term success, an interest in studying the environment came into existence.

[ citation needed ] Beginnings of environmental science [ edit ] 18th century [ edit ] In 1735, the concept of binomial nomenclature is introduced by Carolus Linnaeus as a way to classify all living organisms, influenced by earlier works of Aristotle .

[ 6 ] His text, Systema Naturae , represents one of the earliest culminations of knowledge on the subject, providing a means to identify different species based partially on how they interact with their environment.

[ citation needed ] 19th century [ edit ] In the 1820s, scientists were studying the properties of gases, particularly those in the Earth's atmosphere and their interactions with heat from the Sun.

[ 7 ] Later that century, studies suggested that the Earth had experienced an Ice Age and that warming of the Earth was partially due to what are now known as greenhouse gases (GHG).

[ 7 ] The greenhouse effect was introduced, although climate science was not yet recognized as an important topic in environmental science due to minimal industrialization and lower rates of greenhouse gas emissions at the time.

[ citation needed ] 20th century [ edit ] Rachel Carson published her groundbreaking novel, Silent Spring , in 1962, bringing the study of environmental science to the forefront of society.

In the 1900s, the discipline of environmental science as it is known today began to take shape. The century is marked by significant research, literature, and international cooperation in the field.

In the early 20th century, criticism from dissenters downplayed the effects of global warming .

[ 7 ] At this time, few researchers were studying the dangers of fossil fuels . After a 1.3 degrees Celsius temperature anomaly was found in the Atlantic Ocean in the 1940s, however, scientists renewed their studies of gaseous heat trapping from the greenhouse effect (although only carbon dioxide and water vapor were known to be greenhouse gases then).

[ 7 ] Nuclear development following the Second World War allowed environmental scientists to intensively study the effects of carbon and make advancements in the field.

[ 7 ] Further knowledge from archaeological evidence brought to light the changes in climate over time, particularly ice core sampling .

[ 7 ] Former President Richard Nixon visits the site of the 1969 Santa Barbara oil spill , which received intense media coverage and inspired a multitude of environmental legislation.

Environmental science was brought to the forefront of society in 1962 when Rachel Carson published an influential piece of environmental literature, Silent Spring .

[ 8 ] Carson's writing led the American public to pursue environmental safeguards, such as bans on harmful chemicals like the insecticide DDT .

[ 8 ] Another important work, The Tragedy of the Commons , was published by Garrett Hardin in 1968 in response to accelerating natural degradation.

[ 6 ] In 1969, environmental science once again became a household term after two striking disasters: Ohio's Cuyahoga River caught fire due to the amount of pollution in its waters and a Santa Barbara oil spill endangered thousands of marine animals, both receiving prolific media coverage.

[ 8 ] Consequently, the United States passed an abundance of legislation, including the Clean Water Act and the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement .

[ 8 ] The following year, in 1970, the first ever Earth Day was celebrated worldwide and the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was formed, legitimizing the study of environmental science in government policy.

[ 8 ] In the next two years, the United Nations created the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in Stockholm, Sweden to address global environmental degradation .

[ 9 ] A team of British researchers found a hole in the ozone layer forming over Antarctica, the discovery of which would later influence the Montreal Protocol in 1987.

Much of the interest in environmental science throughout the 1970s and the 1980s was characterized by major disasters and social movements. In 1978, hundreds of people were relocated from Love Canal , New York after carcinogenic pollutants were found to be buried underground near residential areas.

[ 8 ] The next year, in 1979, the nuclear power plant on Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania suffered a meltdown and raised concerns about the dangers of radioactive waste and the safety of nuclear energy.

[ 8 ] In response to landfills and toxic waste often disposed of near their homes, the official Environmental Justice Movement was started by a Black community in North Carolina in 1982.

[ 8 ] Two years later, the toxic methyl isocyanate gas was released to the public from a power plant disaster in Bhopal , India, harming hundreds of thousands of people living near the disaster site, the effects of which are still felt today.

[ 8 ] In a groundbreaking discovery in 1985, a British team of researchers studying Antarctica found evidence of a hole in the ozone layer , inspiring global agreements banning the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), which were previously used in nearly all aerosols and refrigerants.

[ 7 ] Notably, in 1986, the meltdown at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in Ukraine released radioactive waste to the public, leading to international studies on the ramifications of environmental disasters.

[ 8 ] Over the next couple of years, the Brundtland Commission (previously known as the World Commission on Environment and Development) published a report titled Our Common Future and the Montreal Protocol formed the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) as international communication focused on finding solutions for climate change and degradation.

[ 9 ] In the late 1980s, the Exxon Valdez company was fined for spilling large quantities of crude oil off the coast of Alaska and the resulting cleanup, involving the work of environmental scientists.

[ 8 ] After hundreds of oil wells were burned in combat in 1991, warfare between Iraq and Kuwait polluted the surrounding atmosphere just below the air quality threshold environmental scientist environmental scientist s believed was life-threatening.

[ 8 ] 21st century [ edit ] The Paris Agreement (formerly the Kyoto Protocol) is adopted in 2016. Nearly every country in the United Nations has signed the treaty, which aims to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Many niche disciplines of environmental science have emerged over the years, although climatology is one of the most known topics. Since the 2000s, environmental scientists have focused on modeling the effects of climate change and encouraging global cooperation to minimize potential damages. In 2002, the Society for the Environment as well as the Institute of Air Quality Management were founded to share knowledge and develop solutions around the world.

[ 9 ] Later, in 2008, the United Kingdom became the first country to pass legislation (the Climate Change Act ) that aims to reduce carbon dioxide output to a specified threshold.

[ 9 ] In 2016 the Kyoto Protocol became the Paris Agreement , which sets concrete goals to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and restricts Earth's rise in temperature to a 2 degrees Celsius maximum.

[ 9 ] The agreement is one of the most expansive international efforts to limit the effects of global warming to date.

Most environmental disasters in this time period involve crude oil pollution or the effects of rising temperatures. In 2010, BP was responsible for the largest American oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, known as the Deepwater Horizon spill , which killed a number of the company's workers and released large amounts of crude oil into the water.

[ 8 ] Furthermore, throughout this century, much of the world has been ravaged by widespread wildfires and water scarcity , prompting regulations on the sustainable use of natural resources as determined by environmental scientists.

[ 8 ] A false color composite of the greater Boston area, created using remote sensing technology, reveals otherwise not visible characteristics about the land cover and the health of the surrounding ecosystems.

The 21st century is marked by significant technological advancements. New technology in environmental science has transformed how researchers gather information about various topics in the field. Research in engines, fuel efficiency , and decreasing emissions from vehicles since the times of the Industrial Revolution has reduced the amount of carbon and other pollutants into the atmosphere.

[ 10 ] Furthermore, investment in researching and developing clean energy (i.e. wind, solar, hydroelectric, and geothermal power) has significantly increased in recent years, indicating the beginnings of the divestment from fossil fuel use .

[ 10 ] Geographic information systems (GIS) are used to observe sources of air or water pollution through satellites and digital imagery analysis.

[ 10 ] This technology allows for advanced farming techniques like precision agriculture as well as monitoring water usage in order to set market prices.

[ 10 ] In the field of water quality, developed strains of natural and manmade bacteria contribute to bioremediation , the treatment of wastewaters for future use.

[ 10 ] This method is more eco-friendly and cheaper than manual cleanup or treatment of wastewaters.

[ 10 ] Most notably, the expansion of computer technology has allowed for large data collection, advanced analysis, historical archives, public awareness of environmental issues, and international scientific communication.

[ 11 ] The ability to crowdsource on the Internet, for example, represents the process of collectivizing knowledge from researchers around the world to create increased opportunity for scientific progress.

[ 11 ] With crowdsourcing , data is released to the public for personal analyses which can later be shared as new information is found.

[ 11 ] Another technological development, blockchain technology, monitors and regulates global fisheries.

[ 11 ] By tracking the path of fish through global markets, environmental scientists can observe whether certain species are being overharvested to the point of extinction.

[ 11 ] Additionally, remote sensing allows for the detection of features of the environment without physical intervention.

[ 11 ] The resulting digital imagery is used to create increasingly accurate models of environmental processes, climate change , and much more. Advancements to remote sensing technology are particularly useful in locating the nonpoint sources of pollution and analyzing ecosystem health through image analysis across the electromagnetic spectrum . Lastly, thermal imaging technology is used in wildlife management to catch and discourage poachers and other illegal wildlife traffickers from killing endangered animals, proving useful for conservation efforts.

[ 11 ] Artificial intelligence has also been used to predict the movement of animal populations and protect the habitats of wildlife.

[ 11 ] Components [ edit ] Blue Marble composite images generated by NASA in 2001 (left) and 2002 (right) The Earth's atmosphere Atmospheric sciences [ edit ] Main article: Atmospheric sciences Atmospheric sciences focus on the Earth's atmosphere, with an emphasis upon its interrelation to other systems. Atmospheric sciences can include studies of meteorology , greenhouse gas phenomena, atmospheric dispersion modeling of airborne contaminants, [ 12 ] [ 13 ] sound propagation phenomena related to noise pollution , and even light pollution .

Taking the example of the global warming phenomena, physicists create computer models of atmospheric circulation and infrared radiation transmission, chemists examine the inventory of atmospheric chemicals and their reactions, biologists analyze the plant and animal contributions to carbon dioxide fluxes, and specialists such as meteorologists and oceanographers add additional breadth in understanding the atmospheric dynamics .

[ citation needed ] Biodiversity of a coral reef. Corals adapt and modify their environment by forming calcium carbonate skeletons. This provides growing conditions for future generations and forms a habitat for many other species.

Ecology [ edit ] Main article: Ecology As defined by the Ecological Society of America, "Ecology is the study of the relationships between living organisms, including humans, and their physical environment; it seeks to understand the vital connections between plants and animals and the world around them." [ 14 ] Ecologists might investigate the relationship between a population of organisms and some physical characteristic of their environment, such as concentration of a chemical; or they might investigate the interaction between two populations of different organisms through some symbiotic or competitive relationship. For example, an interdisciplinary analysis of an ecological system which is being impacted by one or more stressors might include several related environmental science fields. In an estuarine setting where a proposed industrial development could impact certain species by water and air pollution , biologists would describe the flora and fauna, chemists would analyze the transport of water pollutants to the marsh, physicists would calculate air pollution emissions and geologists would assist in understanding the marsh soils and bay muds.

[ citation needed ] Environmental chemistry [ edit ] Main article: Environmental chemistry Environmental chemistry is the study of chemical alterations in the environment. Principal areas of study include soil contamination and water pollution. The topics of analysis include chemical degradation in the environment, multi-phase transport of chemicals (for example, evaporation of a solvent containing lake to yield solvent as an air pollutant), and chemical effects upon biota .

[ citation needed ] As an example study, consider the case of a leaking solvent tank which has entered the habitat soil of an endangered species of amphibian. As a method to resolve or understand the extent of soil contamination and subsurface transport of solvent, a computer model would be implemented. Chemists would then characterize the molecular bonding of the solvent to the specific soil type, and biologists would study the impacts upon soil arthropods , plants, and ultimately pond-dwelling organisms that are the food of the endangered amphibian.

[ citation needed ] Geosciences [ edit ] Main article: Geosciences Geosciences include environmental geology , environmental soil science , volcanic phenomena and evolution of the Earth's crust. In some classification systems this can also include hydrology , including oceanography .

[ citation needed ] As an example study, of soils erosion , calculations would be made of surface runoff by soil scientists. Fluvial geomorphologists would assist in examining sediment transport in overland flow. Physicists would contribute by assessing the changes in light transmission in the receiving waters. Biologists would analyze subsequent impacts to aquatic flora and fauna from increases in water turbidity.

[ citation needed ] Open-pit coal mining at Garzweiler , Germany Regulations driving the studies [ edit ] Environmental science examines the effects of humans on nature, such as the Glen Canyon Dam in the United States In the United States the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969 set forth requirements for analysis of federal government actions (such as highway construction projects and land management decisions) in terms of specific environmental criteria.

[ 15 ] Numerous state laws have echoed these mandates, applying the principles to local-scale actions. The upshot has been an explosion of documentation and study of environmental consequences before the fact of development actions.

[ citation needed ] One can examine the specifics of environmental science by reading examples of Environmental Impact Statements prepared under NEPA such as: Wastewater treatment expansion options discharging into the San Diego/ Tijuana Estuary , Expansion of the San Francisco International Airport , Development of the Houston , Metro Transportation system , Expansion of the metropolitan Boston MBTA transit system , and Construction of Interstate 66 through Arlington, Virginia .

[ citation needed ] In England and Wales the Environment Agency (EA), [ 16 ] formed in 1996, is a public body for protecting and improving the environment and enforces the regulations listed on the communities and local government site.

[ 17 ] (formerly the office of the deputy prime minister). The agency was set up under the Environment Act 1995 as an independent body and works closely with UK Government to enforce the regulations.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Environment portal Ecology portal Earth sciences portal Geography portal Science portal Environmental engineering science Environmental informatics Environmental monitoring Environmental planning Environmental statistics Glossary of environmental science List of environmental studies topics References [ edit ] ^ Eddy, Matthew Daniel (2008).

The Language of Mineralogy: John Walker, Chemistry and the Edinburgh Medical School 1750-1800 .

Ashgate Publishing .

^ Environmental Science: Iowa State University. Environmental Sciences provides an integrated and interdisciplinary approach to understand and mitigate hazards arising from anthropogenic and natural activities by focusing on key areas of environmental chemistry, earth sciences, environmental engineering, atmospheric sciences, and sustainable systems.

http://www.ensci.iastate.edu Archived 27 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine (Accessed 17 February 2010) ^ Carson, Rachel.

Silent Spring (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1962), Mariner Books, 2002, ISBN 0-618-24906-0 ^ Kovarik, Bill (9 September 2022).

"Environmental issues are part of history" .

Environmental history . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ a b c d e "Prehistoric" .

Environmental history . 20 July 2012 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

^ a b c "Classics of Environmental Literature" .

Environmental history . 14 September 2014 . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g Mason, Matthew (August 2014).

"History of the Study of Climate Change in Field of Environmental Science" .

Environmental Science . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n "Milestones in EPA and Environmental History" .

United States Environmental Protection Agency . 20 May 2020 . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ a b c d e Karr, Katherine (January 2022).

"Celebrating 50 years of the IES: A brief history of environmental science" .

The Institution of Environmental Sciences . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ a b c d e f Austin, David; Marauley, Molly K. (1 December 2001).

"Cutting Through Environmental Issues: Technology as a double-edged sword" .

Brookings . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h Lambertini, Marco (23 August 2018).

"Technology can help us save the planet. But more than anything, we must learn to value nature" .

World Economic Forum . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ Beychok, M.R. (2005).

Fundamentals Of Stack Gas Dispersion (4th ed.). author-published.

ISBN 0-9644588-0-2 .

^ Turner, D.B. (1994).

Workbook of atmospheric dispersion estimates: an introduction to dispersion modeling (2nd ed.).

CRC Press .

ISBN 1-56670-023-X .

^ "What is ecology?" .

Ecological Society of America . 2020 . Retrieved 20 May 2020 .

^ "A Citizen's Guide to the National Environmental Policy Act" . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Council on Environmental Quality. 2007.

^ "Environment Agency" .

GOV.UK . Retrieved 12 May 2021 .

^ "Communities and Local Government: Environment" . Ministry of communities & Local Government, UK. Archived from the original on 12 August 2007.

^ Jewell, Tim; Steele, Jenny (1996).

"UK Regulatory Reform and the Pursuit of "Sustainable Development": The Environment Act 1995" .

Journal of Environmental Law .

8 (2): 283– 300.

doi : 10.1093/jel/8.2.283 .

JSTOR 44248083 . Retrieved 18 February 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Environmental sciences .

Glossary of environmental terms –  Global Development Research Center v t e Environmental science Main fields Atmospheric science Biogeochemistry Ecology Environmental chemistry Geosciences Hydrology Limnology Oceanography Soil science Related fields Biology Chemistry green Ecological economics Environmental design Environmental economics Environmental engineering Environmental health epidemiology Environmental studies Environmental humanities Environmental statistics Environmental toxicology Geodesy Physics Radioecology Sustainability science Systems ecology Urban ecology Applications Energy conservation Environmental technology Natural resource management Pollution control Public transport encouragement Recycling Remediation Renewable energy Road ecology Sewage treatment Urban metabolism Water purification Waste management Lists Degrees Journals Research institutes Glossary Environment by year See also Human impact on the environment Sustainability Technogaianism Category scientists Commons Environment portal WikiProject v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject v t e Earth science Outline Index Atmospheric science Environmental science Geodesy Geology Geophysics Glaciology Hydrology Meteorology Oceanography Paleogeoscience Physical geography Soil science Volcanology Category Portal Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐m7595
Cached time: 20250811235544
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.698 seconds
Real time usage: 0.866 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5177/1000000
Revision size: 29822/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 149370/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9526/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 121225/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.409/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8672499/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  704.935      1 -total
 26.07%  183.762      1 Template:Reflist
 14.91%  105.129     11 Template:Cn
 13.71%   96.632     13 Template:Fix
 11.76%   82.867      1 Template:Environment_sidebar
 11.46%   80.787      1 Template:Sidebar
 11.26%   79.347      3 Template:Cite_book
  9.68%   68.266      1 Template:Short_description
  8.25%   58.148     12 Template:Cite_web
  7.35%   51.846      6 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:64919:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235544 and revision id 1298172182. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_science&oldid=1298172182 " Categories : Environmental science Earth sciences Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 22:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental science 61 languages Add topic

