Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Scientific objectives 3 Lander probes 4 Instrument payload 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Biological Oxidant and Life Detection 2 languages Bahasa Indonesia 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothetical Mars Mission Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Mission type Mars impactor Operator Washington State University Mission duration At Mars: 10 Sols (≈11 Earth days) Mars impactor The Biological Oxidant and Life Detection ( BOLD ) is a concept mission to Mars focused on searching for evidence or biosignatures of microscopic life on Mars .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The BOLD mission objective would be to quantify the amount of hydrogen peroxide ( H 2 O 2 ) existing in the Martian soil and to test for processes typically associated with life. Six landing packages are projected to impact 'softly' on Mars that include a limited power supply, a set of oxidant and life detection experiments, and a transmitter, which is able to transmit information via an existing Mars orbiter back to Earth. The mission was first proposed in 2012.

[ 5 ] Overview [ edit ] The Viking program to Mars was the only mission to date that conducted life-detection experiments. It revealed ambiguous and still controversial results. The mission proponents argue that new findings and hypotheses urge a re-evaluation of the Viking results and a re-evaluation of
the evidence for the possible presence of life on Mars in general.

[ 2 ] Recent and current missions to be launched focus on habitability considerations (e.g., Phoenix , Mars Science Laboratory ), but shy away from directly testing for life on Mars, with the potential exception of the ESA ExoMars mission.

The BOLD mission is designed to be less expensive than most current Mars missions as it consists only of a carrier vehicle with 6 probes attached. No orbiter is assumed. Instead the probes take advantage of existing Mars orbiters for communications relay. The number of probes is intended to provide a certain degree of mission redundancy in case some of them do not land successfully or fail.

Scientific objectives [ edit ] The scientific objectives of the BOLD mission are: to identify the unknown oxidant in the Martian soil, which was postulated after the Viking program , and to probe whether there is extant life near the Martian surface. In contrast to the Viking mission, which was geared toward finding abundant heterotrophic life on Mars with a global distribution, the BOLD mission is aimed at a more comprehensive search including lithoautrophic and photosynthetic microbes , and a variety of biosignatures .

[ 2 ] Lander probes [ edit ] If selected and funded, the carrier vehicle with the landing probes would be propelled into a circular orbit around Mars. The orbiter would be equipped with a small solid rocket to provide the deceleration required to insert the spacecraft in an entry trajectory that can safely release the probes on the Martian surface. A terrain navigation system, coupled with robust propulsion, potentially permits targeting with precision on the order of meters if required to meet the science objectives. Each probe would have a mass of 59 kilograms (130 pounds) [ 3 ] with a science payload of less than 10 kilograms (22 lb). Each of the probes' lander system uses a parachute and a crushable shell behind the heat shield for a 'soft impact' landing. Upon landing, the science instruments at their tips would penetrate up to 30 centimeters (one foot) into Martian regolith , a depth sufficient to conduct accurate scientific measurements.

[ 3 ] The landing probes will be powered by batteries. The mission duration for each landing probe is anticipated to be 10 sols (10 Martian days).

[ 2 ] Instrument payload [ edit ] The envisioned instrument suite on each probe includes: [ 1 ] [ 2 ] The Multispectral Microscopic Imager experiment The Fluorescent Stain experiment The Nanopore-ARROW experiment The Chirality experiment The Hydrogen Peroxide experiment See also [ edit ] Portals : Solar System Spaceflight Astronomy Biology Technology Science Astrobiology ExoMars Mars Science Laboratory Viking biological experiments References [ edit ] ^ a b "A Proposal for a New Mission to Mars: The Biological Oxidant and Life Detection (BOLD) Mission" .

Laboratory for Astrobiological Investigations & Space Mission Planning .

Washington State University . Archived from the original on 2012-04-22 . Retrieved 2012-07-19 .

^ a b c d e Schulze-Makuch, Dirk; Houtkooperb, Joop M.; Knoblauchc, Michael; Furfarod, Roberto; Finke, Wolfgang; et al. (2007). Hoover, Richard B; Levin, Gilbert V; Rozanov, Alexei Y; Davies, Paul C. W (eds.).

The Biological Oxidant and Life Detection (BOLD) Mission: An outline for a new mission to Mars (PDF) . Optical Engineering + Applications. Instruments, Methods, and Missions for Astrobiology X. Vol. 6694.

Caltech . pp. 66940O.

Bibcode : 2007SPIE.6694E..0OS .

doi : 10.1117/12.732155 .

S2CID 36189299 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-05-15 . Retrieved 2012-07-19 .

^ a b c Tudor Vieru (25 April 2012).

"Scientists Want Astrobiology Mission to Mars" .

Softpedia . Retrieved 2012-07-19 .

^ Schulze-Makuch, Dirk; et al. (June 9–11, 2015).

The Biological Oxidant and Life Detection (BOLD) mission: A proposal for a low-cost mission to Mars (PDF) . 11th Low Cost Planetary Missions Conference.

^ The Biological Oxidant and Life Detection (BOLD) Mission: A Proposal for a Mission to Mars .

Concepts and Approaches for Mars Exploration (2012) External links [ edit ] BOLD probe images: Schulze-Makuch, Dirk; Head, James N.; Houtkooper, Joop M.; Knoblauch, Michael; Furfaro, Roberto; Fink, Wolfgang; Fairén, Alberto G.; Vali, Hojatollah; Kelly Sears, S.; Daly, Mike; Deamer, David; Schmidt, Holger; Hawkins, Aaron R.

; Sun, Henry J.; Lim, Darlene S.S.; Dohm, James; Irwin, Louis N.; Davila, Alfonso F.; Mendez, Abel; Andersen, Dale (2012). "The Biological Oxidant and Life Detection (BOLD) mission: A proposal for a mission to Mars".

Planetary and Space Science .

67 (1): 57– 69.

Bibcode : 2012P&SS...67...57S .

doi : 10.1016/j.pss.2012.03.008 .

v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons v t e Extraterrestrial life Events and objects Shergotty meteorite (1865) Nakhla meteorite (1911) Murchison meteorite (1969) Viking lander biological experiments (1976) Allan Hills 77005 (1977) Allan Hills 84001 (1984) Yamato 000593 (2000) CI1 fossils (2011) Signals of interest Misidentified CP 1919 (misidentified pulsar) CTA-102 (misidentified quasar) Stars KIC 8462852 (unusual light fluctuations) EPIC 204278916 (unusual light fluctuations) VVV-WIT-07 (unusual light fluctuations) HD 164595 signal (unknown origin) Other SHGb02+14a (radio source) Wow! signal (inconclusive) Fast radio burst (unknown origin) BLC1 (radio signal) Life in the Universe Earliest known life forms Planetary habitability in the Solar System Life on Venus Life on Mars Life on Titan Planetary habitability Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems List of potentially habitable exoplanets Planetary habitability Superhabitable planet Tholin Space missions Beagle 2 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection BioSentinel Curiosity rover Darwin Dragonfly Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover ExoLance EXPOSE Foton-M3 Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Geyser Hopper Mars sample-return mission Mars 2020 Northern Light Opportunity rover Perseverance rover SpaceX Red Dragon Spirit rover Tanpopo Titan Mare Explorer Venus In Situ Explorer Viking 1 Viking 2 Interstellar communication Active SETI Allen Telescope Array Arecibo message Arecibo Observatory Berkeley SETI Research Center Bracewell probe Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Gauss's Pythagorean right triangle proposal Astrolinguistics Lincos language NIROSETI Pioneer plaque Project Cyclops Project Ozma Project Phoenix SERENDIP Search for extraterrestrial intelligence SETI@home setiQuest Voyager Golden Record Water hole Xenolinguistics Types of alleged extraterrestrial beings Energy beings Grey aliens Insectoids Little green men Nordic aliens Reptilian humanoids Hypotheses Cosmic pluralism Directed panspermia Drake equation Extraterrestrial hypothesis Fermi paradox Hypothetical types of biochemistry Interplanetary contamination Kardashev scale Mediocrity principle Non-planetary abiogenesis Panspermia Fermi paradox solutions Aestivation hypothesis Berserker hypothesis Dark forest hypothesis Firstborn hypothesis Great Filter Hart–Tipler conjecture Neocatastrophism Planetarium hypothesis Rare Earth hypothesis Zoo hypothesis Related topics Ancient astronauts Astrobiology Astroecology Biosignature Brookings Report Exotheology Extraterrestrials in fiction Extremophile Hemolithin History of the extraterrestrial life debate Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Noogenesis Planetary protection Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Post-detection policy San Marino Scale Technosignature UFO religion Xenoarchaeology v t e Spacecraft missions to Mars List of missions to Mars List of Mars orbiters List of artificial objects on Mars Active Flybys Psyche ‡ (2023, flyby in 2026) Orbiters 2001 Mars Odyssey Mars Express Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter timeline MAVEN ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter Hope Tianwen-1 orbiter Rovers Curiosity Mars Science Laboratory timeline Perseverance Mars 2020 timeline Past Flybys Mars 1 † Mariner 4 Zond 2 † Mariner 6 and 7 Mars 6 Mars 7 Rosetta ‡ Dawn ‡ Mars Cube One Europa Clipper ‡ Hera ‡ Orbiters Mars 2 Mars 3 Mariner 9 Mars 4 † Mars 5 Viking program Viking 1 Viking 2 Phobos program Phobos 1 † Phobos 2 † Mars Observer † Mars Global Surveyor Nozomi † Mars Climate Orbiter † Mangalyaan Landers Mars 2 † Mars 3 † Mars 6 † Mars 7 † Viking 1 Viking 2 Mars Pathfinder Mars Polar Lander † / Deep Space 2 † Beagle 2 † Phoenix ExoMars Schiaparelli † InSight Tianwen-1 lander Rovers PrOP-M † Sojourner Mars Exploration Rover Spirit timeline Opportunity timeline Zhurong Aircraft Ingenuity helicopter flights Mars 2020 Failed launches Mars 1M No.1 1M No.2 2MV-4 No.1 2MV-3 No.1 Mariner 3 Mars 2M No.521 2M No.522 Mariner 8 Mars 3MS No.170 Mars 96 Fobos-Grunt / Yinghuo-1 Future Planned EscaPADE (2025) Tera-hertz Explorer (TEREX) (mid 2020s) Martian Moons eXploration (MMX) (2026) Mangalyaan-2 (2026) Tianwen-3 (2028) Rosalind Franklin (2028) MBR Explorer ‡ (2028, flyby in 2031) NASA-ESA Mars Sample Return Mars Sample Recovery Helicopters Kazachok Proposed MAGGIE SpaceX Mars program Mars-Grunt Cancelled or not developed Aerial Regional-scale Environmental Survey Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection DePhine Icebreaker Life Marsokhod Mars 4NM & 5NM Mars 5M (Mars-79) Mars-Aster Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher (MAX-C) Mars Geyser Hopper Mars Exploration Ice Mapper Mars One Mars Micro Orbiter Mars Surveyor Lander Mars Telecommunications Orbiter MELOS rover MetNet NetLander Northern Light Next Mars Orbiter PADME Phootprint Sample Collection for Investigation of Mars (SCIM) Sky-Sailor SpaceX Red Dragon Vesta Voyager Mars Exploration Concepts Flyby Orbiter Landing Atmospheric entry Rover Aircraft Sample return Human mission Permanent settlement Colonization Terraforming Strategies Mars Scout Program Mars Exploration Program Mars Exploration Joint Initiative Mars Next Generation Advocacy The Mars Project The Case for Mars Inspiration Mars Mars Institute Mars Society Mars race Missions are ordered by launch date. Sign † indicates failure en route or before intended mission data returned.

‡ indicates use of the planet as a gravity assist en route to another destination.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biological_Oxidant_and_Life_Detection&oldid=1265954176 " Categories : Missions to Mars Proposed space probes Proposed astrobiology space missions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 December 2024, at 11:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biological Oxidant and Life Detection 2 languages Add topic

