Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Different frameworks to analyze the dynamics of technology 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Technology dynamics 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific field Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e Technology dynamics is broad and relatively new scientific field that has been developed in the framework of the postwar science and technology studies field. It studies the process of technological change . Under the field of Technology Dynamics the process of technological change is explained by taking into account influences from "internal factors" as well as from "external factors". Internal factors relate technological change to unsolved technical problems and the established modes of solving technological problems and external factors relate it to various (changing) characteristics of the social environment , in which a particular technology is embedded.

Overview [ edit ] For the last three decades, it has been argued that technology development is neither an autonomous process, determined by the "inherent progress" of human history, nor a process completely determined by external conditions like the prices of the resources that are needed to operate (develop) a technology, as it is theorized in neoclassical economic thinking. In mainstream neoclassical economic thinking, technology is seen as an exogenous factor: at the moment a technology is required, the most appropriate version can be taken down from the shelf based on costs of labor, capital and eventually raw materials.

Conversely, modern technology dynamics studies generally advocate that technologies are not "self-evident" or market-demanded, but are the upshot of a particular path of technology development and are shaped by social, economic and political factors. in this sense, technology dynamics aims at overcoming distinct "internal" and "external" points of views by presenting co-evolutionary approach regarding technology development.

In general, technology dynamics studies, besides giving a " thick description " of technology development, uses constructivist viewpoints emphasizing that technology is the outcome of particular social context. Accordingly, Technology Dynamics emphasizes the significance and possibility of regaining social control of technology, and also provides mechanisms needed to adapt to and steer the development of certain technologies. In that respect, it uses insights from retrospective studies to formulate hypotheses of a prospective nature on technology development of emerging technologies , besides formulating prescriptive policy recommendations.

An important feature of relevant theories of technological change therein is that they underline the quasi-evolutionary character of technological change: change based on technological variation and social selection in which technological knowledge, systems and institutions develop in interaction with each other. Processes of ' path dependence ' are crucial in explaining technological change.

Following these lines, there have been different approaches and concepts used under the field of technology dynamics.

Different frameworks to analyze the dynamics of technology [ edit ] Social construction of technology Actor–network theory Systems theory Normalization process theory Quasi-evolutionary theories Innovation system Technological innovation system Based on the analysis of the various perspectives, one can aim at developing interventions in the dynamics of a technology. Some approaches have been developed targeting on interventions in technological change: Technology assessment Backcasting Strategic niche management Transition management (governance) References [ edit ] Wiebe E. Bijker , Thomas P. Hughes , Trevor J. Pinch (1987).

The social construction of technological systems; new directions in the sociology and history of technology . Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press.

Michel Callon , Philippe Larédo, et al. (1992). "The management and evaluation of technological programs and the dynamics of techno-economic networks: The case of the AFME." Research Policy 21(3): 215–236.

Geels, F. W. (2002). Understanding the dynamics of technological transitions : a co-evolutionary and socio-technical analysis. Enschede, Universiteit Twente.

Hekkert, M. P., R. A. A. Suurs, et al. "Functions of innovation systems: A new approach for analysing technological change." Technological Forecasting and Social Change In Press, Corrected Proof.

Nelson, R. R. and S. G. Winter (1982). An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Cambridge MA., The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Olmeda, Christopher J. (1998). Health Informatics: Concepts of Information Technology in Health and Human Services. Delfin Press.

ISBN 0-9821442-1-0 Arie Rip , Misa, Thomas J., Schot, Johan (1995). Managing technology in society; the approach of constructive technology assessment. London, Pinter.

Rotmans, J., Kemp, R., Asselt, M. van (2001). "More revolution than evolution: transition management in public policy." Foresight 3(1): .015-.031.

Schot, J. W. (1992). "Constructive Technology Assessment and Technology Dynamics: The Case of Clean Technologies." Science, Technology, & Human Values 17(1): 36.

Smith, A., A. Stirling, et al. (2005). "The governance of sustainable socio-technical transitions." Research Policy 34(10): 1491–1510.

External links [ edit ] Technology Dynamics and sustainable Development v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Technology_dynamics&oldid=1295752662 " Categories : Science and technology studies Technology in society Technological change Technology assessment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 17:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Technology dynamics 1 language Add topic

