Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of papillae 2 Cell composition Toggle Cell composition subsection 2.1 Type I taste bud cell 2.2 Type II taste bud cell 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Taste bud 33 languages العربية تۆرکجه বাংলা Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 עברית Kurdî Latina മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Taste receptor cells This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Taste bud" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Taste buds Taste buds are small structures present within the papillae of the tongue Details System Taste Identifiers Latin caliculus gustatererius MeSH D013650 NeuroLex ID birnlex_4101 TA98 A15.4.00.002 TA2 7037 TH H3.04.01.0.02116, H3.04.01.0.03013 FMA 54825 Anatomical terms of microanatomy [ edit on Wikidata ] Taste buds are clusters of taste receptor cells, which are also known as gustatory cells.

[ 1 ] The taste receptors are located around the small structures known as papillae found on the upper surface of the tongue , soft palate , upper esophagus , the cheek , and epiglottis . These structures are involved in detecting the five elements of taste perception : saltiness , sourness , bitterness , sweetness and savoriness (umami) . A popular assumption assigns these different tastes to different regions of the tongue ; in actuality, these tastes can be detected by any area of the tongue. Via small openings in the tongue epithelium, called taste pores, parts of the food dissolved in saliva come into contact with the taste receptors.

[ 1 ] These are located on top of the taste receptor cells that constitute the taste buds. The taste receptor cells send information detected by clusters of various receptors and ion channels to the gustatory areas of the brain via the seventh, ninth and tenth cranial nerves.

On average, the human tongue has 2,000–8,000 taste buds.

[ 2 ] The average lifespan of these is estimated to be 10 days.

[ 3 ] Types of papillae [ edit ] The taste buds on the tongue sit on raised protrusions of the tongue surface called papillae. There are four types of lingual papillae ; all except one contain taste buds: Fungiform papillae - as the name suggests, these are slightly mushroom -shaped if looked at in longitudinal section. These are present mostly at the dorsal surface of the tongue, as well as at the sides. Innervated by facial nerve.

Foliate papillae - these are ridges and grooves towards the posterior part of the tongue found at the lateral borders. Innervated by facial nerve (anterior papillae) and glossopharyngeal nerve (posterior papillae).

Circumvallate papillae - there are only about 10 to 14 of these papillae on most people, and they are present at the back of the oral part of the tongue. They are arranged in a circular-shaped row just in front of the sulcus terminalis of the tongue . They are associated with ducts of Von Ebner's glands , and are innervated by the glossopharyngeal nerve.

Filiform papillae - the most numerous type but do not contain taste buds.

[ 4 ] They are characterized by increased keratinisation and are involved in the mechanical aspect of providing abrasion.

Cell composition [ edit ] The bud is formed by at least two main kinds of cells: supporting cells and gustatory cells. The supporting ( sustentacular cells ) are mostly arranged like the staves of a cask, and form an outer envelope for the bud. Some, however, are found in the interior of the bud between the gustatory cells. The gustatory (taste) cells , which are chemoreceptors , occupy the central portion of the bud; they are spindle-shaped, and each possesses a large spherical nucleus near the middle of the cell. The peripheral end of the cell terminates at the gustatory pore in a fine hair filament, the gustatory hair. The central process passes toward the deep extremity of the bud, and there ends in single or bifurcated varicosities . The nerve fibrils after losing their medullary sheaths enter the taste bud, and end in fine extremities between the gustatory cells; other nerve fibrils ramify between the supporting cells and terminate in fine extremities; these, however, are believed to be nerves of ordinary sensation and not gustatory.

[ citation needed ] Salt, sweet, sour and umami tastes cause depolarization of the taste cells, although different mechanisms are applied. Bitter causes an internal release of Ca 2+ , no external Ca 2+ is required.

Type I taste bud cell [ edit ] The type I taste bud cells make up about half of the cells in the taste buds, express ion channels and have, apparently, glia -like functions. In electronic microscopy they show up as electron-dense. They are considered to have heterogeneous gene expression patterns.

[ 5 ] Type II taste bud cell [ edit ] The type II taste bud cells make up about another third of the cells in the taste bud and express G-protein coupled receptors that are associated with chemoreception . They usually express either type 1 or type 2 taste receptors , but one cell might detect different stimuli, such as umami and sweetness .

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Tongue map References [ edit ] ^ a b Shier, David (2016).

Hole's Human Anatomy and Physiology . New York: McGraw-Hill Education. pp.

454– 455.

ISBN 978-0-07-802429-0 .

^ Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009.

Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

^ Hamamichi, R.; Asano-Miyoshi, M.; Emori, Y. (15 September 2006). "Taste bud contains both short-lived and long-lived cell populations".

Neuroscience .

141 (4): 2129– 2138.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2006.05.061 .

PMID 16843606 .

S2CID 24014479 .

^ Jung, HS; Akita, K; Kim, JY (2004).

"Spacing patterns on tongue surface-gustatory papilla" .

Int J Dev Biol .

48 ( 2– 3): 157– 61.

doi : 10.1387/ijdb.15272380 .

PMID 15272380 .

^ a b Roper, Stephen D.; Chaudhari, Nirupa (August 2017).

"Taste buds: cells, signals and synapses" .

Nature Reviews Neuroscience .

18 (8): 485– 497.

doi : 10.1038/nrn.2017.68 .

ISSN 1471-0048 .

PMC 5958546 .

External links [ edit ] Scientists Explore the Workings of Taste Buds from National Public Radio's Talk of the Nation , July 22, 2005 http://kidshealth.org/kid/talk/qa/taste_buds.html For kids about taste buds!

http://www.newser.com/story/103744/your-lungs-have-their-own-taste-buds.html v t e Anatomy of taste Tongue Taste bud Lingual papilla Vallate papilla Foliate papilla Fungiform papilla Filiform papilla Path medulla Solitary tract VII IX X Solitary nucleus Gustatory nucleus pons Central tegmental tract Medial parabrachial nucleus Hypothalamus Amygdala thalamus Ventral posteromedial nucleus cerebrum Posterior limb of internal capsule Gustatory cortex Other Basic tastes Special visceral afferent v t e Nervous tissue CNS Tissue Types Grey matter White matter Projection fibers Association fiber Commissural fiber Lemniscus Nerve tract Decussation Neuropil Meninges Cell Types Neuronal Pyramidal Purkinje Granule Von Economo Medium spiny Interneuron Glial Astrocyte Ependymal cells Tanycyte Oligodendrocyte progenitor cell Oligodendrocyte Microglia PNS General Dorsal Root Ganglion Ramus Ventral Root Ramus Ramus communicans Gray White Autonomic ganglion ( Preganglionic nerve fibers Postganglionic nerve fibers ) Nerve fascicle Funiculus Connective tissues Epineurium Perineurium Endoneurium Neuroglia Myelination : Schwann cell Neurilemma Myelin incisure Node of Ranvier Internodal segment Satellite glial cell Neurons / nerve fibers Parts Soma Axon hillock Axon Telodendron Axon terminals Axoplasm Axolemma Neurofibril/neurofilament Dendrite Nissl body Dendritic spine Apical dendrite / Basal dendrite Types Bipolar Unipolar Pseudounipolar Multipolar Interneuron Renshaw Afferent nerve fiber / Sensory neuron GSA GVA SSA SVA fibers Ia or Aα Ib or Golgi or Aα II or Aβ and Aγ III or Aδ or fast pain IV or C or slow pain Efferent nerve fiber / Motor neuron GSE GVE SVE Upper motor neuron Lower motor neuron α motorneuron β motorneuron γ motorneuron Termination Synapse Electrical synapse / Gap junction Chemical synapse Synaptic vesicle Active zone Postsynaptic density Autapse Ribbon synapse Neuromuscular junction Sensory receptors Meissner's corpuscle Merkel nerve ending Pacinian corpuscle Ruffini ending Muscle spindle Free nerve ending Nociceptor Olfactory receptor neuron Photoreceptor cell Hair cell Taste receptor Authority control databases National Germany Other Terminologia Anatomica Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Taste_bud&oldid=1275099032 " Categories : Gustatory system Tongue Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2020 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 This page was last edited on 11 February 2025, at 01:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Taste bud 33 languages Add topic

