Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Population Toggle Population subsection 2.1 Languages 3 Notable people 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Kenyan Australians 1 language Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "Kenyan Australians" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ethnic group Kenyan Australians Total population 13,832 (by birth) [ 1 ] 3,786 (by ancestry) [ 1 ] Regions with significant populations Western Australia 4,397 [ 1 ] Victoria 2,850 [ 1 ] New South Wales 2,764 [ 1 ] Queensland 2,062 [ 1 ] Languages English · Swahili · · Kalenjin · Gujarati · Kikuyu · Dinka · Luo · Religion Christianity · Islam · Hinduism · Other Related ethnic groups African Australians , Ugandan Australians , Tanzanian Australians , South Sudanese Australians , Ethiopian Australians , Somali Australians Kenyan Australians are Australian citizens and residents of Kenyan origin and descent. They may be of indigenous African, European, or Indian heritage.

[ 2 ] Background [ edit ] Uncertainties about the future of colonial-run Kenya prompted many Kenyan-born settlers of both European and Indian backgrounds to migrate to other countries, including Australia. There are also many Swahili-speaking Kenyans of indigenous African ancestry.

[ 2 ] The majority of such migrants had no difficulty getting work and settling into the Australian community.

[ 2 ] The majority of Kenyan Australians are skilled and educated, with 72.5% of the Kenyan-born aged 15 years and over possessing higher non-school qualifications, compared to 55.9% of the Australian population.

[ 2 ] Population [ edit ] The 2016 Census noted there are 17,652 Kenya-born people in Australia.

[ 3 ] [ 2 ] About one in five Australians who claim Kenyan ancestry live in Sydney .

[ 4 ] Languages [ edit ] The languages most commonly spoken at home by Kenyan-born Australians are English and Swahili, however Kikuyu, Luo, Kalenjin, Gujarati, Dinka and other languages are not uncommon.

[ 2 ] Kikuyu is a Kenyan language spoken by over one hundred Australians at home, and Luo is also spoken by about one hundred Australians.

[ 5 ] About 5,000 Kenyan-born Australians speak a language indigenous to Africa at home.

[ 6 ] Some of the over 10,700 Australian-born who speak an African language may also speak a language of Kenya.

[ 6 ] The 74 languages the Special Broadcasting Service broadcasts in includes Swahili and Dinka , both languages spoken by many Kenyan-born Australians.

[ 7 ] Notable people [ edit ] Mark Ochieng , footballer [ 8 ] Former Senator Lucy Gichuhi , Family First Party politician [ 9 ] Rashid Mahazi , footballer of Diaspora Coordinator [ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Australia portal Kenya portal African Australians Australia–Kenya relations References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f "The Kenya-born Community: Historical Background (2011 census)" .

Australian Government, Department of Immigration and Border Protection . 19 November 2013. Archived from the original on 12 February 2014 . Retrieved 23 January 2014 .

^ a b c d e f "Community Information Summary: Kenya-born (2011 census)" (PDF) .

Department of Immigration & Citizenship . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 February 2014.

^ "2016 QuickStats Country of Birth" .

quickstats.censusdata.abs.gov.au . Retrieved 3 October 2020 .

^ 2006 Census ^ The People of Australia: Statistics from the 2011 Census (PDF) . Commonwealth of Australia, Department of Immigration and Border Protection. 2014.

ISBN 978-1-920996-23-9 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 May 2014.

^ a b "SBS Census Explorer" .

SBS Online . Archived from the original on 7 December 2015 . Retrieved 27 April 2018 .

^ "SBS unveils new Radio Schedule" .

SBS News . Retrieved 27 April 2018 .

^ "FFA Cup has Ochieng on course for second chance | Australia Cup" .

www.australiacup.com.au . 24 August 2018 . Retrieved 20 July 2024 .

^ "Former Senator Lucy Gichuhi" .

www.aph.gov.au . Retrieved 20 July 2024 .

^ "Anxiety and falling out of love with football: Why Mahazi quit at 28" .

SBS Sport . Retrieved 20 July 2024 .

v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 v t e Kenyan diaspora Australia Italy Mexico Norway United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kenyan_Australians&oldid=1285932021 " Categories : Australian people of Kenyan descent Kenyan diaspora Hidden categories: Use Australian English from December 2017 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from December 2017 Articles with topics of unclear notability from April 2023 All articles with topics of unclear notability Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Pages using infobox ethnic group with unsupported parameters This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 17:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kenyan Australians 1 language Add topic

