Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Legal status Toggle Legal status subsection 1.1 General Assembly resolutions 1.2 Security Council resolutions 2 Structure of a resolution 3 Types 4 Uniting for Peace 5 Implementation 6 References Toggle the table of contents United Nations resolution 23 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Српски / srpski Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from UN resolution ) Formal text adopted by a United Nations body This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( March 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The United Nations Office at Geneva (Switzerland) is the second largest UN office, after the United Nations Headquarters in New York City .

A United Nations resolution ( UN resolution ) is a formal text adopted by a United Nations (UN) body. Although any UN body can issue resolutions , in practice most resolutions are issued by the Security Council or the General Assembly , in the form of United Nations Security Council resolutions and United Nations General Assembly resolutions , respectively.

Legal status [ edit ] General Assembly resolutions [ edit ] Further information: United Nations General Assembly resolution Except concerning UN budgetary matters and instructions to lower UN bodies, General Assembly resolutions are non-binding.

[ 1 ] The UN's website describes General Assembly resolutions as the expression of member states' views, and as not legally binding upon member states.

[ 1 ] Articles 10 and 14 of the UN Charter refer to General Assembly resolutions as "recommendations"; the recommendatory nature of General Assembly resolutions has repeatedly been stressed by the International Court of Justice .

[ 2 ] Security Council resolutions [ edit ] Further information: United Nations Security Council resolution Under Article 25 of the Charter, UN member states are bound to carry out "decisions of the Security Council in accordance with the present Charter".

In 1971, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) – also called the "World Court", the highest court dealing with international law – asserted in an advisory opinion on the question of Namibia that all UN Security Council resolutions are legally binding.

[ 3 ] Some voices, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] however, defend that a difference should be made between United Nations Security Council resolutions adopted under "Chapter VII" of the UN Charter, which are legally binding, and those adopted under "Chapter VI" of the UN Charter, which are non binding; in practice, however, United Nations Security Council resolutions seldom explicit whether they are being adopted based on Chapter VI or VII of the UN Charter.

The Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs , a UN legal publication, says that during the United Nations Conference on International Organization which met in San Francisco in 1945, attempts to limit obligations of Members under Article 25 of the Charter to those decisions taken by the Council in the exercise of its specific powers under Chapters VI, VII and VIII of the Charter failed. It was stated at the time that those obligations also flowed from the authority conferred on the Council under Article 24(1) to act on the behalf of the members while exercising its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.

[ 6 ] Article 24, interpreted in this sense, becomes a source of authority which can be drawn upon to meet situations which are not covered by the more detailed provisions in the succeeding articles.

[ 7 ] The Repertory on Article 24 says: "The question whether Article 24 confers general powers on the Security Council ceased to be a subject of discussion following the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice rendered on 21 June 1971 in connection with the question of Namibia (ICJ Reports, 1971, page 16)".

[ 8 ] For more information on specific resolutions, see United Nations Security Council resolution .

Structure of a resolution [ edit ] United Nations resolutions follow a common format. Each resolution has three parts: the heading, the preambular clauses, and the operative clauses. The entire resolution consists of one long sentence, with commas and semi-colons throughout, and only one period at the very end. The heading contains the name of the body issuing the resolution (be it the Security Council , the General Assembly , a subsidiary organ of the GA, or any other resolution-issuing organization), which serves as the subject of the sentence; the preambular clauses (also called preambular phrases) indicating the framework through which the problem is viewed, as a preamble does in other documents; and the operative clauses (also called operative phrases) in which the body delineates the course of action it will take through a logical progression of sequentially numbered operative clauses (if it is the Security Council or a UN organ making policy for within the UN) or recommends to be taken (in many Security Council resolutions and for all other bodies when acting outside the UN). Each operative clause calls for a specific action.

The last operative clause, at least in the Security Council, is almost always " Decides [or Resolves ] to remain seized of the matter," (sometimes changed to "actively seized"). The reasoning behind this custom is somewhat murky, but it appears to be an assurance that the body in question will consider the topic addressed in the resolution in the future if it is necessary. In the case of Security Council resolutions, it may well be employed with the hope of prohibiting the UNGA from calling an 'emergency special session' on any unresolved matters, [ 9 ] under the terms of the ' Uniting for Peace resolution ', owing to the Charter stipulation in Article 12 that: "While the Security Council is exercising in respect of any dispute or situation the functions assigned to it in the present Charter, the General Assembly shall not make any recommendation with regard to that dispute or situation." The preambular and operative clauses almost always start with verbs , sometimes modified by adverbs then continue with whatever the body decides to put in; the first word is always either italicized or underlined . However, preambular clauses are unnumbered, end with commas , and sometimes do begin with adjectives ; operative clauses are numbered, end with semicolons (except for the final one, which ends with a full stop/period ), and never begin with adjectives.

The name of the issuing body may be moved from above the preambular clauses to below them; the decision to do so is mostly stylistic, and the resolution still comprises a coherent sentence.

Types [ edit ] United Nations resolutions can be both substantive resolutions and procedural resolutions .

In addition, resolutions can be classified by the organ in which they originate, e.g.: United Nations General Assembly resolutions United Nations Security Council resolutions Uniting for Peace [ edit ] As a way to address deadlock in the Security Council caused by the veto of one or more of the permanent five (P5) members of the Security Council, the General Assembly passed Resolution 377 , the "Uniting for Peace" resolution at the urging of the United States. UNGA Resolution 377 states that when the Security Council, because of a lack of unanimity among its P5 members, fails to act as required to maintain international peace and security, the General Assembly shall consider the matter immediately and may issue appropriate recommendations to UN members for collective measures, including the use of armed force when necessary, in order to maintain or to restore international peace and security.

[ 10 ] Envisioning the need for prompt action, Resolution 377 also created the "Emergency Special Session" (ESS) mechanism.

[ 11 ] The Uniting for Peace approach to quashing international conflicts and crises has been used by the General Assembly several times, including to address conflict in Korea in 1951, in the Middle East in 1956, and more recently in Ukraine (since 2022).

[ 12 ] Implementation [ edit ] Enforcement of resolutions depends on the more powerful member states of the UN and for this reason many resolutions, including scores of Security Council resolutions, have remained unimplemented. Resolutions against allies of the United States constitute by far the largest portion of unimplemented UN resolutions, according to a review of many decades of the diplomatic record by international relations scholar Stephen Zunes . US ally Israel and NATO member Turkey each stand in violation of well over a dozen UN Security Council resolutions.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "What is the difference between a resolution and a decision? – Ask DAG!" . United Nations . Retrieved 4 October 2021 .

^ Sergei A. Voitovich, International Economic Organizations in the Internatio xczcnal Legal Process , p. 95. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1995.

ISBN 0-7923-2766-7 ^ Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970) Archived 8 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , Advisory Opinion of 21 June 1971 at paragraphs 87-116, especially 113: "It has been contended that Article 25 of the Charter applies only to enforcement measures adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter. It is not possible to find in the Charter any support for this view. Article 25 is not confined to decisions in regard to enforcement action but applies to "the decisions of the Security Council" adopted in accordance with the Charter. Moreover, that Article is placed, not in Chapter VII, but immediately after Article 24 in that part of the Charter which deals with the functions and powers of the Security Council. If Article 25 had reference solely to decisions of the Security Council concerning enforcement action under Articles 41 and 42 of the Charter, that is to say, if it were only such decisions which had binding effect, then Article 25 would be superfluous, since this effect is secured by Articles 48 and 49 of the Charter." ^ "The International Court of Justice took the position in the Namibia Advisory Opinion that Art. 25 of the Charter, according to which decisions of the Security Council have to be carried out, does not only apply in relation to chapter VII. Rather, the court is of the opinion that the language of a resolution should be carefully analysed before a conclusion can be drawn as to its binding effect. The Court even seems to assume that Art. 25 may have given special powers to the Security Council. The Court speaks of "the powers under Art. 25". It is very doubtful, however, whether this position can be upheld. As Sir Gerald Fitzmaurice has pointed out in his dissenting opinion: "If, under the relevant chapter or article of the Charter, the decision is not binding, Article [69/70] 25 cannot make it so. If the effect of that Article were automatically to make all decisions of the Security Council binding, then the words 'in accordance with the present Charter' would be quite superfluous". In practice the Security Council does not act on the understanding that its decisions outside chapter VII are binding on the States concerned. Indeed, as the wording of chapter VI clearly shows, non-binding recommendations are the general rule here." Frowein, Jochen Abr.

Völkerrecht – Menschenrechte – Verfassungsfragen Deutschlands und Europas , Springer, 2004, ISBN 3-540-23023-8 , p. 58.

^ De Wet, Erika.

The Chapter VII Powers of the United Nations Security Council , Hart Publishing, 2004, ISBN 1-84113-422-8 , pp. 39-40. "Allowing the Security Council to adopt binding measures under Chapter VI would undermine the structural division of competencies foreseen by Chapters VI and VII, respectively. The whole aim of separating these chapters is to distinguish between voluntary and binding measures. Whereas the specific settlement of disputes provided by the former is underpinned by the consent of the parties, binding measures in terms of Chapter VII are characterised by the absence of such consent. A further indication of the non-binding nature of measures taken in terms of Chapter VI is the obligation on members of the Security Council who are parties to a dispute, to refrain from voting when resolutions under Chapter VI are adopted. No similar obligation exists with respect to binding resolutions adopted under Chapter VII... If one applies this reasoning to the Namibia opinion, the decisive point is that none of the Articles under Chapter VI facilitate the adoption of the type of binding measures that were adopted by the Security Council in Resolution 276(1970)... Resolution 260(1970) was indeed adopted in terms of Chapter VII, even though the ICJ went to some length to give the opposite impression." ^ See page 5, The Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs, Extracts Relating to Article 25 [1] ^ see The Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs, Extracts Relating to Article 24, [2] ^ See Note 2 on page 1 of Sup. 6, vol. 3, Article 24 ^ US to UN: Butt out Archived 6 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine , GreenPeace.org, 10 April 2003 ^ United Nations General Assembly Resolution A/RES/377(V) 3 November 1950.  Retrieved accessdate.

^ UN General Assembly Emergency Special Sessions. UN.org.

^ Journal of Conflict and Security Law, Andrew J. Carswell, "Unblocking the UN Security Council: The Uniting for Peace Resolution " vol. 18, iss. 3, Winter 2013, Pages 453–480 ^ LA Times, 17 October 2002 "U.N. Resolutions Frequently Violated" ^ Foreign Policy in Focus, 1 October 2002 "United Nations Security Council Resolutions Currently Being Violated by Countries Other than Iraq" ^ Eurasia Review, 28 March 2021 "Violation of UN Resolutions Is Not Uncommon – OpEd" v t e United Nations Secretary-General : António Guterres Deputy Secretary-General : Amina J. Mohammed General Assembly President : Philemon Yang UN System Charter Preamble Principal organs Secretariat Secretary-General selections Deputy Secretary-General Under-Secretary-General General Assembly President International Court of Justice Statute Security Council Elections Members President Reform Veto power Economic and Social Council President Trusteeship Council Funds, programmes, and other bodies Culture of Peace IAEA IPCC ITC MINURSO OHCHR SCSL UNAIDS UNCDF UNCITRAL UNCTAD UNDGC UNDP UNDPO peacekeeping UNEP OzonAction UNEP/GRID-Arendal UNEP-WCMC UNFPA UN-HABITAT UNHCR UNHRC UNICEF UNICRI UNIDIR UNITAR UN-Oceans UNODC UNOPS UNOSAT UNRISD UNRWA UNSDG UNSSC UNU UNU-CRIS UNU-OP UNV UN Women WFP Specialized agencies FAO ICAO IFAD ILO IMF IMO IOM ITU UN Tourism UNESCO UNIDO UPU WFEO WHO WIPO WMO World Bank Group IBRD IDA IFC Secretariat offices and departments Headquarters Conference Building General Assembly Building Secretariat Building Department of Economic and Social Affairs Department of Peace Operations Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs Dag Hammarskjöld Library Department for Safety and Security Division for Palestinian Rights Office at Geneva Palace of Nations Office at Nairobi Office at Vienna Office for Disarmament Affairs Office for Outer Space Affairs Office for Partnerships Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Office of Internal Oversight Services Office of Legal Affairs Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States Office of Counter-Terrorism Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict Office of the Spokesperson for the Secretary-General Office on Sport for Development and Peace UN organizations by location Members and observers Founding members Full members Security Council Permanent members Permanent representatives to the UN list General Assembly Observers European Union History Preceding years International Telegraph Union Universal Postal Union Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 Permanent Court of Arbitration International Office of Public Hygiene League of Nations archives covenant organization member states Preparatory years Declaration of St James's Palace (1941) Atlantic Charter (1941) Declaration by United Nations (1942) Moscow Conference (1943) Tehran Conference (1943) Bretton Woods Conference (1944) Dumbarton Oaks Conference (1944) Yalta Conference (1945) Conference on International Organization (1945) Genocide Convention (1948) Activities Enlargement Peacekeeping missions timeline governed territories UNPOL Universal Declaration of Human Rights drafting Human Rights Day World Heritage Convention Convention on the Rights of the Child committee Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues Indigenous Caucus Sustainable Development Goals Declaration on the Rights of Peasants Resolutions Security Council vetoes General Assembly 66th 67th Security Council Cyprus Iran Iraq Israel Lebanon Nagorno-Karabakh North Korea Palestine Syria Western Sahara Yemen Elections Secretary-General 2021 2016 International Court of Justice 2023 2022 2021 2020 2017 2014 2011 General Assembly President (2016) Security Council (2016) Related Outline Advisory Committee of Local Authorities Art Collection Security Council mural Block By Block Bretton Woods system Celestial Sphere Woodrow Wilson Memorial CCISUA Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Criticism Delivering as One Drug control treaties Expulsion from the United Nations Ex Tempore Federal Credit Union FICSA Flag Honour Flag Four Nations Initiative Global Compact International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons International Day of Peace International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of the World International Narcotics Control Board International School Hanoi Interpretation Service Laissez-passer Memorial Cemetery Korea Military Staff Committee Millennium Declaration Millennium Summit Model United Nations Official languages Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Postal Administration Ralph Bunche Park Reform SDG Publishers Compact Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners Treaty Series Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons UN Mandate UN Sacco UN Special UNICEF club United Nations Day United Nations in popular culture United Nations Medal United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights United Nations Radio United Nations television film series University for Peace Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action WIPO Treaty on Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources and Associated Traditional Knowledge Withdrawal from the United Nations Women in peacekeeping World Federation of United Nations Associations World portal Portals : Politics Law NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐lddt5
Cached time: 20250812031136
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.384 seconds
Real time usage: 0.511 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1088/1000000
Revision size: 15268/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 90530/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2049/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 35110/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.226/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5384156/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  403.710      1 -total
 29.17%  117.770      1 Template:Reflist
 24.66%   99.554      3 Template:Navbox
 23.81%   96.115      1 Template:United_Nations
 17.60%   71.072      1 Template:Cite_web
 16.75%   67.609      1 Template:Short_description
 12.91%   52.104      1 Template:Original_research
 12.41%   50.114      1 Template:Ambox
  8.19%   33.047      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.59%   30.631      1 Template:Portal_bar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1437212:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812031136 and revision id 1303806915. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_Nations_resolution&oldid=1303806915 " Category : United Nations resolutions Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2022 Articles that may contain original research from March 2009 All articles that may contain original research This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 04:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United Nations resolution 23 languages Add topic

