Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mathematical work 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Johannes Hudde 11 languages العربية Català Deutsch Français मराठी مصرى Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Русский தமிழ் Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Johannes Hudde Johannes van Waveren Hudde Born 23 April 1628 Amsterdam Died 15 April 1704 ( 1704-04-16 ) (aged 75) Amsterdam Alma mater Leiden University Scientific career Fields Mathematics Academic advisors Frans van Schooten Johannes ( van Waveren ) Hudde (23 April 1628 – 15 April 1704) was a mathematician , burgomaster (mayor) of Amsterdam between 1672 – 1703, and governor of the Dutch East India Company .

Hudde initially studied law at the University of Leiden, until he turned to mathematics under the influence of Frans van Schooten . He contributed to the theory of equations in his posthumous De reductione aequationum of 1713, in which he was the first to take literal coefficients in algebra as indifferently positive or negative. In the Latin translation that Van Schooten made of Descartes ' La Géométrie , Hudde, together with Johan de Witt and Hendrik van Heuraet , published work of their own.

[ 1 ] Hudde's contribution consisted of describing an algorithm for simplifying the calculations necessary to determine a double root to a polynomial equation.

[ 2 ] And establishing two properties of polynomial roots known as Hudde's rules , that point toward algorithms of calculus .

As a "burgemeester" of Amsterdam he ordered that the city canals should be flushed at high tide and that the polluted water of the town "secreten" should be diverted to pits outside the town instead of into the canals. He also promoted hygiene in and around the town's water supply. "Hudde's stones" were marker stones that were used to mark the summer high water level at several points in the city. They later were the foundation for the " NAP ", the now Europe-wide system for measuring water levels.

[ 3 ] Mathematical work [ edit ] Specilla circularia , a text on telescopes from 1656 by Johannes Hudde Hudde studied law at the University of Leiden , but turned to mathematics under the influence of his teacher Frans van Schooten . From 1654 to 1663 he worked under van Schooten.

La Géométrie (1637) by René Descartes provided an introduction to analytic geometry in French, whereas Latin was still the international language of science. Schooten and his students including Hudde, Johan de Witt and Hendrik van Heuraet published a Latin translation of La Geometrie in 1659. Each of the students added to the work. Hudde's contribution described Hudde's rules and made a study of maxima and minima . He added to the translation of La Geometrie two papers of his own: Epistola Prima de Reductione Aequationum on algebraic equations, and Epistola Secunda de Maximis et Minimis , in which he described an algorithm for simplifying the calculations necessary to determine a double root to a polynomial equation.

[ 2 ] Together with René-François de Sluse , Hudde provided general algorithms by which one could routinely construct tangents to curves given by polynomial equations .

[ 2 ] Hudde corresponded with Baruch Spinoza and Christiaan Huygens , Johann Bernoulli , Isaac Newton and Leibniz . Newton and Leibniz mention Hudde, and especially Hudde's rule, many times and used some of his ideas in their own work on infinitesimal calculus .

See also [ edit ] History of group theory Mercator series Tangent References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Johannes Hudde .

^ Katz, V. J.

(2008).

A History of Mathematics (2nd ed.). Pearson. p. 512.

^ a b c Katz 2008 , p. 512.

^ J.P.M Kwaad Het Normal Amsterdam Peil (NAP) (Dutch) Karlheinz Haas (1956) "Die mathematischen Arbeiten von Johann Hudde (1628 to 1704) Bürgermeister von Amsterdam", Centaurus 4: 235–84 doi : 10.1111/j.1600-0498.1956.tb00477.x J. Hudde (1656) Specilla circularia (circular Lens, in Dutch) External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Johannes Hudde" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Johannes Hudde at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Belgium Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Netherlands 2 Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Johannes_Hudde&oldid=1301779272 " Categories : 1628 births 1704 deaths 17th-century Dutch mathematicians Mayors of Amsterdam Scientists from Amsterdam Leiden University alumni Administrators of the Dutch East India Company Burials at the Oude Kerk, Amsterdam 17th-century Dutch politicians 18th-century Dutch politicians People associated with Baruch Spinoza Mayors of places in the Dutch Republic Hidden categories: Articles with hCards Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 16:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Johannes Hudde 11 languages Add topic

