Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin Toggle Origin subsection 1.1 Historical Context and Influences 1.2 Influence of Karl Marx and Expansion by Clarence Ayres 2 Explanation 3 Hard and soft determinism 4 Criticism 5 Notable technological determinists 6 Media determinism as a form of technological determinism 7 See also 8 Footnotes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Technological determinism 36 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Latviešu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Reductionist theory Part of a series on Marxian economics Concepts Abstract labour and concrete labour Capital ( accumulation ) Capitalist mode of production Class process Commodity Constant capital Critique of political economy Exchange value Exploitation Labour power Labour theory of value Law of accumulation Law of value Means of production Mode of production Monopoly capitalism Organic composition of capital Productive forces Profit Prices of production Primitive accumulation Rate of exploitation Rate of profit Real prices and ideal prices Relations of production Reproduction Reserve army of labour Socially necessary labour time Socialist mode of production Socialization Simple commodity production Surplus value Surplus labour Surplus product Use value Wage labour Wage slavery Value-form Value product Variable capital Topics Capital controversy Crisis theory Economic determinism Immiseration thesis Imperialism Historical materialism Okishio's theorem Overaccumulation Overdetermination Overproduction Kondratiev wave Technological determinism Technological unemployment Temporal single-system interpretation Falling profit-rate tendency Transformation problem Underconsumption Value Variants Analytical Marxism Classical Marxism Orthodox Marxism Neo-Marxian economics Works A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Das Kapital Grundrisse Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 The Accumulation of Capital Monopoly Capital The Theory of Capitalist Development Finance Capital People Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Vladimir Lenin Rosa Luxemburg Rudolf Hilferding Leon Trotsky Karl Kautsky Ernest Mandel Antonie Pannekoek János Kornai Andrew Kliman Richard D. Wolff Nikolai Kondratiev Paul Sweezy Nobuo Okishio Ian Steedman John Roemer David Laibman Paul A. Baran Stephen Resnick Michał Kalecki Journals Cambridge Journal of Economics International Journal of Political Economy Monthly Review New School Economic Review Real-World Economics Review Rethinking Marxism Science and Society Related topics Evolutionary economics Classical economics Marxism Marxist sociology Neoclassical economics Perspectives on capitalism Political economy Schools of economic thought Socialist economics Critiques of capitalism Communism portal Economics portal v t e Technological determinism is a reductionist theory in assuming that a society's technology progresses by following its own internal logic of efficiency , while determining the development of the social structure and cultural values .

[ 1 ] The term is believed to have originated from Thorstein Veblen (1857–1929), an American sociologist and economist . The most radical technological determinist in the United States in the 20th century was most likely Clarence Ayres who was a follower of Thorstein Veblen as well as John Dewey .

William Ogburn was also known for his radical technological determinism and his theory on cultural lag .

Origin [ edit ] The origins of technological determinism as a formal concept are often traced to Thorstein Veblen (1857–1929), an influential American sociologist and economist. Veblen, known for his work on social and economic issues, introduced ideas that portrayed technology as a powerful, autonomous force capable of shaping societal norms and structures. He argued that the development and use of machinery exerted an independent influence on human thought and behavior, notably asserting that "the machine throws out anthropomorphic habits of thought.” [ 2 ] [ 3 ] This notion laid the foundation for technological determinism by suggesting that technology inherently transforms society by reshaping patterns of thought and behavior .

Historical Context and Influences [ edit ] During Veblen's time, rapid industrialization and advancements in technology were radically altering American society . Innovations in manufacturing and transportation , such as the assembly line and railroads , demonstrated technology’s potential to reshape economic and social structures. These changes helped popularize the idea that technology could independently drive societal evolution , creating the conditions for Veblen's ideas to resonate widely.

[ 4 ] Influence of Karl Marx and Expansion by Clarence Ayres [ edit ] Although Veblen is credited with coining the core ideas behind technological determinism, the influence of Karl Marx on these ideas is also significant. Marx argued that technology drives historical change by shaping the "material base" of society. For instance, he suggested that the railway in colonial India would challenge and erode the caste system by introducing new economic activities and altering social hierarchies.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Later, Clarence Ayres , a 20th-century economist inspired by Veblen, expanded on these ideas by introducing the concept of "technological drag." According to Ayres, technology progresses as a dynamic, self-generating force, while traditional institutions often lag, resisting the transformative potential of technological change. Ayres’ theory further solidified technological determinism, emphasizing the inevitable clash between technological progress and social conservatism .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Explanation [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Technological determinism seeks to show technical developments, media, or technology as a whole, as the key mover in history and social change.

[ 9 ] It is a theory subscribed to by "hyperglobalists" who claim that as a consequence of the wide availability of technology, accelerated globalization is inevitable. Therefore, technological development and innovation become the principal motor of social, economic or political change.

[ 10 ] Strict adherents to technological determinism do not believe the influence of technology differs based on how much a technology is or can be used. Instead of considering technology as part of a larger spectrum of human activity, technological determinism sees technology as the basis for all human activity.

Technological determinism has been summarized as 'The belief in technology as a key governing force in society ...' ( Merritt Roe Smith ). 'The idea that technological development determines social change ...' (Bruce Bimber). It changes the way people think and how they interact with others and can be described as '...a three-word logical proposition: "Technology determines history"' ( Rosalind H. Williams ) . It is, '... the belief that social progress is driven by technological innovation, which in turn follows an "inevitable" course.' [ 11 ] This 'idea of progress' or 'doctrine of progress' is centralized around the idea that social problems can be solved by technological advancement, and this is the way that society moves forward. Technological determinists believe that "'You can't stop progress', implying that we are unable to control technology" ( Lelia Green ). This suggests that we are somewhat powerless, and society allows technology to drive social changes because "societies fail to be aware of the alternatives to the values embedded in it [technology]" ( Merritt Roe Smith ).

Technological determinism has been defined as an approach that identifies technology, or technological advances, as the central causal element in processes of social change.

[ 12 ] As technology is stabilized, its design tends to dictate users' behaviors, consequently stating that "technological progress equals social progress." [ 13 ] Key notions of this theory are separated into two parts, with the first being that the development of the technology itself may also be separate from social and political factors, arising from "the ways of inventors, engineers, and designers following an internal, technical logic that has nothing to do with social relationships".

[ 13 ] The second is that as technology is stabilized, its design tends to dictate users' behaviors, consequently resulting in social change.

As technology changes, the ways in which it is utilized and incorporated into the daily lives of individuals within a culture consequently affect the ways of living, highlighting how technology ultimately determines societal growth through its influence on relations and ways of living within a culture. To illustrate, "the invention of the wheel revolutionized human mobility, allowing humans to travel greater distances and carry greater loads with them".

[ 14 ] This technological advancement also leads to interactions between different cultural groups, advanced trade, and thus impacts the size and relations both within and between different networks. Other examples include the invention of language, expanding modes of communication between individuals, the introduction of bookkeeping and written documentation, impacting the circulation of knowledge, and having streamlined effects on the socioeconomic and political systems as a whole. As Dusek (2006) notes, "culture and society cannot affect the direction of technology…[and] as technology develops and changes, the institutions in the rest of society change, as does the art and religion of a society." [ 15 ] Thus, technological determinism dictates that technological advances and social relations are inevitably tied, with the change of either affecting the other by consequence of normalization.

[ 16 ] This stance however ignores the social and cultural circumstances in which the technology was developed. Sociologist Claude Fischer (1992) characterized the most prominent forms of technological determinism as "billiard ball" approaches, in which technology is seen as an external force introduced into a social situation, producing a series of ricochet effects.

[ 17 ] Rather than acknowledging that a society or culture interacts with and even shapes the technologies that are used, a technological determinist view holds that "the uses made of technology are largely determined by the structure of the technology itself, that is, that its functions follow from its form" ( Neil Postman ).  However, this is not the sole view of TD following Smith and Marx's (1998) [ 18 ] notion of "hard" determinism, which states that once a technology is introduced into a culture what follows is the inevitable development of that technology. In this view, the role of "agency (the power to affect change) is imputed on the technology itself, or some of its intrinsic attributes; thus the invention of technology leads to a situation of inescapable necessity." The other view follows what Smith and Marx (1998) [ 18 ] dictate as "soft" determinism, where the development of technology is also dependent on social context, affecting how it is adopted into a culture, "and, if the technology is adopted, the social context will have important effects on how the technology is used and thus on its ultimate impact".

[ 16 ] For example, we could examine the spread of mass-produced knowledge through the role of the printing press in the Protestant Reformation. Because of the urgency from the protestant side to get the reform off the ground before the church could react, "early Lutheran leaders, led by Luther himself, wrote thousands of anti-papal pamphlets in the Reformation's first decades and these works spread rapidly through reprinting in various print shops throughout central Europe".

[ 19 ] As such the urgency of the socio-political context to utilize such technology in the beginning of its invention caused its fast adoption and normalization into European culture. We could view its uses in its popularization – for political propaganda purposes – in line with the continued traditions of newspapers in modern times, as well as newly adopted uses for other printed text, adapting to change in a social context such as an emphasis on leisurely activities such as reading.  This follows the soft deterministic view because the technological invention – the printing press – was quickly adopted because of the socio-political context, and because of its fast integration into society, has impacted and continues to impact how society operates.

Hard and soft determinism [ edit ] “Soft determinism”, as the name suggests, is a more passive view of the way technology interacts with socio-political situations. Soft determinists still subscribe to the fact that technology is the guiding force in our evolution but would maintain that we have a chance to make decisions regarding the outcomes of a situation. This is not to say that free will exists, but that the possibility for us to roll the dice and see what the outcome exists. A slightly different variant of soft determinism is the 1922 technology-driven theory of social change proposed by William Fielding Ogburn , in which society must adjust to the consequences of major inventions, but often does so only after a period of cultural lag .

[ 20 ] Criticism [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Skepticism about technological determinism emerged alongside increased pessimism about techno-science in the mid-20th century, in particular around the use of nuclear energy in the production of nuclear weapons , Nazi human experimentation during World War II , and the problems of economic development in the Third World . As a direct consequence, desire for greater control of the course of development of technology gave rise to disenchantment with the model of technological determinism in academia.

Modern theorists of technology and society no longer consider technological determinism to be a very accurate view of the way in which we interact with technology, even though determinist assumptions and language fairly saturate the writings of many boosters of technology, the business pages of many popular magazines, and much reporting on technology.

[ citation needed ] Instead, research in science and technology studies , social construction of technology and related fields have emphasized more nuanced views that resist easy causal formulations. They emphasize that "The relationship between technology and society cannot be reduced to a simplistic cause-and-effect formula. It is, rather, an 'intertwining'", whereby technology does not determine but "operates, and are operated upon in a complex social field" (Murphie and Potts).

T. Snyder approached the aspect of technological determinism in his concept: 'politics of inevitability'.

[ 21 ] A concept utilized by politicians in which society is promised the idea that the future will be only more of the present, this concept removes responsibility. This could be applied to free markets, the development of nation states and technological progress.

In his article "Subversive Rationalization: Technology, Power and Democracy with Technology," Andrew Feenberg argues that technological determinism is not a very well founded concept by illustrating that two of the founding theses of determinism are easily questionable and in doing so calls for what he calls democratic rationalization ( Feenberg 210–212).

Prominent opposition to technologically determinist thinking has emerged within work on the social construction of technology (SCOT). SCOT research, such as that of Mackenzie and Wajcman (1997) argues that the path of innovation and its social consequences are strongly, if not entirely shaped by society itself through the influence of culture, politics, economic arrangements, regulatory mechanisms and the like. In its strongest form, verging on social determinism , "What matters is not the technology itself, but the social or economic system in which it is embedded" ( Langdon Winner ).

In his influential but contested (see Woolgar and Cooper, 1999) article "Do Artifacts Have Politics?", Langdon Winner illustrates not a form of determinism but the various sources of the politics of technologies. Those politics can stem from the intentions of the designer and the culture of the society in which a technology emerges or can stem from the technology itself, a "practical necessity" for it to function. For instance, New York City urban planner Robert Moses is purported to have built Long Island's parkway tunnels too low for buses to pass in order to keep minorities away from the island's beaches, an example of externally inscribed politics. On the other hand, an authoritarian command-and-control structure is a practical necessity of a nuclear power plant if radioactive waste is not to fall into the wrong hands. As such, Winner neither succumbs to technological determinism nor social determinism. The source of a technology's politics is determined only by carefully examining its features and history.

Although "The deterministic model of technology is widely propagated in society" (Sarah Miller), it has also been widely questioned by scholars.

Lelia Green explains that, "When technology was perceived as being outside society, it made sense to talk about technology as neutral". Yet, this idea fails to take into account that culture is not fixed and society is dynamic. When "Technology is implicated in social processes, there is nothing neutral about society" ( Lelia Green ). This confirms one of the major problems with "technological determinism and the resulting denial of human responsibility for change. There is a loss of human involvement that shape technology and society" (Sarah Miller).

Another conflicting idea is that of technological somnambulism , a term coined by Winner in his essay "Technology as Forms of Life". Winner wonders whether or not we are simply sleepwalking through our existence with little concern or knowledge as to how we truly interact with technology. In this view, it is still possible for us to wake up and once again take control of the direction in which we are traveling (Winner 104). However, it requires society to adopt Ralph Schroeder 's claim that, "users don't just passively consume technology, but actively transform it".

[ 22 ] In opposition to technological determinism are those who subscribe to the belief of social determinism and postmodernism . Social determinists believe that social circumstances alone select which technologies are adopted, with the result that no technology can be considered "inevitable" solely on its own merits. Technology and culture are not neutral and when knowledge comes into the equation, technology becomes implicated in social processes. The knowledge of how to create, enhance, and use technology is socially bound knowledge. Postmodernists take another view, suggesting that what is right or wrong is dependent on circumstance. They believe technological change can have implications on the past, present and future.

[ 23 ] While they believe technological change is influenced by changes in government policy, society and culture, they consider the notion of change to be a paradox, since change is constant.

Media and cultural studies theorist Brian Winston , in response to technological determinism, developed a model for the emergence of new technologies which is centered on the Law of the suppression of radical potential . In two of his books – Technologies of Seeing: Photography, Cinematography and Television (1997) and Media Technology and Society (1998) – Winston applied this model to show how technologies evolve over time, and how their 'invention' is mediated and controlled by society and societal factors which suppress the radical potential of a given technology.

Notable technological determinists [ edit ] Some interpret Karl Marx as advocating technological determinism, with such statements as "The Handmill gives you society with the feudal lord: the steam-mill , society with the industrial capitalist" ( The Poverty of Philosophy, 1847), but others argue that Marx was not a determinist.

[ 24 ] Technological determinist Walter J. Ong reviews the societal transition from an oral culture to a written culture in his work Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word (1982). He asserts that this particular development is attributable to the use of new technologies of literacy (particularly print and writing,) to communicate thoughts which could previously only be verbalized. He furthers this argument by claiming that writing is purely context dependent as it is a "secondary modelling system" (8). Reliant upon the earlier primary system of spoken language, writing manipulates the potential of language as it depends purely upon the visual sense to communicate the intended information. Furthermore, the rather stagnant technology of literacy distinctly limits the usage and influence of knowledge, it unquestionably effects the evolution of society. In fact, Ong asserts that "more than any other single invention, writing has transformed human consciousness" (Ong 1982: 78).

Media determinism as a form of technological determinism [ edit ] Media determinism is a form of technological determinism, a philosophical and sociological position which posits the power of the media to impact society.

[ 25 ] Two foundational media determinists are the Canadian scholars Harold Innis and Marshall McLuhan . One of the best examples of technological determinism in media theory is Marshall McLuhan's theory " the medium is the message " and the ideas of his mentor Harold Adams Innis. Both these Canadian theorists saw media as the essence of civilization. The association of different media with particular mental consequences by McLuhan and others can be seen as related to technological determinism. It is this variety of determinism that is referred to as media determinism. According to McLuhan, there is an association between communications media/technology and language; similarly, Benjamin Lee Whorf argues that language shapes our perception of thinking ( linguistic determinism ). For McLuhan, media is a more powerful and explicit determinant than is the more general concept of language. McLuhan was not necessarily a hard determinist. As a more moderate version of media determinism, he proposed that our use of particular media may have subtle influences on us, but more importantly, it is the social context of use that is crucial.

[ 26 ] See also Media ecology .
Media determinism is a form of the popular dominant theory of the relationship between technology and society . In a determinist view, technology takes on an active life of its own and is seen be as a driver of social phenomena. Innis believed that the social, cultural, political, and economic developments of each historical period can be related directly to the technology of the means of mass communication of that period. In this sense, like Dr. Frankenstein's monster, technology itself appears to be alive, or at least capable of shaping human behavior.

[ 27 ] However, it has been increasingly subject to critical review by scholars. For example, scholar Raymond Williams , criticizes media determinism and rather believes social movements define technological and media processes.

[ 28 ] With regard to communications media, audience determinism is a viewpoint opposed to media determinism. This is described as instead of media being presented as doing things to people; the stress is on the way people do things with media. Individuals need to be aware that the term "deterministic" is a negative one for many social scientists and modern sociologists; in particular they often use the word as a term of abuse.

[ 29 ] See also [ edit ] Instrumental conception of technology – Philosophical concept Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Determinism – Philosophical view that events are determined by prior events Historical materialism – Marxist historiography History of science and technology Orthodox Marxism – Body of Marxist thought, prominent until World War I Philosophy of technology – Studies of the nature of technology Theory of the productive forces – Technological determinism in Marxism Path dependence Footnotes [ edit ] [as cited in Croteau, D. and Hoynes, M. (2003) Media Society: Industries, Images and Audiences (third edition), Pine Forge Press, Thousand Oaks pp. 305–306] References [ edit ] ^ Héder, Mihály (June 2021).

"AI and the resurrection of Technological Determinism" (PDF) .

Információs Társadalom (Information Society) .

21 (2): 119– 130.

doi : 10.22503/inftars.XXI.2021.2.8 .

S2CID 244186553 .

^ "The Culture of Technology" .

MIT Press . Retrieved 2024-10-29 .

^ Veblen, Thorstein (1921).

The Engineers and the Price System . B. W. Huebsch, Incorporated.

ISBN 978-0-670-29549-4 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Marx, Leo (1997).

" "Technology": The Emergence of a Hazardous Concept" .

Social Research .

64 (3): 965– 988.

ISSN 0037-783X .

JSTOR 40971194 .

^ "Manifesto of the Communist Party" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2024-10-29 .

^ Avineri, Shlomo (1968).

The social and political thought of Karl Marx / by Shlomo Avineri . Internet Archive. London; New York : Cambridge at the University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-04071-6 .

^ Clarence Edwin Ayres (1944-01-01).

The theory of economic progress . Internet Archive. The University of North Carolina Press.

^ "Journal of Economic Issues, Taylor & Francis Journals | IDEAS/RePEc" .

ideas.repec.org . Retrieved 2024-10-29 .

^ Kunz, William M. (2006).

Culture Conglomerates: Consolidation in the Motion Picture and Television Industries . Publisher: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc. p. 2.

ISBN 978-0742540668 .

^ Global politics . Palgrave Macmillan. 2015.

ISBN 9781137349262 .

OCLC 979008143 .

^ Does technology drive history? : the dilemma of technological determinism . Merritt Roe Smith, Leo Marx. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 1994.

ISBN 0-262-19347-7 .

OCLC 28929481 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ (Croteau and Hoynes) ^ a b Wyatt, Sally. 2008. "Technological Determinism Is Dead; Long Live Technological Determinism." In The Handbook of Science and Technology Studies, edited by Edward Hackett, Olga Amsterdamska, Michael Lynch, and Lucy Wajcman, 165–80. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

https://ds.amu.edu.et/xmlui/bitstream/handle/123456789/1114/00349.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y#page=181 .

^ Drew, Chris. 2021. "Technological Determinism Theory (5 Examples, Pros & Cons)." Helpfulprofessor.com. October 28, 2021.

https://helpfulprofessor.com/technological-determinism-theory/ .

^ Dusek, Val. 2006. Philosophy of Technology : An Introduction. Malden, Ma; Oxford: Blackwell Pub.

^ a b Salsone, Belle, Peter Sebastian Stein, Kaleb Gage Parsons, Thomas Kent, Krystal Nielsen, and David Thomas Nitz. 2020. "Technological Determinism." Opentextbooks.clemson.edu, July.

https://opentextbooks.clemson.edu/sciencetechnologyandsociety/chapter/technological-determinism/ .

^ Croteau and Hoynes, 2003 ^ a b Wengenroth, Ulrich, Merritt Roe Smith, and Leo Marx. 1998. "Does Technology Drive History? The Dilemma of Technological Determinism." Technology and Culture 39 (4): 755.

https://doi.org/10.2307/1215849 .

^ Boerner, Lars, Jared Rubin, and Battista Severgnini. 2021. "A Time to Print, a Time to Reform." European Economic Review 138 (September): 103826.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2021.103826 .

^ Dafoe, Allan (2015).

"On Technological Determinism: A Typology, Scope Conditions, and a Mechanism" .

Science, Technology, & Human Values .

40 (6): 1047– 1076.

doi : 10.1177/0162243915579283 .

ISSN 0162-2439 .

JSTOR 43671266 .

^ The road to unfreedom, Snyder, 2018 ^ Schroeder, Ralph (2007).

Rethinking Science, Technology, and Social Change . Stanford University Press. p. 99.

ISBN 9780804755887 . Retrieved 29 April 2022 .

^ Green, Leila (2001).

Technoculture: From Alphabet to Cybersex . Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin. p.

15 .

ISBN 9781865080482 .

^ Technological or Media Determinism , Daniel Chandler ^ Media Determinism in Cyberspace Archived 2010-05-29 at the Wayback Machine , Regent University ^ McLuhan, Marshall, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man (PDF) , archived from the original (PDF) on March 24, 2012 ^ Hist, Martin.

"One tweet does not a revolution make: Technological determinism, media and social change" . Deakin University.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Williams, Raymond (1974).

Television: Technology and Cultural Form . London and New York: Routledge. p. 133.

ISBN 978-0-415-31456-5 . Retrieved 28 May 2013 .

^ Chandler, Daniel (18 September 1995), Technological or Media Determinism , archived from the original on April 21, 2015 Further reading [ edit ] G.A. Cohen , Karl Marx's Theory of History: A Defence , Oxford and Princeton, 1978.

Cowan, Ruth Schwartz (1983).

More Work for Mother: The Ironies of Household Technology from the Open Hearth to the Microwave . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-04732-1 .

Croteau, David; Hoynes, William (2003).

Media Society: Industries, Images and Audiences ((third edition) ed.). Thousand Oaks: Pine Forge Press. pp.

305 –307.

ISBN 9780761987734 .

Ellul, Jacques (1964).

The Technological Society . New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Green, Lelia (2002).

Technoculture . Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin. pp.

1 –20.

ISBN 9781865080482 .

Huesemann, Michael H., and Joyce A. Huesemann (2011).

Technofix: Why Technology Won't Save Us or the Environment , New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, British Columbia, Canada, ISBN 0865717044 , 464 pp.

Miller, Sarah (January 1997). "Futures Work – Recognising the Social Determinants of Change".

Social Alternatives (vol.1, No.1 ed.). pp.

57– 58.

Murphie, Andrew; Potts, John (2003). "1".

Culture and Technology . London: Palgrave. p. 21.

Ong, Walter J (1982). Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. New York: Methuen.

Postman, Neil (1992).

Technopoly: the Surrender of Culture to Technology . Vintage: New York. pp.

3– 20.

Roland, Alex. Once More into the Stirrups; Lynne White Jr, Medieval Technology and Social Change" Classics Revisited. 574- 585.

Sawyer, P.H. and R.H. Hilton. "Technical Determinism" Past & Present. April 1963: 90–100.

Smith, Merritt Roe ; Marx, Leo , eds. (1994).

Does Technology Drive History? The Dilemma of Technological Determinism . Cambridge: MIT Press.

ISBN 9780262691673 .

Staudenmaier, S.J., John M. (1985). "The Debate over Technological Determinism".

Technology's Storytellers: Reweaving the Human Fabric . Cambridge: The Society for the History of Technology and the MIT Press. pp.

134– 148.

Winner, Langdon (1977).

Autonomous Technology: Technics-Out-of-Control as a Theme in Political Thought . Cambridge: MIT Press.

ISBN 9780262230780 .

Winner, Langdon (1986). "Do Artefacts Have Politics?".

The Whale and the Reactor . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p.

26 .

Winner, Langdon. "Technology as Forms of Life".

Readings in the Philosophy of Technology . David M. Kaplan. Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield, 2004. 103–113 Woolgar, Steve and Cooper, Geoff (1999). "Do artefacts have ambivalence? Moses' bridges, Winner's bridges and other urban legends in S&TS". Social Studies of Science  29 (3), 433–449.

White, Lynn (1966).

Medieval Technology and Social Change . New York: Oxford University Press.

Furbank, P.N. "The Myth of Determinism." Raritan . [City] Fall 2006: 79–87. EBSCOhost. Monroe Community College Library, Rochester, NY. 2 April 2007.

Feenberg, Andrew. "Democratic Rationalization".

Readings in the Philosophy of Technology . David M. Kaplan. Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield, 2004. 209–225 Chandler, Daniel.

Technological or Media Determinism . 1995. 18 September 1995. < http://www.aber.ac.uk/media/Documents/tecdet/tecdet.html > External links [ edit ] Colin Rule, "Is Technology Neutral?" Archived 2007-08-19 at the Wayback Machine Megan McCormick, "Technology as Neutral" Daniel Chandler, "Technological or Media Determinism" Chris Kimble, "Technological Determinism and Social Choice" Vysotskyi, O., Deviatko, N., & Vysotska, O., "Theory of technologies of geographical determinism in international relations" v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars v t e Determinism Types Architectural Biological Cultural Economic Environmental Genetic Historical Linguistic Nominative Psychic Psychological Reciprocal Social Technological Theological Related topics Causality Proximate and ultimate causation Correlation does not imply causation Contingency (philosophy) Etiology Cause (medicine) Falliblism Illusionism Destiny Deterministic system Essentialism and non-essentialism Fatalism Free will Compatibilism Hard determinism Indeterminism Predeterminism Metaphysical necessity Necessitarianism Superdeterminism Uncertainty principle Libertarianism (metaphysics) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Technological_determinism&oldid=1305084063 " Categories : Determinism History of technology Philosophy of technology Reductionism Science and technology studies Sociology of scientific knowledge Marxist theory Historical determinism Technological change Thorstein Veblen Technology Technology systems Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: others Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from June 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 23:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Technological determinism 36 languages Add topic

