Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-revisionism (Marxism–Leninism) 27 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Brezhoneg Català Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ລາວ Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marxist–Leninist political position This article is about the communist concept. For other uses, see Revisionism .

Supporters of the anti-revisionist Chilean Communist Party (Proletarian Action) march during the May Day 2007 manifestations in Santiago , Chile , carrying a banner with the portraits of Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels , Vladimir Lenin and Joseph Stalin Anti-revisionism is a position within Marxism–Leninism which emerged in the mid-1950s in opposition to the reforms of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev .

History [ edit ] When Khrushchev pursued an interpretation that differed from his predecessor, Joseph Stalin , anti-revisionists within the international communist movement remained dedicated to Stalin's ideological legacy and criticized the Soviet Union under Khrushchev and his successors as state capitalist and social imperialist . During the Sino-Soviet split , the Communist Party of China , led by Mao Zedong ; the Party of Labour of Albania , led by Enver Hoxha ; [ 1 ] and some other communist parties and organizations around the world denounced the Khrushchev line as revisionist .

Mao Zedong first denounced the Soviet Union as revisionist at a meeting in January 1962.

[ 2 ] In early 1963, Mao returned to Beijing after a prolonged visit to Wuhan and Hangzhou , and issued a call to combat domestic revisionism in China.

[ 3 ] A 'central anti-revisionist drafting group' was formally constituted, led by Kang Sheng , which drafted anti-revisionist polemics, which were later personally reviewed by Mao before publication.

[ 3 ] The 'Nine Articles' emerged as the centre-piece of anti-Soviet polemics.

[ 4 ] Anti-revisionism would emerge as a key theme in Chinese foreign and domestic policies, reaching a peak during the 1966 Cultural Revolution .

[ 2 ] China friendship associations turned into anti-revisionist organizations, and Western Europe anti-revisionist splinter groups began to emerge (such as the Marxist-Leninist Communist Party of France [ fr ] , the Grippa group in Belgium [ fr ] , and the Lenin Centre in Switzerland ).

[ 5 ] In Beijing, the street where the Soviet embassy was located was symbolically renamed as 'Anti-Revisionism Street'.

[ 4 ] In the wake of the 1964 split in the Communist Party of India , the Communist Party of India (Marxist) would reject Soviet positions as revisionist, but the party did not fully adopt a pro-Chinese line.

[ 6 ] During Deng Xiaoping 's reign in the late 1970s, anti-revisionist themes began to be downplayed in official Chinese discourse.

[ 2 ] The Chinese Academy of Sciences stated that the 'Nine Articles' had been wrong in focusing on the revisionism of the Soviet Union, rather than the threats of Soviet hegemonism and expansionism .

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-Stalinist left Hoxhaism List of anti-revisionist groups Maoism Stalinism References [ edit ] ^ Elbaum, Max (April 10, 2018).

Revolution in the Air: Sixties Radicals Turn to Lenin, Mao and Che .

Verso Books .

ISBN 9781786634597 – via Google Books .

^ a b c Robinson, Thomas W.; Shambaugh, David L.

(1995).

Chinese Foreign Policy: Theory and Practice .

Clarendon Press . pp.

249– 254.

ISBN 978-0-19-829016-2 – via Google Books .

^ a b Lüthi, Lorenz M. (December 16, 2010).

The Sino-Soviet Split: Cold War in the Communist World .

Princeton University Press . p. 237.

ISBN 978-1400837625 – via Google Books .

^ a b c Levine, Steven I. (1980). "The Unending Sino-Soviet Conflict".

Current History .

79 (459): 70– 104.

doi : 10.1525/curh.1980.79.459.70 .

JSTOR 45314865 .

^ Schaufelbuehl, Janick Marina; Wyss, Marco; Zanier, Valeria, eds. (2018).

Europe and China in the Cold War: Exchanges Beyond the Bloc Logic and the Sino-Soviet Split . New Perspectives on the Cold War. Vol. 6.

BRILL .

ISBN 978-90-04-38812-3 – via Google Books .

^ M. R. (1972). "CPI (M) between Moscow and Peking".

Economic and Political Weekly .

7 (19): 918– 919.

JSTOR 4361331 .

External links [ edit ] Encyclopedia of Anti-Revisionism On-Line by the Marxists Internet Archive List of Anti-Revisionist Parties/Groups by the International Organizations and Conferences of Leftist Parties v t e Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-imperialism Anti-fascism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type economic planning Commanding heights of the economy Developed socialism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Labour aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism Partiinost' People's democracy People's democratic revolution Popular front Proletarian internationalism Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Theory of the productive forces Third Period Wars of national liberation State forms People's democratic state National democratic state Socialist state State of socialist orientation Socialist state of the whole people Class system Dictatorship of the proletariat People's democratic dictatorship Political system Party Central committee General Secretary of the Communist Party Politburo Secretariat Vanguardism State Permanent organ of the supreme state organ of power Special committees of the supreme state organ of power Supreme executive and administrative organ Supreme state organ of power Leading role of the party Transmission belt Unified power Unified state apparatus Hybrid Civilian control of the military Collective leadership Cult of personality Democratic centralism Variants Cuban ( Fidelismo Guevarism ) Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche ( Songun Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism Kimjongunism ) Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism ( Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Naxalism Prachanda Path Mao-spontex Islamic Maoism Pantherism ( Intercommunalism ) New Synthesis Mulelism ) Kaysone Phomvihane Thought National Pol Potism African ( Sankarism Machelism Nkrumaism ) Socialism with Chinese characteristics ( Dengism Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Xi Jinping Thought ) Stalinism ( Neo-Stalinism ) People's Multiparty Democracy American ( Bill of Rights socialism Browderism Marcyism New Communism ) Dubčekism Zachariadism Brezhnevism Taistoism Titoism ( Đilasism Rankovićism ) People Joseph Stalin Mao Zedong John Maclean James Connolly Ernst Thälmann Khorloogiin Choibalsan Ehmetjan Qasim José Díaz Maurice Thorez Palmiro Togliatti Dolores Ibárruri Harry Pollitt Rajani Palme Dutt Ho Chi Minh Võ Nguyên Giáp Earl Browder Nikita Khrushchev Walter Ulbricht Josip Broz Tito Mátyás Rákosi Lazar Kaganovich Georgi Dimitrov Bolesław Bierut Willie Gallacher Valko Chervenkov Klement Gottwald Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Enver Hoxha Kaysone Phomvihane Khalid Bakdash Leonid Brezhnev Deng Xiaoping Pol Pot Nikos Zachariadis Che Guevara Fidel Castro Agostinho Neto Mengistu Haile Mariam Kim Il Sung Chin Peng Sanzō Nosaka Nicolae Ceaușescu Gustáv Husák János Kádár Maurice Bishop Erich Honecker Władysław Gomułka Samora Machel Thomas Sankara Mathieu Kérékou Siad Barre Nur Muhammad Taraki Alfonso Cano Pushpa Kamal Dahal Rohana Wijeweera Abimael Guzmán Gus Hall Gennady Zyuganov Xi Jinping Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism Dialectical and Historical Materialism The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Britain's Road to Socialism Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR A Critique of Soviet Economics Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism Guerrilla Warfare History Soviet Union ( 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 ) Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Communist Revolution China ( 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present ) Tito–Stalin split Korean War De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Albanian–Soviet split Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black Power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency New People's Army rebellion Maoist insurgency in Turkey Sino-Albanian split Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Revolutions of 1989 By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia ( Democratic Kampuchea People's Republic of Kampuchea ) China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia ( Czechia Slovakia ) East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia Soviet Union ( Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan ) Vietnam Yemen Yugoslavia ( Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia ) Organizations Albanian Party of Labour Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Brazil Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of India (Marxist) Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Philippines Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam Communist Party of Malaya Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Shining Path ( Militarized Communist Party of Peru ) Workers' Party of Korea Portuguese Communist Party Related topics Bolshevism Leninism Trotskyism See also All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism ( Mass killings ) Cold War Crimes against humanity under Marxist–Leninist regimes ( Mass killings ) Criticism of Marxist–Leninist party rule MAGA Communism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism New class Post-Marxism–Leninism Red fascism Red Scare ( Second ) Second World State capitalism State socialism State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Socialism portal Communism portal v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-revisionism_(Marxism–Leninism)&oldid=1297928104 " Categories : Anti-revisionism Hoxhaism Maoism Marxism Marxism–Leninism Stalinism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 12:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-revisionism (Marxism–Leninism) 27 languages Add topic

