Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Academics 2 Media 3 Associated Student Government 4 Athletics 5 Honor Societies Toggle Honor Societies subsection 5.1 Phi Theta Kappa 6 Notable alumni 7 Notable faculty 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Palomar College 3 languages مصرى Simple English اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 33°08′58″N 117°11′05″W ﻿ / ﻿ 33.1494°N 117.1848°W ﻿ / 33.1494; -117.1848 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Community college in San Diego County, California For the transit center that serves the campus, see Palomar College Transit Center .

Palomar College Motto in English Learning for Success Type Public community college Established September 23, 1946 ; 78 years ago ( 1946-09-23 ) President Star Rivera-Lacey Location San Marcos , California , United States Campus Multiple sites Colors Scarlet and silver Mascot Comets Website www .palomar .edu Palomar College is a public community college in San Diego County, California . The main campus is in San Marcos and three centers and four education sites are located elsewhere throughout north San Diego County.

Academics [ edit ] Palomar College library Palomar college sign Palomar College offers 250 associate degree and certificate programs as well as programs for students wishing to transfer to many different four-year universities, including institutions in the University of California and California State University systems. These programs are organized into five academic divisions: Arts, Media, Business Administration Career, Technical and Extended Education Languages and Literature Mathematics and The Natural and Health Sciences Social and Behavioral Sciences A Palomar College Ford Police Interceptor Utility car parked outside of the cafeteria In addition, Palomar College and other local adult schools in North County work collaboratively to leverage services and resources to better serve adult education students in the areas of Adult Basic Education, ESL, GED, HISET, high school diploma, and post-secondary education and vocational training. Palomar College is the lead member of the Education to Career Network of North San Diego County. ETCN is one of 71 consortia in the state of California and is funded by the California Adult Education Program. Members of the ETCN consortium are Escondido Adult School, Palomar College, Poway Adult School, Ramona Adult School, San Marcos Adult School, and Vista Adult School.

Media [ edit ] The Telescope is a student-run publication, produced by students enrolled in journalism courses and funded entirely through advertising.

[ 1 ] Impact is a student-run magazine also produced by students in the college's journalism program. It has been published annually each spring semester since 2011 by the editorial staff of The Telescope .

[ 2 ] KKSM is the college's student-run radio station. It is broadcast 24/7 from the Jonathan Downey Memorial Studio. It has a 500-watt AM signal.

[ 3 ] Palomar College Television (PCTV) is the college's PBS television station. It has been active since 1975.

[ 4 ] Associated Student Government [ edit ] The Governing Board of the Palomar Community College District has authorized the students of the District to organize a student body association named "Associated Students of the Palomar Community College District".

[ 5 ] The association is required by law to "encourage students to participate in the governance of the college".

[ 6 ] The governing body of the association is named "Associated Student Government" (ASG).

[ 7 ] The ASG is a student-run organization at Palomar that strives to create a better campus for its students. Members of the ASG serve on campus-wide shared-governance committees and hiring committees, lobby State and Federal representatives on student issues, attend leadership conferences, and are responsible for Comet Week, Springfest, and some campus-wide activities.  Members of the ASG have opportunities to attend conferences, special on-campus parking, and serve on campus-wide committees as the "voice of the students." The Associated Students periodically participates in meetings sponsored by a statewide community college student organization named Student Senate for California Community Colleges . The statewide Student Senate is authorized by law "to advocate before the Legislature and other state and local governmental entities".

[ 8 ] Athletics [ edit ] The intercollegiate athletic program at Palomar College consists of a combined 22 men's and women's sports teams, averaging over 450 participating student-athletes per year. Men's and women's sports include basketball, volleyball, tennis, soccer, swimming, water polo, and cross country. Other Sports are football, baseball, softball, golf, wrestling, track and field.

[ citation needed ] Honor Societies [ edit ] Phi Theta Kappa [ edit ] Palomar College is home to the Alpha Omega Rho (ΑΩΡ) Chapter of Phi Theta Kappa (PTK), the official international honor society for two-year colleges. The chapter recognizes and encourages academic achievement among associate degree students. Eligibility for membership requires the completion of at least 12 transferable semester units and a minimum cumulative GPA of 3.5.

Students who meet the criteria are typically invited to join each semester, though eligible students may also apply directly. Active members have opportunities to engage in service, leadership, fellowship, and scholarly activities through campus events, regional conferences. Benefits of membership include access to exclusive transfer scholarships, leadership development, publication opportunities in Nota Bene —PTK’s literary journal—and the honor of wearing Phi Theta Kappa regalia during commencement ceremonies.

[ 9 ] Notable alumni [ edit ] Todd Bankhead – professional football player Joey Beltran – professional mixed martial artist [ 10 ] Lizet Benrey – painter Ken Block – Rally Car driver and founder of DC Shoes Travis Browne –  professional mixed martial artist [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Matt Chico – professional baseball player Tom Dempsey – professional football player Ryan Dahl – software engineer, inventor of Node.js Pita Elisara – professional football player Lina Fanene – professional wrestler and plus-sized model Saalim Hakim – professional football player Tim Hill (attended) – professional baseball player James Hoyt – professional baseball player Candi Kubeck – captain of ValuJet Flight 592 , which crashed into the Florida Everglades on May 11, 1996.

Bobby Lee (attended) – comedian and actor Tommy Lister Jr.

– actor and professional wrestler Tom Luginbill – college football player and analyst for ESPN Brett Salisbury – college football player and author Robert Stromberg – Oscar-winning art director, production designer, special effects artist, and filmmaker Jesse Taylor (attended) – professional mixed martial artist [ 13 ] Kenbrell Thompkins (attended) – professional football player Taylor Tomlinson , stand-up comedian , writer , and television host Nick Vincent (born 1986) – professional baseball player Notable faculty [ edit ] Dorian "Doc" Paskowitz (1921–2014), surfer and physician Joyce Cutler–Shaw (1932–2018), multidisciplinary artist; taught from 1974 to 1978.

[ 14 ] References [ edit ] ^ "About the Telescope" . PCTV . Retrieved July 4, 2025 .

^ "About IMPACT" . PCTV . Retrieved July 4, 2025 .

^ "The History of KKSM" . KKSM . Retrieved July 4, 2025 .

^ "The History of PCTV" . PCTV . Retrieved July 4, 2025 .

^ Palomar Community College District Policy BP 5400 Archived July 24, 2013, at the Wayback Machine , adopted April 8, 2008.

^ Section 76060 of the California Education Code . Retrieved June 8, 2018.

^ See "Associated Student Government" in Article III – Structure, Section 1 Archived January 31, 2013, at the Wayback Machine of the association's constitution.

^ Section 76060.5 of the California Education Code. Retrieved June 8, 2018.

^ "Phi Theta Kappa - Alpha Omega Rho Chapter" .

Palomar College . Archived from the original on 27 July 2025 . Retrieved 27 July 2025 .

^ "Joey Beltran MMA Bio" . Retrieved January 1, 2014 .

^ "Browne continues to add wrinkles to game – MMA Blog – ESPN" . Espn.go.com . Retrieved August 23, 2014 .

^ "Travis Browne UFC Bio" . Retrieved January 1, 2014 .

^ "Jesse Taylor MMA Bio" . Archived from the original on August 19, 2014 . Retrieved January 1, 2014 .

^ "Cutler-Shaw (Joyce) Papers: Biography, UC San Diego" .

Online Archive of California (OAC) . Retrieved 2024-03-15 .

External links [ edit ] Official website 33°08′58″N 117°11′05″W ﻿ / ﻿ 33.1494°N 117.1848°W ﻿ / 33.1494; -117.1848 v t e San Diego Community College District City College Mesa College Miramar College Continuing Education v t e Colleges and universities in San Diego County Community colleges Cuyamaca College Grossmont College MiraCosta College Palomar College San Diego City College San Diego Mesa College San Diego Miramar College Southwestern College Public universities California State University San Marcos San Diego State University University of California San Diego Private universities Alliant International University Chula Vista Christian University John Paul the Great Catholic University National University Point Loma Nazarene University San Diego Christian College Southern States University University of San Diego v t e California Community Colleges Campuses Alameda Allan Hancock American River Antelope Valley Bakersfield Barstow Berkeley City Butte Cabrillo Calbright Cañada Canyons Cerritos Cerro Coso Chabot Chaffey Citrus City College of San Francisco Clovis Coalinga Coastline Columbia Compton Contra Costa Copper Mountain Cosumnes River Crafton Hills Cuesta Cuyamaca Cypress De Anza Desert Diablo Valley East L.A.

El Camino Evergreen Valley Feather River Folsom Lake Foothill Fresno City Fullerton Gavilan Glendale Golden West Grossmont Hartnell Imperial Valley Irvine Valley Lake Tahoe Laney Las Positas Lassen Lemoore Long Beach City L.A. City L.A. Harbor L.A. Mission L.A. Pierce L.A. Southwest L.A. Trade–Tech L.A. Valley Los Medanos Madera Marin Mendocino Merced Merritt MiraCosta Mission Modesto Monterey Peninsula Moorpark Moreno Valley Mt. San Antonio Mt. San Jacinto Napa Valley Norco Ohlone Orange Coast Oxnard Palo Verde Palomar Pasadena City Porterville Reedley Redwoods Rio Hondo Riverside Sacramento City Saddleback San Bernardino Valley San Diego City San Diego Continuing Education San Diego Mesa San Diego Miramar San Joaquin Delta San Jose City San Mateo Santa Ana Santa Barbara City Santa Monica Santa Rosa Santiago Canyon Sequoias Shasta Sierra Siskiyous Skyline Solano Southwestern Taft Ventura Victor Valley West L.A.

West Valley Woodland Yuba Districts Allan Hancock Antelope Valley Barstow Butte–Glenn Cabrillo California Online Cerritos Chabot–Las Positas Chaffey Citrus Coast Compton Contra Costa Copper Mountain Desert El Camino Feather River Foothill–De Anza Gavilan Glendale Grossmont–Cuyamaca Hartnell Imperial Kern Lake Tahoe Lassen Long Beach Los Angeles Los Rios Marin Mendocino–Lake Merced MiraCosta Monterey Peninsula Mt. San Antonio Mt. San Jacinto Napa Valley North Orange County Ohlone Palo Verde Palomar Pasadena Area Peralta Rancho Santiago Redwoods Rio Hondo Riverside San Bernardino San Diego San Francisco San Joaquin Delta San Jose–Evergreen San Luis Obispo County San Mateo County Santa Barbara Santa Clarita Santa Monica Sequoias Shasta–Tehama–Trinity Sierra Siskiyous Solano County Sonoma County South Orange County Southwestern State Center Ventura County Victor Valley West Hills West Kern West Valley–Mission Yosemite Yuba Satellite campuses Advanced Tech. & Education Park Athletics California Community College Athletic Association Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Palomar_College&oldid=1302873546 " Categories : Palomar College California Community Colleges Universities and colleges in San Diego County, California Education in San Marcos, California North County (San Diego County) Universities and colleges established in 1946 1946 establishments in California Schools accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges Two-year colleges in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 22:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Palomar College 3 languages Add topic

