Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Instruments 3 Observations 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din 10 languages العربية Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Русский Shqip Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medieval astronomical observatory Work in the observatorium of Taqi ad-Din The Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din , founded in Constantinople (today Istanbul ) by Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf in 1577, was one of the largest astronomical observatories in the pre-modern world . However, it only existed for a few years and was destroyed in 1580.

History [ edit ] In 1574, Murad III became the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire . The empire's chief astronomer, Taqi ad-Din , petitioned the Sultan to finance the building of a great observatory to rival Ulugh Beg 's Samarkand observatory. The Sultan approved, and construction was completed in 1577, [ 1 ] at nearly the same time as Tycho Brahe 's observatory at Uraniborg .

This observatory consisted of two large structures perched on a hill overlooking the European section of Constantinople and offering a wide view of the night sky. Much like a modern institution, the main building was reserved for the library and the living quarters of the staff, while the smaller building housed a collection of instruments built by Taqi ad-Din. These included a giant armillary sphere and an accurate mechanical astronomical clock for measuring the position and speed of the planets. With these instruments, Taqi ad-Din had hoped to update the old astronomical tables describing the motion of the planets, sun, and moon.

[ 1 ] The observatory did not survive to advance the development of astronomy in the Muslim world. Within months of the observatory's completion, a comet with an enormous tail appeared in the sky and Sultan Murad III demanded a prognostication about it from his astronomer. "Working day and night without food and rest" Taqi ad-Din studied the comet and came up with the prediction that it was "an indication of well-being and splendor," and would mean a "conquest of Persia". Unfortunately, instead of splendor, a devastating plague followed in some parts of the empire, and several important persons died.

[ 2 ] Astronomy was a respected and approved science among the Islamic clergy of the Ottoman Empire, yet the same could not be said with regard to astrology, a field which is considered to be divination and thus against sharia . In order to prevent its further use for astrological purposes, they successfully sought the observatory's destruction.

[ 3 ] [ dubious – discuss ] This happened just as the king of Denmark built an observatory for Tycho Brahe that would pave the way for Kepler 's elucidation of the orbits of planets.

[ 4 ] Instruments [ edit ] Taqi ad-Din invented a framed sextant similar to what Tycho Brahe later used as shown in the picture.

Taqi ad-Din wrote an important treatise on astronomical instruments entitled the Observational Instruments of the Emperor's Catalogue , which describes the astronomical instruments used in the Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din. These included ancient instruments such as the armillary sphere , paralactic ruler and astrolabe ; medieval Muslim instruments such as the universal astrolabe, azimuthal and mural quadrants , and sextants ; and several instruments he invented himself, including the mushabbaha bi'l manattiq , a framed sextant with cords for the determination of the equinoxes similar to what Tycho Brahe later used, and a wooden quadrant for measuring azimuths and elevations. His most important astronomical instrument, however, is the "observational clock", which in his In the Nabk Tree of the Extremity of Thoughts , he describes as "a mechanical clock with three dials which show the hours , the minutes , and the seconds .  We divided each minute into five seconds." This was used for measuring the right ascension of the stars . This is considered one of the most important innovations in 16th century practical astronomy, as at the start of the century clocks were not accurate enough to be used for astronomical purposes.

[ 5 ] A "remarkably modern-looking" terrestrial globe of the Earth , one of the earliest of its kind, was constructed by Taqi ad-Din at the Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din.

[ 6 ] Observations [ edit ] Taqi ad-Din made use of his new "observational clock" to produce a zij (named Culmination of Thoughts in the Kingdom of Rotating Spheres )  more accurate than his predecessors, Tycho Brahe and Nicolaus Copernicus . Taqi ad-Din was also the first astronomer to employ a decimal point notation in his observations rather than the sexagesimal fractions used by his contemporaries and predecessors. He also made use of Al-Biruni 's method of "three points observation". In The Culmination of Thoughts in the Kingdom of Rotating Spheres , Taqi ad-Din described the three points as "two of them being in opposition in the ecliptic and the third in any desired place on the ecliptic. He used this method to calculate the eccentricity of the Sun's orbit and the annual motion of the apogee , and so did Tycho Brahe and Copernicus shortly afterwards, though Taqi ad-Din's values were more accurate, due to his observational clock and other more accurate instruments.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Astronomy in medieval Islam Great Comet of 1577 Taqi ad-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf References [ edit ] ^ a b John Morris Roberts , The History of the World , pp. 264-74, Oxford University Press , ISBN 978-0-19-521043-9 ^ Arabs and Astronomy, written by Paul Lunde and Zayn Bilkadi Archived 2014-03-11 at the Wayback Machine Saudi Aramco World , January February 1986 ^ El-Rouayheb, Khaled (2008). "The Myth of "The Triumph of Fanaticism" in the Seventeenth-Century Ottoman Empire".

Die Welt des Islams .

48 (2): 196– 221.

doi : 10.1163/157006008X335930 .

^ Soucek, Svat (June 2013), "Piri Reis. His uniqueness among cartographers and hydrographers of the Renaissance" , in Vagnon, Emmanuelle; Hofmann, Catherine (eds.), Cartes marines : d'une technique à une culture. Actes du colloque du 3 décembre 2012.

, CFC, pp.

135– 144, archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-06-27 , retrieved 2016-08-21 ^ a b Sevim Tekeli , "Taqi al-Din", in Helaine Selin (2008), Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures , Springer, ISBN 978-1-4020-4559-2 (print), ISBN 978-1-4020-4425-0 (online.) ^ Soucek, Svat (1994), "Piri Reis and Ottoman Discovery of the Great Discoveries", Studia Islamica , 79 (79), Maisonneuve &#38: 121–142 [123 & 134–6], doi : 10.2307/1595839 , JSTOR 1595839 Further reading [ edit ] King, David A. (2000).

"Taḳī al-Dīn" . In Bearman, P. J.

; Bianquis, Th.

; Bosworth, C. E.

; van Donzel, E.

& Heinrichs, W. P.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume X: T–U . Leiden: E. J. Brill. pp.

132– 133.

ISBN 978-90-04-11211-7 .

Ahmad Y Hassan , Taqi al-Din and Arabic Mechanical Engineering , Institute for the History of Arabic Science, Aleppo University, 1976, pp. 34–35.

Antoine Gautier, L'âge d'or de l'astronomie ottomane , in L'Astronomie, (Monthly magazine created by Camille Flammarion in 1882), December 2005, volume 119.

v t e Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Astronomers by century 8th Ahmad Nahavandi Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Mashallah ibn Athari Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq 9th Abu Ali al-Khayyat Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Said Gorgani Al-Farghani Al-Kindi Al-Mahani Abu Hanifa Dinawari Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Marwazi Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi Banū Mūsā brothers Iranshahri Khalid ibn Abd al‐Malik al‐Marwarrudhi Al-Khwarizmi Sahl ibn Bishr Thābit ibn Qurra Yahya ibn Abi Mansur 10th al-Sufi Ibn Al-Adami al-Khojandi al-Khazin al-Qūhī Abu al-Wafa Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Battani Al-Qabisi Ibn al-A'lam Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Ibn Yunus Ibrahim ibn Sinan Ma Yize al-Sijzi Al-ʻIjliyyah Nastulus Abolfadl Harawi Haseb-i Tabari al-Majriti Abu al-Hasan al-Ahwazi 11th Abu Nasr Mansur al-Biruni Ali ibn Ridwan Al-Zarqālī Ibn al-Samh Alhazen Avicenna Ibn al-Saffar Kushyar Gilani Said al-Andalusi Ibrahim ibn Said al-Sahli Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani Al-Isfizari Ali ibn Khalaf 12th Al-Bitruji Avempace Ibn Tufail Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Abu al-Salt Averroes Ibn al-Kammad Jabir ibn Aflah Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 13th Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Jamal ad-Din Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Najm al‐Din al‐Misri Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Zakariya al-Qazwini al-Urdi al-Abhari Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi Abu Ali al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi Ibn al‐Raqqam Al-Ashraf Umar II Fakhr al-Din al-Akhlati 14th Ibn al-Shatir Al-Khalili Ibn Shuayb al-Battiwi Abū al‐ʿUqūl Al-Wabkanawi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri al-Jadiri Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar Fathullah Shirazi 15th Ali Kuşçu Abd al‐Wajid Jamshid al-Kashi Kadızade Rumi Ulugh Beg Sibt al-Maridini Ibn al-Majdi al-Wafa'i al-Kubunani 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i 16th Al-Birjandi al-Khafri Baha' al-din al-'Amili Piri Reis Takiyüddin 17th Yang Guangxian Ehmedê Xanî Al Achsasi al Mouakket Muhammad al-Rudani Topics Works Arabic star names Islamic calendar Aja'ib al-Makhluqat Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Tabula Rogeriana The Book of Healing The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Zij Alfonsine tables Huihui Lifa Book of Fixed Stars Toledan Tables Zij-i Ilkhani Zij-i Sultani Sullam al-sama' Instruments Alidade Analog computer Aperture Armillary sphere Astrolabe Astronomical clock Celestial globe Compass Compass rose Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorium Globe Graph paper Mural instrument Navigational astrolabe Octant Planisphere Quadrant Sextant Shadow square Sundial Schema for horizontal sundials Triquetrum Concepts Almucantar Apogee Astrology Astrophysics Axial tilt Azimuth Celestial mechanics Celestial spheres Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Galaxy Geocentrism Gravitational energy Gravity Heliocentrism Inertia Islamic cosmology Moonlight Multiverse Muwaqqit Obliquity Parallax Precession Qibla Salah times Specific gravity Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Sunlight Supernova Temporal finitism Trepidation Triangulation Tusi couple Universe Institutions Al-Azhar University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom University of al-Qarawiyyin Observatories Constantinople (Taqi al-Din) Maragheh Samarkand (Ulugh Beg) Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Indian astronomy Influenced Byzantine science Chinese astronomy Medieval European science Indian astronomy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Constantinople_observatory_of_Taqi_ad-Din&oldid=1193143481 " Categories : Buildings and structures of the Ottoman Empire Culture of the Ottoman Empire Astronomical observatories in Turkey 1577 establishments in the Ottoman Empire 1580 disestablishments in Asia 1577 in science Astronomical observatories of the medieval Islamic world 16th century in Istanbul Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from January 2023 Turkey articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Articles missing coordinates without coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 January 2024, at 08:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din 10 languages Add topic

