Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 International law 3 Examples by country Toggle Examples by country subsection 3.1 Angola 3.2 Bolivia 3.3 Democratic Republic of the Congo 3.4 Guinea 3.5 Iran 3.6 Iraq 3.7 Mauritania 3.8 Mozambique 3.9 Thailand 3.10 United Arab Emirates 3.11 United States 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Arbitrary arrest and detention 16 languages العربية বাংলা Español فارسی Français Hausa Հայերեն Қазақша Кыргызча Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Shqip தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arrest or detention without evidence or likelihood of crime or without due process Arbitrary arrest and detention is the arrest and detention of an individual in a case in which there is no likelihood or evidence that they committed a crime against legal statute , or in which there has been no proper due process of law or order.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Arbitrary arrest and detention is similar to but legally distinct from wrongful detention , which is broader in scope and does not involve arrest.

[ 3 ] Background [ edit ] Virtually all individuals who are arbitrarily arrested are given no explanation as to why they are being arrested, and they are not shown any arrest warrant .

[ 4 ] Depending on the social context, many or the vast majority of arbitrarily arrested individuals may be held incommunicado and their whereabouts can be concealed from their family, associates, the public population and open trial courts .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] International law [ edit ] Arbitrarily depriving an individual of their liberty is prohibited under international human rights law . Article 9 of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights decrees that "no one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile"; [ 7 ] that is, no individual, regardless of circumstances, is to be deprived of their liberty or exiled from their country without having first committed an actual criminal offense against a legal statute, and the government cannot deprive an individual of their liberty without proper due process of law. As well, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights specifies the protection from arbitrary arrest and detention by the Article 9.

[ 8 ] The implementation of the Covenants is monitored by the United Nations human rights treaty bodies.

Examples by country [ edit ] Angola [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Human rights in Angola § Rights of persons under arrest .

[ edit ] Although Angolan law forbids arbitrary arrest, it occurs often. Warrants are technically required, but arrests are often made without them, and about 75 percent of searches take place without a warrant. Authorities have been known to detain family members of suspected criminals. The constitution requires that suspects be promptly brought to court to determine the legality of their detention, but this requirement is often violated. Authorities do generally conform to the requirement that suspects be informed of charges within five days of being taken into custody. There is an inefficient bail system for minor offences, with prison officials demanding bribes to release inmates. In 2009, over 500 people were being held illegally. In mining areas, security forces detain, rape, and abuse illegal immigrants and their families. Political opponents of the regime are also arbitrarily arrested.  Defendants are technically allowed to have lawyers, and indigent defendants are entitled to government-paid representation, but this right is often ignored. Suspects are often subjected to very long periods of pretrial detention. Instead of being put on trial, many suspects are beaten and then released. Others are detained past the legal time limit.

[ 9 ] Bolivia [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Human rights in Bolivia § Rights of persons under arrest .

[ edit ] Arbitrary arrest is illegal, although such arrests do take place. Under the law, detainees have the right to face a judge within 24 hours, although this right is not always honored. Most defendants cannot afford a lawyer and the supply of public defenders is insufficient. Although Bolivian law prohibits pretrial periods exceeding 18 months, it is common for periods of pretrial detention to last longer than this. On the orders of a social worker, children between 11 and 16 may be held indefinitely in special centers without judicial review. Although torture is forbidden under the Bolivian constitution and law, security forces frequently engage in it, and punishment for such violations is rare.

[ 10 ] Democratic Republic of the Congo [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo § Arbitrary arrest or detention .

[ edit ] The law prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention; however, government security forces arbitrarily arrested and detained persons, including journalists.

[ 11 ] in 2020, authorities have intimidated, harassed, and detained journalists, activists, and politicians who have publicly criticized the government, president, or SSF.

Guinea [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Human rights in Guinea § Arbitrary arrest and torture .

[ edit ] While the constitution prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention, its practice is quite common.

[ 12 ] Prisoners are beaten and raped by police.

[ 12 ] Action by Christians for the Abolition of Torture alleges that four youths accused of stealing were tortured by police in 2011.

[ 12 ] Abuses at the Kassa Island military prison in 2009 reportedly included castration .

[ 12 ] Amnesty has two reports of the use of torture in 2011: in February a man in Mamou was taken to the local police station after setting up roadblocks and beaten while handcuffed.

[ 13 ] In April a man was arrested in Dixinn and beaten at a local station.

[ 13 ] Iran [ edit ] Iran has been widely criticized for arbitrary arrests and detentions, particularly of journalists, activists, dual nationals , and political opponents. Human rights organizations like Amnesty International [ 14 ] and Human Rights Watch [ 15 ] have repeatedly reported cases of individuals being detained without due process, fair trials, or clear charges.

[ 16 ] Iran has been accused of arresting foreign and dual nationals (especially from Western countries) to use them as bargaining chips in political negotiations. Political activists, human rights defenders, and journalists often face imprisonment on vague charges like "spreading propaganda against the system" or "acting against national security." Ethnic and religious minorities, such as Kurds , Baha'is , and Sunnis , are disproportionately arrested.

Iraq [ edit ] In mid-August 2020, protests erupted in the Kurdistan region of Iraq concerning corruption, the improvement of public services, and pay owed to government employees. In response, the regional government arbitrarily arrested activists and journalists covering the protests under the pretext of preserving “national security”. Some were detained anywhere from several days to six months.

[ 17 ] Mauritania [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Human rights in Mauritania § Arbitrary detention .

[ edit ] The Constitution and statutes of Mauritania prohibit arbitrary arrest and detention, but authorities in 2011 did not observe these prohibitions. In some cases, authorities arbitrarily arrested and detained protesters and journalists.

[ 18 ] : page: 5 Human rights and other observers accused the government of exceeding the legal limits for pretrial detention in 2011. Security forces at times arrested demonstrators engaged in sit-ins, marches, or rallies, and held them longer than the regulations allow. On 29 September, the media reported that following a violent protest in Nouakchott against the national registration initiative, security forces entered private residences without warrants and arrested approximately 20 individuals.

[ 18 ] : page: 5 By law, a minor may not be held for more than six months while awaiting trial. Nevertheless, there were reports in 2011 that a large number of individuals, including minors, remained in pretrial detention for extended periods due to judicial ineptitude.

[ 18 ] : page: 6 Mozambique [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Human rights in Mozambique § Arbitrary arrests .

[ edit ] An arrest is arbitrary when there is insufficient evidence to condemn an individual, and when there is no legal basis to the arrest. The law states that anyone that is detained without legal basis or on the foundation of insufficient evidence should be released, however the authorities of Mozambique have that responsibility, and have been found to not follow this law strictly.

[ 19 ] According to Amnesty International , the Mozambican police have been found to arrest citizens without sufficient reason or evidence to do so.

[ 20 ] Many detainees in detention centres are being held while their case is still being investigated. They were arrested on the suspicion of theft, and some are held in these pre-trial facilities for almost a year, while police investigate the case, providing the assumption that the arrests were arbitrary and on suspicious grounds.

[ 21 ] The Mozambican law also states that an arrest is arbitrary if it does not comply with the procedures for arrest set out in the Criminal Procedure Code.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Amnesty International has documented arrests that do not comply with these procedures due to failing to inform those being arrested and detaining their rights.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Violating a detainee's rights can include not allowing them to see a lawyer, forcing detainees to sign documents, or beating or ill-treating detainees to force them to confess.

[ 19 ] [ 24 ] Thailand [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Human rights in Thailand § Arbitrary arrest and detention .

[ edit ] Since the beginning of 2021, prominent human rights defenders and democracy activists were charged with the possibility of more than 100 years each on criminal charges for their involvement in pro-democracy activism. The leading figures of the 2020–2021 Thai protests that called for reforms to the monarchy, Arnon Nampa , Panupong Jadnok , Parit Chiwarak , Jatupat (Pai Dao Din) , Panusaya (Rung) , and Benja Apan , were all detained awaiting trial in 2021 in a series of detainments and releases. Some were imprisoned accumulatively for more than 200 days after Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha issued a declaration in November 2020 to charge protesters with offenses under all laws, including lèse-majesté .

[ 25 ] In 2022, there were multiple cases of systematic harassment and detention against young monarchy-reform activists, such as that of Tantawan Tuatulanon , who protested her imprisonment by going on a hunger strike for 37 days. Most activists who mentioned the monarchy were also forced to wear electronic monitoring anklets by the criminal court.

[ 26 ] More than 15 dissidents are still imprisoned to this day.

[ 27 ] United Arab Emirates [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Human rights in the United Arab Emirates § Arbitrary detention .

[ edit ] Between 2015 and 2017, the United States sent a number of detainees of various nationalities, some only suspects, from Guantanamo Bay detention camp to the UAE. According to US officials, the agreement reached with UAE to accept these prisoners did not include their continued imprisonment. By 2020, nineteen remained in detention in often undisclosed locations, in harsh conditions, and with little access to outside communication. In at least one case, a detainee was sent to a facility reported by the Associated Press to be "a notorious prison rife with torture". One Afghani detainee was returned home after more than three years in UAE prisons, dying four months after his release. He recounted harsh, inhumane treatment in UAE, describing it as "mental torture".

[ 28 ] Since October 2020, UAE authorities have, on the basis of religious background, detained, at times incommunicado, at least four Pakistani men and deported at least six others. Reports of UAE authorities arbitrarily targeting Shia residents, whether Lebanese, Iraqi, Afghan, Pakistani, or otherwise, often emerge at times of increased regional tensions.

[ 29 ] On 18 November 2024, Dubai police arrested a Kyrgyz dissident, Kudaibergen uluu, who was visiting the Emirate to meet other activists of Kyrgyzstan. He was informed that the Kyrgyzstan government had requested for his extradition. Kudaibergen uluu was released within 24 hours, but was kept under investigation. On 3 January 2025, he was arrested again by Dubai police, stayed for half a day, based on another extradition request from Kyrgyz government over bogus charges of fraud. The new extradition request was being considered by the UAE. Kudaibergen uluu, who lives in exile in the US, was trapped in Dubai and unable to travel back because of his missing passport.

[ 30 ] A joint letter from human rights organizations, including International partnership for Human Rights (IPHR), Freedom for Eurasia, Freedom Now, and the Norwegian Helsinki Committee, called on the UAE to not force Kudaibergen uluu to return to Kyrgyzstan, where he is likely to face, arbitrary detention, torture, unfair trial, ill treatment and other human right abuses. They warned the UAE to ensure his safety, liberty and to coordinate with the US to send him back to his family.

[ 31 ] United States [ edit ] Further information: Human rights in the United States Arbitrary arrest and detention are not uncommon in the United States . In 2006, Amnesty International condemned the Bush administration for "years of arbitrary and indefinite detention" at the Guantanamo Bay detention camp .

[ 32 ] Amnesty International also reported in 2018 that the average daily population of arbitrarily detained immigrants in the United States was projected to reach 47,000 people by 2019. It further reported that 15 LGBTQ people interviewed had been arbitrarily detained in the United States without parole for periods ranging from several months to 2.5 years.

[ 33 ] In 2025, the widespread arbitrary detention of European and Canadian tourists in the United States, including the Canadian actress Jasmine Mooney , [ 34 ] lead to increased fears abroad about traveling to the country.

[ 35 ] In May 2025, Amnesty International reported that the United States had arbitrarily detained asylum seekers and violated their rights to due process and their rights to legal resources. It reported that immigrants from Venezuela were disproportionately targeted by arbitrary arrest and human rights violations such as physical abuse by authorities.

[ 36 ] In July 2025, a United States citizen and United States Army veteran named George Retes was arbitrarily detained by ICE for three days.

[ 37 ] See also [ edit ] Hostage diplomacy Wrongful detention False arrest False imprisonment Forced disappearance Habeas corpus Kettling Mass arrest Preemptive arrest Preventive detention Retaliatory arrest and prosecution Working Group on Arbitrary Detention References [ edit ] ^ "About arbitrary detention" .

United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention . United Nations . Retrieved 2025-02-02 .

^ "Freedom from Arbitrary Arrest and Exile" .

Human Rights Law . United Nations Cyber Schoolbus. 2006-11-09. Archived from the original on 2007-07-17 . Retrieved 2007-09-30 .

^ "HOSTAGE & WRONGFUL DETAINEE CRITERIA" . James W. Foley Legacy Foundation.

^ "Human Rights Violations by the Indonesian Armed Forces" .

Human Rights . Human Rights Watch. 1998-06-27 . Retrieved 2007-09-30 .

^ "Arbitrary arrest / Incommunicado detention / Risks of ill-treatment - SYR 003 / 0506 / OBS 060" .

Human Rights . International Federation for Human Rights. 2006-05-15 . Retrieved 2007-09-30 .

^ "Enforced disappearance and incommunicado detention" . World Organisation Against Torture. 2007-08-31. Archived from the original on Jun 3, 2010 . Retrieved 2007-09-30 .

^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights" . United Nations. 1998-12-01. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007 . Retrieved 2007-09-30 .

^ International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , Article 9 ^ "Angola" . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 2013-01-19 .

^ "2010 Human Rights Report: Bolivia" .

^ Report on Religious Freedom 2020: Democratic Republic of the Congo . US State Dept This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.

^ a b c d Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2012).

"Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2011: Guinea" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 2012-08-27 .

^ a b Amnesty International (2012).

"Annual Report 2012: Guinea" . Amnesty International. Archived from the original on 2014-12-29 . Retrieved 2012-08-27 .

^ "Human rights in Iran" .

Amnesty International . Retrieved 2025-03-29 .

^ Human Rights Watch (2024-12-17), "Iran: Events of 2024" , Share this via Facebook , retrieved 2025-03-29 ^ "Iran" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 2025-03-29 .

^ "Kurdistan region of Iraq: Authorities must end protests-related repression" .

Amnesty International . Amnesty International. 2021-06-15 . Retrieved 2025-02-02 .

^ a b c 2011 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Mauritania , Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, U.S. Department of State ^ a b c "Mozambique" .

Amnesty International USA . Retrieved 2019-06-02 .

^ a b https://www.refworld.org/topic,50ffbce582,50ffbce58e,481f0a152,0,AMNESTY,,MOZ.html ^ Refugees, United Nations High Commissioner for.

"Refworld | Mozambique: Licence to kill: Police accountability in Mozambique" .

Refworld . Retrieved 2019-06-02 .

^ Criminal Procedure Code Archived 2022-01-21 at the Wayback Machine ^ Amnesty International. (2012).

Locking up my rights : arbitrary arrest, detention and treatment of detainees in Mozambique . Amnesty International.

OCLC 819639830 .

^ "MOZAMBIQUE 2018 HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT" .

U.S. Embassy in Mozambique . 2019-03-29 . Retrieved 2019-06-02 .

^ "Thailand: Arbitrary detention of eight pro-democracy activists" .

International Federation for Human Rights . 12 August 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "Thailand: Arbitrary detention and judicial harassment of Tantawan Tuatulanon" .

International Federation for Human Rights .

^ "List of detainees still in government custody for protesting and assembly - Thai Enquirer Current Affairs" .

Thai Enquirer . 27 May 2022.

^ "Sent from Gitmo to UAE, detainees fear final stop: Yemen" .

AP NEWS . Associated Press. 2020-10-22 . Retrieved 2020-10-26 .

Ian Moss, a former chief of staff for the State Department's Guantanamo envoy, insisted that, 'We wanted these individuals after they were released to have a fresh start in life. It wasn't part of the deal that they be incarcerated.' ^ "UAE: Arbitrary Targeting of Pakistani Shia Residents" .

Human Rights Watch . 22 June 2021 . Retrieved 22 June 2021 .

^ "Exiled Kyrgyz Government Critic Threatened With Extradition From Dubai" . 6 February 2025. Archived from the original on 7 February 2025 . Retrieved 20 February 2025 .

^ "Joint call to UAE: Protect Kyrgyz activist Tilekmat Kudaibergen from extradition" (PDF) . 14 January 2025. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 February 2025 . Retrieved 20 February 2025 .

^ "Guantanamo commander says three detainees hang themselves with makeshift nooses" .

USA Today . 10 June 2006.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2011 . Retrieved 17 August 2007 .

^ "USA: Facts and figures on illegal pushbacks, arbitrary detention and ill treatment of asylum-seekers in the United States" .

Amnesty International . 2018-10-22 . Retrieved 2025-07-21 .

^ Vigdor, Neil (2025-03-18).

"Canadian Who Was in an 'American Pie' Video Says ICE Held Her for 12 Days" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2025-03-22 .

^ "U.S. detention of European and Canadian tourists creates fear over traveling to America" .

PBS News . 2025-03-21 . Retrieved 2025-07-21 .

^ "Amnesty International Exposes Human Rights Violations at El Paso Immigrant Detention Facility" .

Amnesty International USA . Retrieved 2025-07-21 .

^ Faheid, Dalia (2025-07-19).

"A US citizen and Army veteran was detained at an immigration raid and held for 3 days. His family scrambled to find him" .

CNN . Retrieved 2025-07-21 .

External links [ edit ] Behind the Wire: An Update to Ending Secret Detentions (2005) , Human Rights First v t e Arbitrary arrest and detention by country Democratic Republic of the Congo Mali Mozambique v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arbitrary_arrest_and_detention&oldid=1301766664 " Categories : Imprisonment and detention Human rights abuses Enforced disappearance Police misconduct Arrests Authoritarianism Totalitarianism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 15:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arbitrary arrest and detention 16 languages Add topic

