Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 People 3 Facilities 4 Traditions 5 See also Toggle See also subsection 5.1 Risley in literature 6 References 7 External links Toggle External links subsection 7.1 Cornell-affiliated sources 7.2 Non-Cornell-affiliated sources Toggle the table of contents Risley Residential College Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°27′11″N 76°28′55″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.45307°N 76.481962°W ﻿ / 42.45307; -76.481962 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Residence hall at Cornell University Risley Residential College Residential college , Dining hall , Theater Cornell University Risley Residential College in August 2018 Location North Campus , Ithaca, New York , U.S.

Coordinates 42°27′11″N 76°28′55″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.45307°N 76.481962°W ﻿ / 42.45307; -76.481962 Established 1913 Namesake Prudence Risley Architect William Henry Miller Architectural style Tudor gothic Benefactor Margaret Olivia Slocum Sage Website risley .org Prudence Risley Residential College for the Creative and Performing Arts , commonly known as Risley Residential College , Risley Hall , or just Risley , is a program house (themed residence hall ) at Cornell University . Unlike most other dormitories on campus, Risley is a residential college ; house members, or "Risleyites," have some say in the administration of the residence hall, can continue to reside there as long as they are enrolled at Cornell, are encouraged to eat together at the in-house dining hall, and participate in educational activities such as guest lectures within the dormitory.

History [ edit ] Early Risley Hall Postcard of Risley Residential College, c.

1910s Portrait of Margaret Slocum Sage in Risley Residential College Stonework detail bearing Risley's historical motto " The Truth Will Make You Free " and "True and Firm" ( Treu und Fest ), a German motto Andrew Dickson White had first suggested to fellow university co-founder Ezra Cornell to adorn his mansion .

[ 1 ] In 1911, Margaret Olivia Slocum Sage , a progressive philanthropist and the widow of financier Russell Sage , donated $300,000 (equivalent to $11.1 million in 2024) to the university for the construction of a women's dormitory.  At her request, the building was named after her husband's mother, Prudence Risley. Financier and Cornell trustee Emerson McMillin donated an additional $20,000 (equivalent to $674,929 in 2024) to purchase the requisite five-acre lot, the first expansion of Cornell's footprint north of the Fall Creek gorge, the beginning of the modern day North Campus.

[ 2 ] The building was opened to students in 1913. It was unusually luxurious, with sculptures and expensive furnishings in common areas, many of which were donated by Cornell co-founder Andrew Dickson White .

In approximately 1969-70, undergraduates Judith Goodman ('71) and Gail Hassan ('71) developed a proposal to create university housing specifically for students interested in the arts, as well as decidated performance, practice, and other creative spaces.

[ 3 ] The Associate Dean of Students, Ruth Darling, [ 4 ] was supportive of the proposal, which asked for 40 housing units, but, if there was sufficient demand, they might use Risley Hall.

[ 5 ] Student interest was overwhelming: the university received over 1000 applications for the roughly 200 spots in the building.

[ 6 ] Having demonstrated student interest in such a dormatory, in fall 1970, Risley Hall thus became the home of Risley Residential College for the Fine and Performing Arts, Cornell's first "program house." [ 5 ] People [ edit ] The building houses 196 students, chosen by Risleyites from a number of applications. Notable former Risley residents from before the creation of Risley Residential College include Margaret Bourke-White [ 7 ] ', Elspeth Huxley , [ 8 ] Barbara McClintock , [ 9 ] Helen Reichert [ 10 ] , and Janet Reno .

[ 9 ] Notable residents from after the creation of the Residential College include Matt Ruff , [ 9 ] Mia Korf , [ 11 ] Jamie Silverstein , [ 12 ] Christopher Reeve , [ 13 ] Andre Balazs , Madalyn Aslan , Duo Dickinson , Andrew C. Greenberg , [ 9 ] David Conte , [ 14 ] Jared Emerson-Johnson , [ 15 ] Adam Becker , [ 16 ] Yoon Ha Lee , Elizabeth Neuffer , and Keith Raywood .

In addition to students, Risley houses one or two Artists-In-Residence ("AIRs"), who live in the building and organize regular programs in which the house members participate. There is not currently an Artist-In-Residence. Previous AIRs include Georgia O'Neil, Patrick Gray, Carolina Osorio-Gill, Natalie Tyler, Abraham Burickson , Gregory Halpern , and Brandon Bird.

[ 17 ] Many famous people have visited the house for intimate discussions with the Risleyites, such as Anthony Rapp , Christopher Hogwood , John Cleese , who hosted a question and answer session after the showing of his film A Fish Called Wanda , [ 18 ] and Samuel R. Delany who continues to collaborate with Risley alumnus Kenneth James.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Facilities [ edit ] Risley Residential College seen from its courtyard Risley Residential College offers archiecturally distinctive living experience at Cornell, as a Tudor Gothic -style dormitory resembling a large red-brick castle. The building, designed by architect William H. Miller , is modeled after Hampton Court Palace in England . At the request of its benefactors, the floor plan was designed so that no two rooms would be identical, resulting in a wide variety of room layouts. Room sizes range from a single unit of 93 square feet (9 m²), originally a maid’s quarters, to a double room measuring 273 square feet (25 m²), which is the largest double occupancy room on campus.

[ citation needed ] Architectural features include balconies, fireplaces, dumbwaiter shafts, secret stairwells, bay windows , embrasures , and turrets .

The Risley Great Hall, built at the request of Andrew Dickson White , is a scaled-down replica of the dining hall at Christ Church , Oxford .

[ 21 ] It features a prominent stained-glass window depicting English social reformer Elizabeth Fry , U.S. First Lady Abigail Adams , and Scottish polymath Mary Somerville .

[ 22 ] Additionally, it serves as the university’s only gluten-free dining hall.

[ 23 ] The residence provides spaces dedicated to student creativity, including a theater, music practice rooms, art workshops, a recording studio, a darkroom, and a small library.

[ citation needed ] Governance of the building is overseen by an elected student body, "Kommittee," which manages the budget, facility use, and allocation of resources.

[ 24 ] Students are permitted to paint interior walls, resulting in numerous murals throughout the hallways. The dormitory also houses "Tammany," a coffeehouse where regional bands perform.

[ citation needed ] .

Risley Theatre is an 81-seat black box theater that is housed in a converted ballroom.

[ citation needed ] It is the only fully student-operated theater at the university and is managed by the Risley Theatre Subcommittee ("T-Sub"), a division of Kommittee. T-Sub is responsible for organizing performances, managing resources, funding student productions, and overseeing theater operations.

[ citation needed ] All performances are open to the public.

Traditions [ edit ] Risley's great hall on Wizard's Feast Night Risley hosts several annual events, many of which have become long-standing traditions for students and the local community. On the weekend before Halloween , students organize MasqueRave, a costumed dance party. The following weekend, the Denton Drama Troupe, an in-house student performance group, presents a live rendition of The Rocky Horror Picture Show in the Great Hall. This tradition, established in 1991 by Paula Berman, remains a popular event. Due to their large attendance, these events serve as major fundraisers for smaller student-led projects.

Other notable annual events include themed dinners, such as Wizard’s Feast, first held in 2005 and organized by resident Charlene Morales. The event featured a menu inspired by the Harry Potter series, including specially crafted dishes and beverages such as "butter beer." Kitchen director Lorna McNab designed the menu, and the event attracted over 200 attendees. Another longstanding tradition is the annual reading of Handel 's Messiah .

In addition to these annual events, Risley also hosts several recurring weekly programs, many of which involve communal meals. Eat This! is a Wednesday night event where students prepare food for fellow residents, while RisBrunch (RizBrunch) follows a similar format on Saturdays at noon. Lost Coffee takes place on Monday nights, during which a student hides coffee, tea, and cookies somewhere in the building and provides clues for residents to locate them. Funding for these programs is allocated by Kommittee, the dormitory's student governance body.

A longstanding legend associated with Risley is the alleged haunting by Prudence Risley, often referred to as "Auntie Prue." Some students claim that she manifests by flickering lights within the building, though others attribute these occurrences to aging electrical systems and student folklore.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Hutchinson Hall, University of Chicago Risley in literature [ edit ] Fool on the Hill by Matt Ruff The Salt Point by Paul Russell References [ edit ] ^ "The Project Gutenberg eBook of Autobiography of Andrew Dickson White — Volume 1" (TXT) .

www.gutenberg.org .

^ "The President's Report 1913-14" . p. 41.

^ " 'The Castle on the Hill': Risley Hall's 100th Anniversary - the Cornell Daily Sun" . 30 November 2001.

^ "Obituary" .

News.cornell.edu . Archived from the original on 16 September 2006 . Retrieved 17 October 2017 .

^ a b "Campus Bus To Stop In Risley-Balch Area" .

ecommons.cornell.edu . p. 3.

^ "Risley residential college Newsletter" (PDF) . June 2020. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 September 2006 . Retrieved 1 August 2006 .

^ Portrait of Myself by Margaret Bourke-White, p 30 ^ Elspeth Huxley: A Biography by C. S. Nicholls, p. 85 ^ a b c d "Gothic Castle on the Hill: Fascinating Facts about Risley Hall - Cornellians | Cornell University" .

alumni.cornell.edu . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ "Helen "Happy" Reichert | Carl Becker House" .

carlbeckerhouse.cornell.edu . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ "Frequently asked questions about Fool on the Hill " . Archived from the original on 12 January 2010 . Retrieved 13 March 2006 .

^ "Washington Week: Student Voices (O)" .

PBS . Archived from the original on 29 September 2007 . Retrieved 10 September 2017 .

^ "Christopher Reeve" .

IMDb.com . Retrieved 17 October 2017 .

^ "David Conte" . Retrieved 27 August 2023 .

^ "Happy Tuesday, and... - Risley Residential College and Alumni" .

www.facebook.com . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ "Home of the Adam Becker. Bring a Rubic's Cube" .

tour.risley.org .

^ "Brandon Bird resume" .

The official website of Brandon Bird . Retrieved 13 June 2015 .

^ "Photographic image" (JPG) .

Brandonbird.com . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ "Crowdfunding the publication of Samuel R Delany's journals / Boing Boing" .

Boingboing.net . 21 June 2016 . Retrieved 17 October 2017 .

^ Delany, Samuel R.; James, Ken (15 November 1996).

Longer Views: Extended Essays . Wesleyan.

ISBN 0819562939 .

^ "Living at Cornell" .

Campuslife.cornell.edu . Retrieved 17 October 2017 .

^ "The Cornell Alumni News" . 19 May 2024.

^ "Risley Dining Room | Student & Campus Life | Cornell University" .

scl.cornell.edu . Retrieved 29 May 2024 .

^ "Risley | Kommittee" . Archived from the original on 1 October 2011 . Retrieved 25 October 2011 .

^ "Big Red gives up the ghosts" .

Cornell Alumni Magazine Online . 107 (No 2) (Cornelliana: Spirit of the Season). Cornell University. September 2004 . Retrieved 13 June 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Risley Residential College .

Cornell-affiliated sources [ edit ] Risley Hall official website The Campus Life Risley Page Non-Cornell-affiliated sources [ edit ] * Virtual Risley tour Profile of Risley Hall, including photographs and floorplans at American Architect magazine (1915) Picture of Risley in 1919 v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Risley_Residential_College&oldid=1305370441 " Categories : Cornell University dormitories Art schools in New York (state) William Henry Miller buildings 1913 establishments in New York (state) Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2023 Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2007 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 17:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Risley Residential College Add languages Add topic

