Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Directors 2 Management Committee 3 Research projects 4 Research Networks 5 Events and Initiatives 6 Fellowships 7 Alison Richard Building 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Centre for Research in the Arts, Social Sciences and Humanities Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic institution in Cambridge, United Kingdom Centre for Research in the Arts, Social Sciences and Humanities Alison Richard Building, Sidgwick Site, University of Cambridge Established 2001 ; 24 years ago ( 2001 ) Director Joanna Page Location Alison Richard Building, 7 West Road, Cambridge , United Kingdom Campus Sidgwick Site, Cambridge Affiliations University of Cambridge Website www .crassh .cam .ac .uk The Centre for Research in the Arts, Social Sciences and Humanities ( CRASSH ) is an interdisciplinary research centre within the University of Cambridge . Founded in 2001, CRASSH came into being as a way to create interdisciplinary dialogue across the University’s many faculties and departments in the arts , social sciences , and humanities , as well as to build bridges with scientific subjects.

Directors [ edit ] Ian Donaldson, 2001–2003 Ludmilla Jordanova , 2003–2005 Mary Jacobus , 2005–2011 Andrew Webber (Sabbatical Director), 2009–2010 Simon Goldhill , 2011–2018 Tim Lewens (Deputy Director), 2014–2017 Jan-Melissa Schramm (Deputy Director), 2017–2019 Steven Connor , 2018–2022 Joanna Page , 2022–present Stuart Hogarth (Deputy Director), 2023–present Management Committee [ edit ] For the current CRASSH Management Committee, please visit the Governance page on the official website.

Research projects [ edit ] CRASSH is and was home to numerous major, long-term research projects and centres.

[ 1 ] Current projects Minderoo Centre for Technology and Democracy Minderoo Centre is primarily funded [ 2 ] by Minderoo Foundation which is primarily funded [ 3 ] by Andrew Forrest , Chairman of Fortescue Metals Group Cambridge Digital Humanities The University of Cambridge Centre for Geopolitics [ 4 ] Global History Lab Roam Within Nasawe’sx ya’yu’cenxi – Weaving Our Own Justice Past projects Centre for the Study of Existential Risk (now a spin-off centre) Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence (now a spin-off centre) Beyond the Cold War: Toward a Community of Asia Crossroads of Knowledge in Early Modern England: The Place of Literature Expertise Under Pressure Genius Before Romanticism: Ingenuity in Early Modern Art and Science Making Visible: The Visual and Graphic Practices of the Early Royal Society Qualitative and Quantitative Social Science: Unifying the Logic of Causal Inference?

Bible and Antiquity in 19th Century Culture China in a Global World War II The Concept Lab Conspiracy and Democracy Conversions The History of Cross-Cultural Comparatism Limits of the Numerical Seeing Things: Early Modern Visual and Material Culture Technology and Democracy Visual Representations of the Third Plague Pandemic Centre for Global Knowledge Studies Centre for the Humanities and Social Change, Cambridge Giving Voice to Digital Democracies: The Social Impact of Artificially Intelligent Communications Technology The Global as ARTEFACT: Understanding the Patterns of Global Political History Through an Anthropology of Knowledge – The Case of Agriculture in Four Global Systems from the Neolithic to the Present Religious Diversity and the Secular University Research Networks [ edit ] The CRASSH Research Networks Programme [ 5 ] supports groups of Cambridge graduate students and faculty members working together with a common interdisciplinary research interest, bringing together early-career researchers, established academics and guest speakers on particular research topics for a year of collaborative work.

Events and Initiatives [ edit ] The CRASSH events and initiatives programme [ 6 ] showcases arts, social sciences and humanities research.

Fellowships [ edit ] CRASSH offers a number of Fellowship programmes.

[ 7 ] These schemes allow a community of scholars to interact in an interdisciplinary research environment.

Alison Richard Building [ edit ] At the beginning of 2012, CRASSH moved into the new Alison Richard Building at the West Road gateway to the University’s Sidgwick Site , the main base for humanities and social science teaching and research at Cambridge. The building was designed by Nicholas Hare Architects and received a commendation at the 2013 Civic Trust Awards . The Centre’s relocation put CRASSH alongside the major regional studies centres as well as the Department of Politics and International Studies. The building is also home to Edmund de Waal 's first piece of public sculpture, A Local History , a commission of three vitrines filled with porcelain and sunk into the pavement outside the building.

See also [ edit ] University of Cambridge References [ edit ] ^ "Projects" .

CRASSH . Retrieved 10 May 2020 .

^ "Minderoo Centre for Technology and Democracy" .

CENTRE FOR RESEARCH IN THE ARTS, SOCIAL SCIENCES AND HUMANITIES . 4 November 2021 . Retrieved 23 September 2022 .

^ "Co-Founders" .

The Minderoo Foundation . Retrieved 23 September 2022 .

^ "Centre for Geopolitics - University of Cambridge" .

Centre for Geopolitics - . Retrieved 15 July 2025 .

^ "Research Networks" .

CRASSH . Retrieved 10 May 2020 .

^ "Events & initiatives" .

CRASSH . Retrieved 10 May 2020 .

^ "Fellowships" .

CRASSH . Retrieved 10 May 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Centre_for_Research_in_the_Arts,_Social_Sciences_and_Humanities&oldid=1306526288 " Categories : Institutions in the School of Arts and Humanities, University of Cambridge 2001 establishments in England Culture of the University of Cambridge Educational projects History of literature Research institutes established in 2001 Research institutes in Cambridge Research projects Social science research institutes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the image name parameter Pages using infobox university with the affiliations parameter This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 06:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Centre for Research in the Arts, Social Sciences and Humanities Add languages Add topic

