Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Activities 3 Facilities 4 Satellites 5 Egyptian Space Program 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents National Authority for Remote Sensing and Space Sciences 3 languages العربية مصرى Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 30°07′46″N 31°22′54″E ﻿ / ﻿ 30.12949°N 31.38166°E ﻿ / 30.12949; 31.38166 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Egyptian space institution 30°07′46″N 31°22′54″E ﻿ / ﻿ 30.12949°N 31.38166°E ﻿ / 30.12949; 31.38166 National Authority for Remote Sensing and Space Sciences ( NARSS ; Arabic : الهيئة القومية للاستشعار من البعد وعلوم الفضاء , romanized : al-Hayʼah al-Qawmīyah lil-Istishʻār min al-Buʻd wa-ʻUlūm al-Faḍāʼ ) is the pioneering Egyptian institution in the field of satellite remote sensing and space sciences .

History [ edit ] NARSS is an outgrowth of Egyptian Remote Sensing Center , established in 1973 as an American-Egyptian joint project were affiliated with the Egyptian Academy of Scientific Research and Technology . In 1994 the authority was established as an organization under the State Ministry of Scientific Research to promote the use of state of the art space technology for the development of the country and introducing High Tech capabilities to regional planning and other applications.

[ 1 ] Activities [ edit ] The sector of remote sensing works on the use of data provided by earth observation satellites and airborne sensors to produce maps and spatial data for the evaluation and monitoring of natural resources , natural hazards and environmental management.

The sector of space sciences is concerned with the development of sensors for earth observation to be mounted on satellites and with all the problems involved with monitoring communication with satellites and retrieving the information for processing, and ultimately on launching an Egyptian remote sensing satellite.

[ 1 ] Facilities [ edit ] Both the headquarters and the New Cairo space control station are located in Cairo. The receiving station is located in Aswan.

[ 1 ] Satellites [ edit ] EgyptSat 1 was a remote sensing satellite that was launched on 17 April 2007 at Baikonur Cosmodrome . Control and communication was lost July 2010.The satellite weighed 100 kg and contained a multi-spectral imager for Earth observations.

[ 2 ] EgyptSat 2 was an imaging satellite built by RSC Energia that launched on 16 April 2014 at Baikonur Cosmodrome .

[ 3 ] The satellite was lost in April 2015 when a dual failure in the flight control system occurred.

[ 4 ] EgyptSat-A is a replacement imaging satellite launched on 21 February 2019 at Baikonur Cosmodrome , paid for by insurance for the loss of EgyptSat 2.

[ 5 ] Egyptian Space Program [ edit ] The Egyptian space program started in the 1950s but it was not until the establishment of the Egyptian Space Council in 1998 and approval of a year later of the Egyptian Space Program within the National Authority of Remote Sensing and Space Sciences.

Enabling Egypt to join the Space Technology Age through designing and manufacturing of small research and remote sensing satellites, acquiring technological knowledge and capabilities, and building required infrastructure to achieve self-capability to design & manufactures small satellites Transfer of advanced space technologies in communication, computers, programs, optics, sensors, new materials, command and control and energy to the Egyptian Scientific community.

Drive innovation in earth observations and space sciences Utilizing of space technologies & applications in development plans.

Acquiring national capabilities in Space Technology disciplines.

Establishment of scientific & industrial base in advanced technology fields.

Building human resource capabilities for space sciences fields.

Coordinating and enhancing the cooperation between the research & industrial centers and space program through a national project To establish a scientific and technological base for space and high technology industries in Egypt and the development of the relevant human capacity and improve local stakeholders in remote sensing applications.

To support decision makers in sustainable development by providing space images.

See also [ edit ] List of government space agencies References [ edit ] ^ a b c "About NARSS" .

National Authority for Remote Sensing & Space Sciences . Archived from the original on April 1, 2017 . Retrieved October 27, 2016 .

^ "EgyptSat1" .

NASA Space Science Data Coordinated Archive . Retrieved October 27, 2016 .

^ Stephen Clark (16 April 2014).

"Egyptian reconnaissance satellite launched by Soyuz" . Spaceflight Now.

Archived from the original on 19 April 2014 . Retrieved 18 April 2014 .

^ "EgyptSat 2" .

Gunter's Space Page .

Archived from the original on October 17, 2016 . Retrieved October 27, 2016 .

^ Clark, Stephen (21 February 2019).

"Egyptian observation satellite launched by Russian rocket" . Spaceflight Now . Retrieved 22 February 2019 .

External links [ edit ] NARSS v t e Space research in Africa Space agencies North Africa ASAL (Algeria) NARSS (Egypt) CRTS (Morocco) CNCT (Tunisia) Sub-Saharan GSSTC (Ghana) KSA (Kenya) NASRDA (Nigeria) RSA (Rwanda) SANSA (South Africa) Initiatives African Space Agency (ASA) Kenya Uganda Zambia Observatories in Algeria in Namibia in South Africa Astronomy Egyptian astronomy Astronomical Society of Southern Africa See also Timeline of first orbital launches by country Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Authority_for_Remote_Sensing_and_Space_Sciences&oldid=1304253184 " Categories : Remote sensing research institutes Research institutes in Egypt Space program of Egypt Government agencies of Egypt Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates not on Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 23:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Authority for Remote Sensing and Space Sciences 3 languages Add topic

