Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Views and goals 2 Relationship to other movements 3 Arguments 4 19th-century feminists 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-abortion feminism 11 languages العربية অসমীয়া Español فارسی Français Magyar Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belief that abortion harms women Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Anti-abortion feminism is the opposition to abortion by some feminists . Anti-abortion feminists may believe that the principles behind women's rights also call them to oppose abortion on right to life grounds and that abortion hurts women more than it benefits them.

The modern anti-abortion feminist movement cites precedent in the 19th century; the movement itself began to take shape in the early to mid-1970s with the founding of Feminists for Life (FFL) in the United States and Women for Life in Great Britain amid legal changes in those nations which widely permitted abortion.

[ 1 ] FFL and the Susan B. Anthony List (SBA List) are the most prominent anti-abortion feminist organizations in the United States. Other anti-abortion feminist organizations include New Wave Feminists and Feminists for Nonviolent Choices.

Views and goals [ edit ] Anti-abortion feminists consider the legal option of abortion to "support anti-motherhood social attitudes and policies and limit respect for women's citizenship".

[ 2 ] Anti-abortion feminists believe that abortion is an action dictated by society and legal abortion "perpetuates an uncaring, male-dominated society." [ 3 ] Laury Oaks, Associate Professor of Feminist Studies at the University of California, Santa Barbara , writes that when abortion is legal, anti-abortion feminists believe that "women come to see pregnancy and parenting as obstacles to full participation in education and the workplace", [ 2 ] and describes anti-abortion feminist activism in Ireland as more "pro-mother" than "pro-woman".

[ 1 ] Oaks has written that while Irish abortion opponents valorize child-bearing and are critical of the notion that women have "a right to an identity beyond motherhood", some like Breda O'Brien , founder of Feminists for Life Ireland, also offer feminist-inspired arguments that women's contributions to society are not limited to such functions.

[ 1 ] Anti-abortion feminist organizations generally do not distinguish between views on abortion as a legal issue, abortion as a moral issue, and abortion as a medical procedure.

[ 2 ] Such distinctions are made by many women, for example women who would not abort their own pregnancies but would prefer that abortion remain legal.

[ 2 ] Anti-abortion feminist organizations seek to personalize abortion by using women who survived abortions to attempt to convince others of their argument.

[ 4 ] Prominent American anti-abortion feminist organizations seek to end abortion in the United States . The SBA List states this as their "ultimate goal", [ 5 ] and FFL president Serrin Foster said that FFL "opposes abortion in all cases because violence is a violation of basic feminist principles." [ 2 ] [ 6 ] Relationship to other movements [ edit ] Anti-abortion feminists form a part of the anti-abortion movements rather than the mainstream feminist movement .

[ 2 ] During the era of second wave feminism in the late 1960s and 1970s, the tenets of the emerging group of anti-abortion feminists were rejected by mainstream feminists who held that for full participation in society, a woman's "moral and legal right to control her fertility" needed to be a fundamental principle.

[ 2 ] From their minority position, anti-abortion feminists said that mainstream feminists did not speak for all women.

[ 2 ] Having failed to gain a respected position within mainstream feminism, [ 2 ] anti-abortion feminists aligned themselves with other anti-abortion and right to life groups. According to Oaks, this placement has eroded a feminist sense of identity separate from other anti-abortion groups, despite pro-woman arguments that are distinct from the fetal rights arguments put forward by other anti-abortion advocates.

[ 2 ] Arguments [ edit ] The abortion debate has primarily been focused on the question of whether or not the human fetus is a person and whether or not the killing of humans (depending on their developmental stage) should ever fall under the umbrella of person autonomy.

[ 7 ] Anti-abortion feminist organizations distinguish themselves as "pro-woman" organizations as opposed to "fetal rights" organizations. This sets them apart from other anti-abortion groups.

[ 2 ] The "pro-woman" argument frames abortion as harmful to women. Anti-abortion feminists argue that most women do not truly want to have abortions, [ 8 ] but rather are forced into abortions by third parties, partners or medical practitioners. They also suggest that women have been primed and socialized to believe they cannot be successful if they experience an unanticipated pregnancy and that our society continues to reflect patriarchal standards that use men as the "basic human".

[ 8 ] They believe unwanted abortions, can cause physical and emotional damage to women.

[ 9 ] Research from the Guttmacher Institute shows that the majority of women who have abortions seek the procedure for personal, financial, vocational, or family planning purposes rather than under coercion from third-parties.

[ 10 ] By positing the existence of a post-abortion syndrome mental condition, which is not medically recognized, anti-abortion feminists reframe opposition to abortion in terms of protecting women's public health.

[ 11 ] The "pro-woman" argument has been used to sway men and women against-abortion.

[ 12 ] 19th-century feminists [ edit ] Feminist anti-abortion groups say they are continuing the tradition of 19th-century women's rights activists such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton , Matilda Joslyn Gage , Victoria Woodhull , Elizabeth Blackwell , and Alice Paul , who considered abortion to be an evil forced upon women by men.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] The Revolution , a newspaper published by Susan B. Anthony and Stanton, carried letters, essays, and editorials debating many issues of the day, including articles decrying "child murder" and "infanticide".

[ 13 ] [ 16 ] According to historians A. Kennedy and K. D. Mary, Alice Paul felt that abortion was the "ultimate exploitation of women", [ 17 ] and was worried about female babies being aborted.

[ 17 ] Kennedy and Mary also say that Elizabeth Blackwell, the first female doctor in the United States, [ 17 ] became a doctor because of her passionate hatred for abortion.

[ 17 ] By way of criticism, sociologists Nicole Beisel and Tamara Kay have written that White Anglo-Saxon Protestants (WASPs) in the United States were worried that continued abortions by their kind would endanger their position at the top of society's hierarchy, especially fearing the influx of Irish Catholics , but also concerned about African Americans, and describe Anthony and Stanton as part of this reactionary racial stance.

[ 18 ] In arguing for "voluntary motherhood", [ 19 ] or abstinence until children are wanted, Stanton said that the problem of abortion demonstrates the victimization of women by men who pass laws without women's consent.

[ 19 ] Woodhull and her sister, Tennessee Celeste Claflin , argued that abortion clinics would go out of business if voluntary motherhood was widely practiced.

[ 19 ] A dispute about Anthony's abortion views arose in 1989. Anti-abortion feminists in the United States began using Anthony's words and image to promote their anti-abortion cause. Scholars of 19th-century American feminism , as well as abortion-rights activists, countered what they considered a co-opting of Anthony's legacy as the country's most dedicated suffragist, saying that the anti-abortion activists are falsely attributing opinions to Anthony, and that it is misleading to apply 19th-century arguments to the modern abortion debate.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Dorothy Day Pro-choice and pro-life Right to life § Abortion debate framing Susan B. Anthony abortion dispute United States anti-abortion movement References [ edit ] ^ a b c Oaks, Laury (2000). " 'Pro-Woman, Pro-Life'? The Emergence of Pro-Life Feminism in Irish Anti-Abortion Discourses and Practices".

Irish Journal of Feminist Studies .

4 (1): 73– 90.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Oaks, Laury (Spring 2009).

"What Are Pro-Life Feminists Doing on Campus?" (PDF) .

NWSA Journal .

21 (1): 178– 203.

ISSN 1040-0656 .

^ Oaks, Laury (2009).

"What are Pro-Life Feminists doing on Campus?" .

NWSA .

21 : 178– 203 – via Gender Studies Database.

^ Kintz, Linda (1997).

Between Jesus and the Market: The Emotions that Matter in Right-Wing America . Durham: Duke University Press. p. 269 – via Gender Studies Database.

^ "SBA List Mission: Advancing, Mobilizing and Representing Pro-Life Women" . Susan B. Anthony List. 2008. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014 . Retrieved October 18, 2010 .

To accomplish our ultimate goal of ending abortion in this country...

^ The Nation . August 11, 2005. Katha Pollitt. Reproductive Rights.

Feminists for (Fetal) Life: subject to debate . Retrieved on May 11, 2009.

^ Markowitz, Sally (1990). "Abortion and Feminism".

Social Theory and Practice .

16 (1): 1– 17.

JSTOR 23557071 .

^ a b Trumpy, Alexa J. (March 2014). "Woman vs. Fetus: Frame Transformation and Intramovement Dynamics in the Pro-Life Movement".

Sociological Spectrum .

34 (2): 163– 184.

doi : 10.1080/02732173.2014.878624 .

^ Rose, Melody (31 January 2011). "Pro-Life, Pro-Woman? Frame Extension in the American Antiabortion Movement".

Journal of Women, Politics & Policy .

32 (1): 1– 27.

doi : 10.1080/1554477X.2011.537565 .

^ "Women's Reasons for Having an Abortion" .

Guttmacher Institute . 2018-01-05. Archived from the original on 2019-08-06 . Retrieved 2019-03-08 .

^ Siegel, Reva B. (2008). "The Right's Reasons: Constitutional Conflict and the Spread of Woman-Protective Antiabortion Argument".

Duke Law Journal .

57 (6): 1641– 1692.

JSTOR 40040629 .

PMID 19108356 .

^ Schreiber, Ronnee (2008).

Righting Feminism . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

99– 101.

ISBN 978-0-19-533181-3 .

^ a b Kate O'Beirne, excerpt from 'Women Who Make the World Worse: and How Their Radical Feminist Assault Is Ruining Our Schools, Families, Military, and Sports' National Review January 23, 2006 . Archived from the original on February 3, 2006. Retrieved on March 30, 2012 ^ SBA List – Early Suffragists Archived 2010-01-15 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Abortion and the early feminists" .

BBC . Retrieved March 31, 2012.

^ McLaughlin, Peter (February 11, 2010).

"Susan B. Anthony (Birthplace) House opens" .

The Eagle . Susan B. Anthony Birthplace Museum. Archived from the original on May 11, 2008 . Retrieved October 19, 2010 .

^ a b c d Kennedy, Angela; Derr, Mary Krane (August 1999). "Feminism and abortion".

History Today .

49 (8): 34– 35.

ProQuest 202814071 .

^ Beisel, Nicola; Kay, Tamara (2004). "Abortion, Race, and Gender in Nineteenth-Century America".

American Sociological Review .

69 (4): 498– 518.

JSTOR 3593062 .

^ a b c Gordon, Linda (1973). "Voluntary Motherhood; The Beginnings of Feminist Birth Control Ideas in the United States".

Feminist Studies .

1 (3/4): 5– 22.

JSTOR 1566477 .

^ Stevens, Allison (2006-10-06).

"Susan B. Anthony's Abortion Position Spurs Scuffle" .

Women's eNews . Retrieved 2009-11-21 .

Further reading [ edit ] The Cost of 'Choice': Women Evaluate the Impact of Abortion edited by Erika Bachiochi (2004, ISBN 1-59403-051-0 ) Prolife Feminism Yesterday & Today.

Second & greatly expanded edition. Edited by Derr, Naranjo-Huebl, & MacNair (2005, ISBN 1-4134-9576-1 ) Prolife Feminism Yesterday & Today.

edited by Derr, Naranjo-Huebl, and MacNair (1995, ISBN 0-945819-62-5 ) Pro-Life Feminism: Different Voices edited by Gail Grenier-Sweet (1985, ISBN 0-919225-22-5 ) Swimming Against the Tide: Feminist Dissent on the Issue of Abortion edited by Angela Kennedy (1997, ISBN 1-85182-267-4 ) External links [ edit ] Feminism & Nonviolence Studies Association v t e Abortion Main topics Definitions History Methods Abortion debate Philosophical aspects Abortion law Movements Abortion-rights movements Anti-abortion movements Issues Abortion and mental health Beginning of human personhood Beginning of pregnancy controversy Abortion-breast cancer hypothesis Anti-abortion violence Abortion under communism Birth control Crisis pregnancy center Ethical aspects of abortion Eugenics Forced abortion Genetics and abortion Late-term abortion Legal protection of access Legalized abortion and crime effect Libertarian perspectives on abortion Limit of viability Malthusianism Men's rights Minors and abortion Misinformation related to abortion Natalism One-child policy Paternal rights and abortion Post-abortion care Prenatal development Prenatal rights Reproductive rights Self-induced abortion Sex-selective abortion Sidewalk counseling Societal attitudes towards abortion Socialism Termination for medical reasons Toxic abortion Unsafe abortion Women's rights By country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Hong Kong Cyprus Georgia India Iran Israel Japan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Laos Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Northern Cyprus Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Taiwan Timor-Leste Turkey United Arab Emirates Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom North America Bahamas Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Micronesia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands New Zealand Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Law Case law Constitutional law History of abortion law Laws by country Buffer zones Conscientious objection Fetal protection Six-week bans Informed consent Late-term restrictions Parental involvement Spousal consent Methods Vacuum aspiration Dilation and evacuation Dilation and curettage Intact D&X Hysterotomy Instillation Menstrual extraction Medical abortion Abortifacient drugs Methotrexate Mifepristone Misoprostol Oxytocin Self-induced abortion Unsafe abortion Religion Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Hinduism Islam Judaism Scientology Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-abortion_feminism&oldid=1278170892 " Categories : Anti-abortion movements Feminism and health Feminist theory Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 28 February 2025, at 21:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-abortion feminism 11 languages Add topic

