Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Letter of administration Toggle Letter of administration subsection 1.1 English law 2 Other types of letters of administration 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Administration (probate law) 1 language Čeština Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Administration of an estate on death This article is about administration of an estate on death. For other usages, see Administration (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( December 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Administration" probate law – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Wills , trusts and estates Part of the common law series Wills Legal history of wills Joint wills and mutual wills Will contract Codicil Holographic will Oral will Attestation clause Residuary clause Incorporation by reference Contest Testamentary capacity Undue influence Insane delusion Fraud No-contest clause Lapse and anti-lapse Ademption Abatement Satisfaction of legacies Acts of independent significance Elective share Pretermitted heir Trusts Express Resulting Constructive Bare Discretionary Accumulation and maintenance Interest in possession Charitable Purpose Incentive Protective Spendthrift Life insurance Testamentary Honorary Asset-protection Special needs Supplemental needs Governing doctrines Pour-over will Cy-près doctrine Hague Convention (conflict law) Application in civil law Dishonest assistance Estate administration Estate planning Intestacy Testator Probate Power of appointment Simultaneous death Slayer rule Laughing heir Advancement Disclaimer of interest Inheritance tax Related topics Advance directive (Living will) Blind trust Forced heirship Totten trust v t e In common-law jurisdictions , administration of an estate on death arises if the deceased is legally intestate , meaning they did not leave a will, or some assets are not disposed of by their will.

Where a person dies leaving a will appointing an executor , and that executor validly disposes of the property of the deceased within England and Wales , then the estate will go to probate .  However, if no will is left, or the will is invalid or incomplete in some way, then administrators must be appointed.  They perform a similar role to the executor of a will but, where there are no instructions in a will, the administrators must distribute the estate of the deceased according to the rules laid down by statute and the common trust.

Certain property falls outside the estate for administration purposes, the most common example probably being houses jointly owned that pass by survivorship on the first death of a couple into the sole name of the survivor.  Other examples include discretionary death benefits from pension funds, accounts with certain financial institutions subject to a nomination and the proceeds of life insurance policies which have been written into trust.  Trust property will also frequently fall outside the estate but will depend on the terms of the trust.

Letter of administration [ edit ] English law [ edit ] Upon the death of a person intestate, or of one who left a will without appointing executors , or when the executors appointed by the will cannot or will not act, the Probate Division of the High Court of Justice or the local District Probate Registry will appoint an administrator who performs similar duties to an executor. The court does this by granting letters of administration to the person so entitled. Grants of administration may be either general (where the deceased has died intestate) or limited.

[ 1 ] The order in which the court will make general grants of letters follows the sequence: The surviving spouse , or civil partner , as the case may be; The next of kin ; The Crown ; A creditor ; A stranger .

Under the rules for distribution of estates without a will (the Intestacy Rules ), where a child under 18 would inherit or a life interest would arise, the Court or District Probate Registry normally appoints a minimum of two administrators. On some estates, even under an intestate, it is not clear who are the next-of-kin, and probate research may be required to find the entitled beneficiaries.

An administrator (sometimes known as the administratrix, if female) acts as the personal representative of the deceased in relation to land and other property in the UK. Consequently, when the estate under administration consists wholly or mainly of land, the court will grant administration to the heir to the exclusion of the next of kin. In the absence of any heir or next of kin, the Crown has the right to property (other than land) as bona vacantia , and to the land by virtue of the historic land rights of the Crown (and the Duchy of Cornwall and Duchy of Lancaster in their respective areas). If a creditor claims and obtains a Grant of Administration, the court compels him or her to enter into a bond with two or more sureties that he or she will not prefer his or her debt to those of other creditors.

[ 2 ] Other types of letters of administration [ edit ] The more important cases of grants of special letters of administration include the following: Administration cum testamento annexo , where the deceased has left a will but has appointed no executor to it, or the executor appointed has died or refuses to act. In this case the court will make the grant to the person, usually the residuary legatee, with the largest beneficial interest in the estate.

Administration de bonis non administratis occurs in two cases: Where the executor dies intestate after probate without having completely administered the estate Where an administrator dies.

In the first case the principle of administration cum testamento is followed, in the second that of general grants in the selection of the person to whom letters are granted.

Administration durante minore aetate, when the executor or the person entitled to the general grant is under age.

Administration durante absentia, when the executor or administrator is out of the jurisdiction for more than a year.

Administration pendente lite, where there is a dispute as to the person entitled to probate or a general grant of letters the court appoints an administrator till the question has been decided.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Probate (administration, as to both testate and intestate estates, in the United States and England and Wales ) Administration of Estates Act 1925 Calendars of the Grants of Probate and Letters of Administration (CGPLA) Estate planning References [ edit ] ^ Rollison, W.D. (1 November 1931). "Principles of the Law of Succession to Intestate Property".

Notre Dame Law Review .

11 (1): 14.

^ Williams, E.V.; Troubat, F.J. (1856).

The Law of Executors and Administrators (5 ed.). London: V.R. Stevens and G.S. Norton; H. Sweet and W. Maxwell. p. 1336.

^ K., D. P. (May 1934). "Equity: Admissibility of Evidence Arising Pendente Lite".

Michigan Law Review .

32 (7): 982– 987.

doi : 10.2307/1280822 .

JSTOR 1280822 .

v t e Death In medicine Cell death Necrosis Avascular necrosis Coagulative necrosis Liquefactive necrosis Gangrenous necrosis Caseous necrosis Fat necrosis Fibrinoid necrosis Temporal lobe necrosis Programmed cell death AICD Anoikis Apoptosis Autophagy Intrinsic apoptosis Necroptosis Paraptosis Parthanatos Phenoptosis Pseudoapoptosis Pyroptosis Autolysis Autoschizis Eschar Immunogenic cell death Ischemic cell death Pyknosis Karyorrhexis Karyolysis Mitotic catastrophe Suicide gene Abortion Accidental death Autopsy Brain death Brainstem death Clinical death DOA Death by natural causes Death rattle Dysthanasia End-of-life care Euthanasia Lazarus sign Lazarus syndrome Medical declaration of death Organ donation Terminal illness Unnatural death Lists Causes of death by rate Notable deaths by year Expressions related to death Natural disasters People by cause of death Premature obituaries Preventable causes of death Unusual deaths List of ways people dishonor the dead List of ways people honor the dead Mortality Birthday effect Child mortality Excess mortality Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality Infant mortality Karoshi Maternal death Maternal mortality in fiction Memento mori Micromort Mortality rate RAMR Mortality salience Perinatal mortality After death Body Stages Pallor mortis Livor mortis Algor mortis Rigor mortis Putrefaction Decomposition Skeletonization Fossilization Preservation Cryopreservation Cryonics Neuropreservation Embalming Maceration Mummification Plastination Prosection Taxidermy Disposal Burial Natural burial Sky burial Ocean burial Cremation Dismemberment Excarnation Promession Resomation Beating heart cadaver Body donation Cadaveric spasm Coffin birth Death erection Dissection Gibbeting Postmortem caloricity Post-mortem interval Other aspects Carrion Cemetery Consciousness after death Afterlife Tukdam Customs Crematorium Desecration of graves Eternal oblivion Examination Funeral Grief Internet Midwife Mourning Online mourning Obituary Reincarnation Palingenesis Saṃsāra Resurrection Underworld Viewing Vigil Wake Paranormal Ghosts Near-death experience Near-death studies Necromancy Out-of-body experience Reincarnation research Séance Legal Abortion law Administration Capital punishment Cause of death Civil death Coroner Death-qualified jury Death certificate Declared death in absentia Death row Dying declaration Inquest Legal death Murder Necropolitics Prohibition of dying Right to die Suspicious death Trust law Will Fields Death tech [ pt ] Forensic pathology Funeral director Mortuary science Necrobiology Post-mortem chemistry Post-mortem photography Taphonomy Biostratinomy Thanatology Other Apparent death Chinese burial money Coins for the dead Dark tourism Darwin Awards Death and culture Death anniversary Death anxiety Death deity Personification of death Dying-and-rising god Psychopomp Death camp Death drive Death education Death from laughter Death hoax Death knell Death march Death messenger Death notification Death panel Death poem Death pose Death-positive movement Death squad Death threat Death trajectory Dignified death Extinction Festival of the Dead Fascination with death Hierarchy of death Homicide Immortality Last rites Longevity Martyr Museum of Death Necronym Necrophilia Necrophobia Philosophy of death Predation Sacrifice human Suicide Assisted suicide Thanabot [ ca ] Thanatosensitivity Category Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Administration_(probate_law)&oldid=1253210671 " Categories : Real property law Wills and trusts English law Inheritance Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from December 2010 Articles needing additional references from January 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 24 October 2024, at 21:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Administration (probate law) 1 language Add topic

