Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Origins 3 New inventions during the classical period 4 Hellenistic period 5 Architecture Toggle Architecture subsection 5.1 Theatron 5.2 Skené 5.3 Orchestra 5.4 Acoustics 5.5 Scenic elements 6 Masks Toggle Masks subsection 6.1 Masks 6.2 Mask details 6.3 Mask functions 6.4 Other costume details 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Bibliography 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Theatre of ancient Greece 53 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Greek theatre" redirects here. For other uses, see Greek theatre (disambiguation) .

Bronze statue of a Greek actor, 150–100 BC. The half-mask over the eyes and nose identifies the figure as an actor. He wears a man's conical cap but female garments, following the Greek custom of men playing the roles of women. Later, slave women were brought in to play minor female characters and in comedy as well.

A theatrical culture flourished in ancient Greece from 700 BC. At its centre was the city-state of Athens , which became a significant cultural, political, and religious place during this period, and the theatre was institutionalised there as part of a festival called the Dionysia , which honoured the god Dionysus .

Tragedy (late 500 BC), comedy (490 BC), and the satyr play were the three dramatic genres emerged there. Athens exported the festival to its numerous colonies. Modern Western theatre comes, in large measure, from the theatre of ancient Greece , from which it borrows technical terminology, classification into genres, and many of its themes , stock characters , and plot elements.

Etymology [ edit ] The word τραγῳδία , tragodia , from which the word " tragedy " is derived, is a compound of two Greek words: τράγος , tragos or "goat" and ᾠδή , ode meaning "song", from ἀείδειν , aeidein , 'to sing'.

[ 1 ] This etymology indicates a link with the practices of the ancient Dionysian cults . It is impossible, however, to know with certainty how these fertility rituals became the basis for tragedy and comedy .

[ 2 ] Origins [ edit ] Further information: Greek tragedy and Dionysia View of the ancient theatre at Epidaurus , considered by Pausanias the finest in Greece.

[ 3 ] The Ancient Greeks valued the power of the spoken word, and it was their main method of communication and storytelling. Bahn and Bahn write, "To Greeks, the spoken word was a living thing and infinitely preferable to the dead symbols of a written language." Socrates himself believed that once something has been written down, it lost its ability for change and growth. For these reasons, among many others, oral storytelling flourished in Greece.

[ 4 ] Greek tragedy , as it is presently known, was created in Athens around 532 BC, when Thespis was the earliest recorded actor. Being a winner of the first theatrical contest held in Athens, he was the exarchon , or leader, [ 5 ] of the dithyrambs performed in and around Attica, especially at the Rural Dionysia . By Thespis' time, the dithyramb had evolved far away from its cult roots. Under the influence of heroic epic, Doric choral lyric and the innovations of the poet Arion , it had become a narrative, ballad-like genre. Because of these, Thespis is often called the "Inventor of Tragedy"; however, his importance is disputed, and Thespis is sometimes listed as late as 16th in the chronological order of Greek tragedians; the statesman Solon , for example, is credited with creating poems in which characters speak with their own voice, and spoken performances of Homer 's epics by rhapsodes were popular in festivals prior to 534 BC.

[ 6 ] Thus, Thespis's true contribution to drama is unclear at best, but his name has been given a longer life in English as a common term for performer—i.e., a "thespian." The dramatic performances were important to the Athenians – this is made clear by the creation of a tragedy competition and festival in the City Dionysia (or Great Dionysia). This was organized possibly to foster loyalty among the tribes of Attica (recently created by Cleisthenes ). The festival was created roughly around 508 BC. While no drama texts exist from the sixth century BC, the names of three competitors besides Thespis are known: Choerilus, Pratinas, and Phrynichus . Each is credited with different innovations in the field.

Some information is known about Phrynichus. He won his first competition between 511 BC and 508 BC. He produced tragedies on themes and subjects later exploited in the Golden Age such as the Danaids , Phoenician Women and Alcestis . He was the first poet we know of to use a historical subject – his Fall of Miletus , produced in 493–2, chronicled the fate of the town of Miletus after it was conquered by the Persians. Herodotus reports that "the Athenians made clear their deep grief for the taking of Miletus in many ways, but especially in this: when Phrynichus wrote a play entitled The Fall of Miletus and produced it, the whole theatre fell to weeping; they fined Phrynichus a thousand drachmas for bringing to mind a calamity that affected them so personally and forbade the performance of that play forever." [ 7 ] He is also thought to be the first to use female characters (though not female performers).

[ 8 ] Until the Hellenistic period , all tragedies were unique pieces written in honour of Dionysus and played only once; what is primarily extant today are the pieces that were still remembered well enough to have been repeated when the repetition of old tragedies became fashionable (the accidents of survival, as well as the subjective tastes of the Hellenistic librarians later in Greek history, also played a role in what survived from this period).

New inventions during the classical period [ edit ] The Theatre of Dionysus After the Achaemenid destruction of Athens in 480 BC, the town and acropolis were rebuilt, and theatre became formalized and an even greater part of Athenian culture and civic pride. This century is normally regarded as the Golden Age of Greek drama. The center-piece of the annual Dionysia , which took place once in winter and once in spring, was a competition between three tragic playwrights at the Theatre of Dionysus . Each submitted three tragedies, plus a satyr play (a comic, burlesque version of a mythological subject). Beginning in a first competition in 486 BC each playwright submitted a comedy.

[ 9 ] Aristotle claimed that Aeschylus added the second actor ( deuteragonist ), and that Sophocles introduced the third ( tritagonist ). Based on what is known about Greek theatre, the Greek playwrights never used more than three actors.

[ 10 ] Tragedy and comedy were viewed as completely separate genres, and no plays ever merged aspects of the two. Satyr plays dealt with the mythological subject matter of the tragedies, but in a purely comedic manner.

Hellenistic period [ edit ] Roman, Republican or Early Imperial Relief of a seated poet ( Menander ) with masks of New Comedy, 1st century BC. – early 1st century AD, Princeton University Art Museum The power of Athens declined following its defeat in the Peloponnesian War against Sparta . From that time on, the theatre started performing old tragedies again. Although its theatrical traditions seem to have lost their vitality, Greek theatre continued into the Hellenistic period (the period following Alexander the Great 's conquests in the fourth century BC).

The primary Hellenistic theatrical form was not tragedy but New Comedy , comic episodes about the lives of ordinary citizens. The only extant playwright from the period is Menander . One of New Comedy's most important contributions was its influence on Roman comedy, an influence that can be seen in the surviving works of Plautus and Terence .

Architecture [ edit ] Theatre of Pergamon , one of the steepest theatres in the world, has a capacity of 10,000 people and was constructed in the 3rd century BC Most ancient Greek cities lay on or near hills, so seating was generally built into the slope of a hill, producing a natural viewing area known as the theatron (literally "seeing place"). In cities without suitable hills, banks of earth were piled up.

[ 11 ] At the foot of the hill was a flattened, generally circular performance space with an average diameter of 78 feet (24 m), [ citation needed ] known as the orchestra (literally "dancing place"), [ 11 ] where a chorus of typically 12 to 15 people [ 12 ] performed plays in verse accompanied by music. There were often tall, arched entrances called parodoi or eisodoi , through which actors and chorus members entered and exited the orchestra. In some theatres, behind the orchestra, was a backdrop or scenic wall known as the skené .

The term theatre eventually came to mean the whole area of theatron , orchestra , and skené .

Theatron [ edit ] Ancient Greek theatre in Delos The theatron was the seating area, built into a hill to create a natural viewing space. The first seats in Greek theatres (other than just sitting on the ground) were wooden, but around 499 BC, the practice of inlaying stone blocks into the side of the hill to create permanent, stable seating became more common. They were called the prohedria and reserved for priests and a few of the most respected citizens. The diazoma separated the upper and lower seating areas.

Skené [ edit ] After 465 BC, playwrights began using a backdrop or scenic wall, called the skené (from which the word scene derives), that hung or stood behind the orchestra and also served as an area where actors could change their costumes. After 425 BC a stone scene wall, called a paraskenia , became a common supplement to skené . The paraskenia was a long wall with projecting sides, which may have had doorways for entrances and exits. Just behind the paraskenia was the proskenion ("in front of the scene"), which is similar to the modern day proscenium . The upper story was called the episkenion . Some theatres also had a raised speaking place on the orchestra called the logeion . By the end of the 5th century BC, around the time of the Peloponnesian War, the skené was two stories high.

The death of a character was always heard behind the skené , for it was considered inappropriate to show a killing in view of the audience.

[ citation needed ] Conversely, there are scholarly arguments that death in Greek tragedy was portrayed off stage primarily because of dramatic considerations, and not prudishness or sensitivity of the audience.

[ 13 ] A temple nearby, especially on the right side of the scene, is almost always part of the Greek theatre complex. This could justify, as a transposition, the recurrence of the pediment with the later solidified stone scene.

[ 14 ] Orchestra [ edit ] The Ancient Theatre of Delphi The orchestra was a circular piece of ground at the bottom of the theatron where the chorus and actors performed; the word means "dancing space", as the chorus also danced in early periods.

[ 15 ] Originally unraised, Greek theatre would later incorporate a raised stage for easier viewing. This practice would become common after the advent of "New Comedy," which incorporated dramatic portrayal of individual characters. The coryphaeus was the head chorus member, who could enter the story as a character able to interact with the characters of a play. Plays often began in the morning and lasted into the evening.

Acoustics [ edit ] The theatres were built on a large scale to accommodate a large number of performers on stage and in the audience—up to fourteen thousand [ which?

] . Physics and mathematics played a significant role in the construction of these theatres, as their designers had to be able to create acoustics in them such that the actors' voices could be heard throughout the theatre, including the very top row of seats. The Greek's understanding of acoustics compares very favorably with the current state of the art [ dubious – discuss ] .

Scenic elements [ edit ] There were several scenic elements commonly used in Greek theatre: mechane , a crane for lifting an actor to represent flying (thus, deus ex machina ) ekkyklêma , a wheeled platform often used to bring dead characters into view for the audience pinakes , pictures hung to create scenery thyromata , more complex pictures built into the second-level scene (3rd level from the ground) Masks [ edit ] Masks [ edit ] Tragic Comic Masks Hadrian's Villa mosaic The Ancient Greek term for a mask is prosopon (lit., "face"), [ 16 ] and was a significant element in the worship of Dionysus at Athens likely used in ceremonial rites and celebrations. Many masks worshipped the higher power, the gods, making masks also very important for religion. Most of the evidence comes from only a few vase paintings of the 5th century BC, such as one showing a mask of the god suspended from a tree with decorated robe hanging below it and dancing and the Pronomos vase, [ 17 ] which depicts actors preparing for a satyr play .

[ 18 ] No physical evidence remains available to us, as the masks were made of organic materials and not considered permanent objects, ultimately being dedicated at the altar of Dionysus after performances. Nevertheless, the mask is known to have been used since the time of Aeschylus and considered to be one of the iconic conventions of classical Greek theatre.

[ 19 ] Masks were also made for members of the chorus, who play some part in the action and provide a commentary on the events in which they are caught up. Although there are twelve or fifteen members of the tragic chorus, they all wear the same mask because they are considered to be representing one character.

Stylized comedy and tragedy masks said to originate in ancient Greek theatre have come to widely symbolize the performing arts generally.

[ 20 ] Mask details [ edit ] Mask dating from the 3rd century AD, Stoa of Attalos [ 21 ] Illustrations of theatrical masks from 5th century display helmet-like masks, covering the entire face and head, with holes for the eyes and a small aperture for the mouth and an integrated wig. These paintings never show actual masks on the actors in performance. They are most often shown being handled by the actors before or after a performance. This demonstrates the way in which the mask was to 'melt' into the face and allow the actor to vanish into the role.

[ 22 ] Effectively, the mask transformed the actor as much as memorization of the text. Therefore, performance in ancient Greece did not distinguish the masked actor from the theatrical character.

The mask-makers were called skeuopoios or "maker of the props", thus suggesting that their role encompassed multiple duties and tasks. The masks were most likely made out of light weight, organic materials like stiffened linen, leather, wood, or cork, with the wig consisting of human or animal hair.

[ 23 ] Due to the visual restrictions imposed by these masks, it was imperative that the actors hear in order to orient and balance themselves. Thus, it is believed that the ears were covered by substantial amounts of hair and not the helmet-mask itself. The mouth opening was relatively small, preventing the mouth being seen during performances. Vervain and Wiles posit that this small size discourages the idea that the mask functioned as a megaphone, as originally presented in the 1960s.

[ 18 ] Greek mask-maker Thanos Vovolis suggests that the mask serves as a resonator for the head, thus enhancing vocal acoustics and altering its quality. This leads to increased energy and presence, allowing for the more complete metamorphosis of the actor into his character.

[ 24 ] Mask functions [ edit ] In a large open-air theatre, like the Theatre of Dionysus in Athens , the classical masks were able to create a sense of dread in the audience creating large scale panic, especially since they had intensely exaggerated facial features and expressions.

[ 24 ] They enabled an actor to appear and reappear in several different roles, thus preventing the audience from identifying the actor to one specific character. Their variations help the audience to distinguish sex, age, and social status, in addition to revealing a change in a particular character's appearance, e.g., Oedipus , after blinding himself.

[ 25 ] Unique masks were also created for specific characters and events in a play, such as the Furies in Aeschylus ' Eumenides and Pentheus and Cadmus in Euripides ' The Bacchae . Worn by the chorus, the masks created a sense of unity and uniformity, while representing a multi-voiced persona or single organism and simultaneously encouraged interdependency and a heightened sensitivity between each individual of the group. Only 2 to 3 actors were allowed on the stage at one time, and masks permitted quick transitions from one character to another. There were only male actors, but masks allowed them to play female characters.

The modern method to interpret a role by switching between a few simple characters goes back to changing masks in the theatre of ancient Greece.

[ 26 ] Other costume details [ edit ] The soccus The actors in these plays that had tragic roles wore boots called cothurnus ( buskin ), that elevated them above the other actors. The actors with comedic roles only wore a thin-soled shoe called a soccus or sock. For this reason, dramatic art is sometimes called " sock and buskin ." Male actors playing female roles would wear a wooden structure on their chests ( posterneda ) to imitate the look of breasts and another structure on their stomachs ( progastreda ) to make them appear softer and more lady like. They would also wear white body stockings under their costumes to make their skin appear fairer.

Most costuming detail comes from pottery paintings from that time as costumes and masks were fabricated out of disposable material, so there are little to no remains of any costume from that time. The biggest source of information is the Pronomos Vase where actors are painted at a show's after party.

Costuming would give off a sense of character, as in gender, age, social status, and class. For example, characters of higher class would be dressed in nicer clothing, although everyone was dressed fairly nicely. Contrary to popular belief, they did not dress in only rags and sandals, as they wanted to impress. Some examples of Greek theatre costuming include long robes called chiton that reached the floor for actors playing gods, heroes, and old men. Actors playing goddesses and women characters that held a lot of power wore purple and gold. Actors playing queens and princesses wore long cloaks that dragged on the ground and were decorated with gold stars and other jewels, and warriors were dressed in a variety of armor and wore helmets adorned with plumes. Costumes were supposed to be colourful and obvious to be easily seen by every seat in the audience.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] History of theatre Theatre of ancient Rome List of ancient Greek playwrights List of extant ancient Greek and Roman plays List of ancient Greek theatres Representation of women in Athenian tragedy Agôn Antistrophe Archon Aulos Chorêgos Chorus Chorus of the elderly in classical Greek drama Didascaliae Didaskalos Eisodos Ekkyklêma Episode Epode Kommós Mêchanê Monody Ode Epinikion Onomastì komodèin Parabasis Phlyax play Sparagmos Stásimon Stichomythia Strophê Thalia (Muse) Theoric fund Roman theatre (structure) List of films based on Greek drama References [ edit ] ^ "Merriam-Webster definition of tragedy" .

Archived from the original on 22 January 2007 . Retrieved 22 January 2007 .

^ Ridgeway (1910) , p. 83 ^ Lawrence, 283 ^ Bahn, Eugene & Bahn, Margaret L. (1970).

A History of Oral Interpretation . Minneapolis, MN: Burgess Publishing Company. p. 3.

^ Aristotle, ' Poetics ' ^ Brockett (1999) , pp. 16–17 ^ "Herodotus, Histories , 6.21 trans. A.D. Godley" .

Archived from the original on 29 January 2022 . Retrieved 29 January 2022 .

^ Brockett (1999) , p. 17 ^ Kuritz (1988) , p. 21 ^ Kuritz (1988) , p. 24 ^ a b Lawrence, A. W.; Tomlinson, R. A. (1996).

Greek Architecture (5th ed.). Yale University Press Pelican History of Art.

ISBN 0-300-06491-8 .

^ Jansen (2000) ^ Pathmanathan (1965) ^ Brnić, Ivica (2019).

Nahe Ferne: Sakrale Aspekte im Prisma der Profanbauten von Tadao Ando, Louis I. Kahn und Peter Zumthor . Zurich: Park Books. pp.

78– 79.

ISBN 978-3-03860-121-0 .

^ Lawrence, 280-281 ^ "Liddell & Scott via Perseus @ UChicago" . Archived from the original on 29 May 2012 . Retrieved 15 February 2012 .

^ "Tufts.edu" .

Archived from the original on 10 December 2022 . Retrieved 21 February 2021 .

^ a b Vervain & Wiles (2004) , p. 255 ^ Varakis (2004) ^ D'Almeida, Cristina (21 June 2020).

"The Origins of the Comedy and Tragedy Masks of Theatre" .

OnStage Blog . Retrieved 16 May 2024 .

^ Athenian Agora V K 136 ^ Vervain & Wiles (2004) , p. 256 ^ Brooke (1962) , p. 76 ^ a b Vovolis & Zamboulakis (2007) ^ Brockett & Ball (2000) , p. 70 ^ Tangian, Andranik (1997). "Performance interpretation by segmentation and its notation".

Contemporary Theatre Review .

6 (4): 79– 97.

doi : 10.1080/10486809708568438 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Brockett, Oscar G. (1999).

History of the Theatre (8th ed.). Allyn and Bacon.

ISBN 9780205290260 .

Brockett, Oscar G.; Ball, Robert (2000).

The Essential Theatre (7th ed.). Orlando, FL: Harcourt Brace.

Brooke, Iris (1962).

Costume in Greek Classical Drama . London: Methuen.

Jansen, Jan (2000).

Lebensqualität im Theater des demokratischen Athen: Kult, Politik und Alte Komödie [ Quality of life in the theatre of Democratic Athens: cults, politics and ancient comedy ] (PDF) (in German). Munich, Germany: GRIN.

ISBN 9783638291873 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 November 2008 . Retrieved 5 October 2007 .

Kuritz, Paul (1988).

The Making of Theatre History . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 9780135478615 .

Lawrence, A. W.

, Greek Architecture , 1957, Penguin, Pelican history of art Pathmanathan, R. Sri (1965). "Death in Greek tragedy".

Greece and Rome .

12 (1): 2– 14.

doi : 10.1017/S0017383500014704 .

JSTOR 642398 .

S2CID 162902790 .

Ridgeway, William (1910).

Origin of Tragedy with Special Reference to the Greek Tragedians .

Varakis, Angie (2004).

"Research on the Ancient Mask" .

Didaskalia .

6 (1).

Vervain, Chris; Wiles, David (2004).

The Masks of Greek Tragedy as Point of Departure for Modern Performance . New Theatre Quarterly. Vol. 67. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Vovolis, Thanos; Zamboulakis, Giorgos (2007).

"The acoustical mask of Greek tragedy" .

Didaskalia .

7 (1).

Further reading [ edit ] Bosher, Kathryn G. 2021.

Greek Theater in Ancient Sicily . Cambridge University Press.

Buckham, Philip Wentworth, Theatre of the Greeks , London 1827.

Davidson, J.A., Literature and Literacy in Ancient Greece, Part 1 , Phoenix , 16, 1962, pp. 141–56.

Davidson, J.A., Peisistratus and Homer , TAPA , 86, 1955, pp. 1–21.

Easterling, P.E.

, ed. (1997).

The Cambridge Companion to Greek Tragedy . Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 0-521-41245-5 .

Easterling, Patricia Elizabeth; Hall, Edith (eds.), Greek and Roman Actors: Aspects of an Ancient Profession , Cambridge University Press, 2002.

ISBN 0-521-65140-9 Else, Gerald F.

Aristotle's Poetics: The Argument , Cambridge, Massachusetts 1967.

The Origins and Early Forms of Greek Tragedy , Cambridge, Massachusetts 1965.

The Origins of ΤΡΑΓΩΙΔΙΑ , Hermes 85, 1957, pp. 17–46.

Flickinger, Roy Caston, The Greek theater and its drama , Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1918 Foley, Helene , Female Acts in Greek Tragedy , Princeton: Princeton University Press 2001.

Freund, Philip, The Birth of Theatre , London: Peter Owen, 2003.

ISBN 0-7206-1170-9 Haigh, A. E.

, The Attic Theatre , 1907.

Harsh, Philip Whaley, A handbook of Classical Drama , Stanford University, California, Stanford University Press ; London, H. Milford, Oxford University Press, 1944.

Lesky, A.

Greek Tragedy , trans. H.A., Frankfurt, London and New York 1965.

Ley, Graham.

A Short Introduction to the Ancient Greek Theatre.

University of Chicago , Chicago: 2006 Ley, Graham.

Acting Greek Tragedy.

University of Exeter Press , Exeter: 2015 Loscalzo, Donato, Il pubblico a teatro nella Grecia antica , Roma 2008 McDonald, Marianne, Walton, J. Michael (editors), The Cambridge companion to Greek and Roman theatre , Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007.

ISBN 0-521-83456-2 McClure, Laura.

Spoken Like a Woman: Speech and Gender in Athenian Drama , Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999.

Moulton, Richard Green , The ancient classical drama; a study in literary evolution intended for readers in English and in the original , Oxford, The Clarendon Press , 1890.

Padilla, Mark William (editor), "Rites of Passage in Ancient Greece: Literature, Religion, Society" , Bucknell University Press, 1999.

ISBN 0-8387-5418-X Pickard-Cambridge, Sir Arthur Wallace Dithyramb, Tragedy, and Comedy , Oxford 1927.

The Theatre of Dionysus in Athens , Oxford 1946.

The Dramatic Festivals of Athens , Oxford 1953.

Rabinowitz, Nancy Sorkin (2008).

Greek Tragedy . Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers .

ISBN 978-1-4051-2160-6 .

Riu, Xavier, Dionysism and Comedy , 1999.

review Ross, Stewart.

Greek Theatre.

Wayland Press, Hove: 1996 Rozik, Eli, The roots of theatre: rethinking ritual and other theories of origin , Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2002.

ISBN 0-87745-817-0 Schlegel, August Wilhelm , Lectures on Dramatic Art and Literature , Geneva 1809.

Sommerstein, Alan H., Greek Drama and Dramatists , Routledge, 2002.

Sourvinou-Inwood, Christiane, Tragedy and Athenian Religion , Oxford:University Press 2003.

Tsitsiridis, Stavros, "Greek Mime in the Roman Empire (P.Oxy. 413: Charition and Moicheutria ", Logeion 1 (2011) 184-232 .

Wiles, David.

Greek Theatre Performance: An Introduction.

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge: 2000 Wiles, David.

The Masks of Menander: Sign and Meaning in Greek and Roman Performance , Cambridge, 1991.

Wiles, David.

Mask and Performance in Greek Tragedy: from ancient festival to modern experimentation , Cambridge, 1997.

Wise, Jennifer, Dionysus Writes: The Invention of Theatre in Ancient Greece , Ithaca 1998.

review Zimmerman, B., Greek Tragedy: An Introduction , trans. T. Marier, Baltimore 1991.

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has original works on the topic: Theatre of ancient Greece Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ancient Greek theatre .

Library resources about Theatre of ancient Greece Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Ancient Greek theatre history and articles Drama lesson 1: The ancient Greek theatre Ancient Greek Theatre The Ancient Theatre Archive, Greek and Roman theatre architecture – Dr. Thomas G. Hines, Department of Theatre, Whitman College Greek and Roman theatre glossary Illustrated Greek Theater – Dr. Janice Siegel, Department of Classics, Hampden–Sydney College , Virginia Searchable database of monologues for actors from Ancient Greek Theatre Logeion: A Journal of Ancient Theatre with free access which publishes original scholarly articles including its reception in modern theatre, literature, cinema and the other art forms and media, as well as its relation to the theatre of other periods and geographical regions.

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e History of Western theatre Greek Roman Medieval Commedia dell'arte English Renaissance Spanish Golden Age Classicism Neoclassical Restoration Augustan Weimar Romanticism Melodrama 19th century Realism Naturalism Modernism Postmodern 20th century timeline v t e Classical Athenian drama List of plays Genres Tragedy Comedy Satyr play Writers Aeschylus Sophocles Euripides Aristophanes Menander Structure Architecture List of theatres Skene Analysis Poetics (335 BCE) The Birth of Tragedy (1872) Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐kwtpj
Cached time: 20250814220226
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.746 seconds
Real time usage: 0.932 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4635/1000000
Revision size: 34561/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 220722/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5156/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 122191/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.454/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18879103/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  740.832      1 -total
 22.58%  167.296      1 Template:Reflist
 14.01%  103.807      1 Template:Ancient_Greece_topics
 13.69%  101.439      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 12.25%   90.785      4 Template:Langx
 11.88%   87.975      5 Template:Cite_web
  9.05%   67.022      1 Template:Short_description
  8.39%   62.126     12 Template:Cite_book
  6.04%   44.757      5 Template:Fix
  5.80%   42.936      3 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:528520:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220226 and revision id 1304065647. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theatre_of_ancient_Greece&oldid=1304065647 " Categories : Ancient Greek theatre Ancient Greek dramatists and playwrights Cult of Dionysus Masks in theatre Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2024 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2019 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from June 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 19:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theatre of ancient Greece 53 languages Add topic

