Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of discovery Toggle History of discovery subsection 1.1 Plate tectonics 1.2 Distribution and species 1.2.1 Species found in Africa 1.2.2 Other species 2 Description 3 Paleoecology Toggle Paleoecology subsection 3.1 Dominance of the Early Triassic 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Lystrosaurus 33 languages Afrikaans العربية Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Livvinkarjala Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genus of Late Permian and Early Triassic dicynodont therapsids Lystrosaurus Temporal range: Late Permian ( Lopingian )– Early Triassic ( Olenekian ), 255–248 Ma PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N L. hedini skeletal mount from the Natural history museum of Zürich Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Clade : Synapsida Clade : Therapsida Clade : † Anomodontia Clade : † Dicynodontia Family: † Lystrosauridae Genus: † Lystrosaurus Cope , 1870 Species List L. murrayi ( Huxley , 1859) ( type ) L. declivis ( Owen , 1860) L. curvatus (Owen, 1876) L. maccaigi Seeley , 1898 Lystrosaurus ( / ˌ l ɪ s t r oʊ ˈ s ɔːr ə s / ; 'shovel lizard'; proper Ancient Greek is λίστρον lístron ‘tool for leveling or smoothing, shovel, spade, hoe’) is an extinct genus of herbivorous dicynodont therapsids from the late Permian and Early Triassic epochs (around 248 million years ago). It lived in what is now Antarctica , India , China , Mongolia , European Russia and South Africa . Four to six species are currently recognized, although from the 1930s to 1970s the number of species was thought to be much higher. They ranged in size from that of a small dog to 8 feet (2.5 meters) long.

[ 1 ] As a dicynodont, Lystrosaurus had only two teeth (a pair of tusk -like canines ), and is thought to have had a horny beak that was used for biting off pieces of vegetation.

Lystrosaurus was a heavily built, herbivorous animal. The structure of its shoulders and hip joints suggests that Lystrosaurus moved with a semi-sprawling gait . The forelimbs were even more robust than the hindlimbs, and the animal is thought to have been a powerful digger that nested in burrows.

Lystrosaurus survived the Permian-Triassic extinction , 252 million years ago. In the Early Triassic , they were by far the most common terrestrial vertebrates, accounting for as many as 95% of the total individuals in some fossil beds.

[ 2 ] Researchers have offered various hypotheses for why Lystrosaurus survived the extinction event and thrived in the early Triassic.

History of discovery [ edit ] Map of Pangea showing locations of Lystrosaurus remains as yellow disks. Distorted boundaries of modern continents shown as grey lines. (Distributions for lystrosaurs and three other Permian and Triassic fossil groups used as biogeographic evidence for continental drift and certain land bridges .) Dr. Elias Root Beadle, a Philadelphia missionary and avid fossil collector, discovered the first Lystrosaurus skull. Beadle wrote to the eminent paleontologist Othniel Charles Marsh , but received no reply. Marsh's rival, Edward Drinker Cope , was very interested in seeing the find, and described and named Lystrosaurus in the Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society in 1870.

[ 3 ] Its name is derived from the Ancient Greek words listron , "shovel", and sauros , "lizard".

[ 4 ] Marsh belatedly purchased the skull in May 1871, although his interest in an already-described specimen was unclear; he may have wanted to carefully scrutinize Cope's description and illustration.

[ 3 ] Plate tectonics [ edit ] The discovery of Lystrosaurus fossils at Coalsack Bluff in the Transantarctic Mountains by Edwin H. Colbert and his team in 1969–1970 helped support the hypothesis of plate tectonics and strengthen the theory, since Lystrosaurus had already been found in the lower Triassic of southern Africa as well as in India and China.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Distribution and species [ edit ] Lystrosaurus fossils have been found in many Late Permian and Early Triassic terrestrial bone beds , most abundantly in Africa, and to a lesser extent in parts of what are now India, China, Mongolia, European Russia, and Antarctica (which was not over the South Pole at the time).

[ 7 ] Species found in Africa [ edit ] L. murrayi skeleton Most Lystrosaurus fossils have been found in the Balfour and Katberg Formations of the Karoo basin in South Africa ; these specimens offer the best prospects of identifying species because they are the most numerous and have been studied for the longest time. As so often with fossils, there is debate in the paleontological community as to exactly how many species have been found in the Karoo basin. Studies from the 1930s to 1970s suggested a large number (23 in one case).

[ 8 ] However, by the 1980s and 1990s, only 6 species were recognized in the Karoo : L. curvatus , L. platyceps , L. oviceps , L. maccaigi , L. murrayi , and L. declivis . A study in 2011 reduced that number to four, treating the fossils previously labeled as L. platyceps and L. oviceps as members of L. curvatus .

[ 9 ] L. maccaigi is the largest and apparently most specialized species, while L. curvatus was the least specialized. A Lystrosaurus -like fossil, Kwazulusaurus shakai , has also been found in South Africa. Although not assigned to the same genus , K. shakai is very similar to L. curvatus . Some paleontologists have therefore proposed that K. shakai was possibly an ancestor of or closely related to the ancestors of L. curvatus , while L. maccaigi arose from a different lineage.

[ 8 ] L. maccaigi is found only in sediments from the Permian period, and apparently did not survive the Permian–Triassic extinction event . Its specialized features and sudden appearance in the fossil record without an obvious ancestor may indicate that it immigrated into the Karoo from an area in which Late Permian sediments have not been found.

[ 8 ] L. curvatus is found in a relatively narrow band of sediments from shortly before and after the extinction, and can be used as an approximate marker for the boundary between the Permian and Triassic periods. A skull identified as L. curvatus has been found in late Permian sediments from Zambia . For many years it had been thought that there were no Permian specimens of L. curvatus in the Karoo, which led to suggestions that L. curvatus immigrated from Zambia into the Karoo. However, a re-examination of Permian specimens in the Karoo has identified some as L. curvatus , and there is no need to assume immigration.

[ 8 ] L. murrayi and L. declivis are found only in Triassic sediments.

[ 8 ] Other species [ edit ] Lystrosaurus georgi fossils have been found in the Earliest Triassic sediments of the Moscow Basin in Russia. It was probably closely related to the African Lystrosaurus curvatus , [ 7 ] which is regarded as one of the least specialized species and has been found in very Late Permian and very Early Triassic sediments.

[ 8 ] L. murrayi , in addition to two undescribed species presently assigned to L. curvatus and L. declivis , is known from the Early Triassic Panchet Formation of the Damodar Valley and the Kamthi Formation of the Pranhita-Godavari Basin in India .

[ 10 ] Seven Lystrosaurus species have been described from the Early Triassic Jiucaiyuan , Guodikeng and Wutonggou formations of the Bogda Mountains in Xinjiang , China , although it is possible that only two ( L. youngi and L. hedini ) are valid; unusually, no Chinese Lystrosaurus specimens are known below the Permian-Triassic boundary in this region.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] L. curvatus , L. murrayi , and L. maccaigi are known from the Fremouw Formation in the Transantarctic Mountains of Antarctica .

[ 13 ] Description [ edit ] Size of Lystrosaurus murrayi relative to a human.

Lystrosaurus was a dicynodont therapsid , between 0.6 to 2.5 m (2 to 8 ft) long with an average of about 0.9 m (3 ft) depending upon the species.

[ 14 ] Unlike other therapsids, dicynodonts had very short snouts and no teeth except for the tusk -like upper canines . Dicynodonts are generally thought to have had horny beaks like those of turtles, for shearing off pieces of vegetation, which were then ground on a horny secondary palate when the mouth was shut. The jaw joint was weak and moved backwards and forwards with a shearing action, instead of the more common sideways or up and down movements. It is thought that the jaw muscles were attached unusually far forward on the skull and took up a lot of space on the top and back of the skull. As a result, the eyes were set high and well forward on the skull, and the face was short.

[ 15 ] Features of the skeleton indicate that Lystrosaurus moved with a semi-sprawling gait . The lower rear corner of the scapula (shoulder blade) was strongly ossified (built of strong bone), which suggests that movement of the scapula contributed to the stride length of the forelimbs and reduced the sideways flexing of the body.

[ 7 ] The five sacral vertebrae were massive but not fused to each other and to the pelvis , making the back more rigid and reducing sideways flexing while the animal was walking.

Therapsids with fewer than five sacral vertebrae are thought to have had sprawling limbs, like those of modern lizards.

[ 7 ] In dinosaurs and mammals , which have erect limbs, the sacral vertebrae are fused to each other and to the pelvis .

[ 16 ] A buttress above each acetabulum (hip socket) is thought to have prevented dislocation of the femur (thigh bone) while Lystrosaurus was walking with a semi-sprawling gait.

[ 7 ] The forelimbs of Lystrosaurus were massive, [ 7 ] and Lystrosaurus is thought to have been a powerful burrower.

Mummified specimens recovered from the Karoo Basin and described in 2022 revealed that Lystrosaurus had dimpled, leathery, and hairless skin.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Paleoecology [ edit ] Dominance of the Early Triassic [ edit ] Lystrosaurus georgi Lystrosaurus is notable for dominating southern Pangaea for millions of years during the Early Triassic . At least one unidentified species of this genus survived the end-Permian mass extinction and, in the absence of predators and herbivorous competitors, went on to thrive and re-radiate into a number of species within the genus, [ 19 ] becoming the most common group of terrestrial vertebrates during the Early Triassic; for a while, 95% of land vertebrates were Lystrosaurus .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] This is the only time that a single species or genus of land animal dominated the Earth to such a degree.

[ 21 ] A few other Permian therapsid genera also survived the mass extinction and appear in Triassic rocks—the therocephalians Tetracynodon , Moschorhinus , Ictidosuchoides and Promoschorhynchus —but do not appear to have been abundant in the Triassic; [ 8 ] [ 22 ] complete ecological recovery took 30 million years, spanning the Early and Middle Triassic .

[ 23 ] Several attempts have been made to explain why Lystrosaurus survived the Permian–Triassic extinction event , the "mother of all mass extinctions", [ 24 ] and why it dominated Early Triassic fauna to such an unprecedented extent: Lystrosaurus murrayi Growth marks in fossilized tusks suggest that Lystrosaurus living in Antarctica ~250 Mya could enter a prolonged state of torpor analogous to hibernation . This could be the oldest evidence of a hibernation-like state in a vertebrate animal and indicates that torpor arose in vertebrates before mammals and dinosaurs evolved.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] One of the more recent theories is that the extinction event reduced the atmosphere's oxygen content and increased its carbon dioxide content, so that many terrestrial species died out because they found breathing too difficult.

[ 20 ] It has therefore been suggested that Lystrosaurus survived and became dominant because its burrowing life-style made it able to cope with an atmosphere of "stale air", and that specific features of its anatomy were part of this adaptation: a barrel chest that accommodated large lungs, short internal nostrils that facilitated rapid breathing, and high neural spines (projections on the dorsal side of the vertebrae ) that gave greater leverage to the muscles that expanded and contracted its chest. However, there are weaknesses in all these points: the chest of Lystrosaurus was not significantly larger in proportion to its size than in other dicynodonts that became extinct; although Triassic dicynodonts appear to have had longer neural spines than their Permian counterparts, this feature may be related to posture, locomotion or even body size rather than respiratory efficiency; L. murrayi and L. declivis are much more abundant than other Early Triassic burrowers such as Procolophon or Thrinaxodon .

[ 8 ] Lystrosaurus skeletal diagram The suggestion that Lystrosaurus was helped to survive and dominate by being semi-aquatic has a similar weakness: although temnospondyls become more abundant in the Karoo's Triassic sediments, they were much less numerous than L. murrayi and L. declivis .

[ 8 ] The most specialized and the largest animals are at higher risk in mass extinctions; this may explain why the unspecialized L. curvatus survived while the larger and more specialized L. maccaigi perished along with all the other large Permian herbivores and carnivores.

[ 8 ] Although Lystrosaurus generally looks adapted to feed on plants similar to Dicroidium , which dominated the Early Triassic, the larger size of L. maccaigi may have forced it to rely on the larger members of the Glossopteris flora, which did not survive the end-Permian extinction.

[ 8 ] Only the 1.5 m (5 ft)–long therocephalian Moschorhinus and the large archosauriform Proterosuchus appear to be large enough to have preyed on the Triassic Lystrosaurus species, and this shortage of predators may have been responsible for a Lystrosaurus population boom in the Early Triassic.

[ 8 ] According to Benton, "Perhaps the survival of Lystrosaurus was simply a matter of luck".

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Geology portal Paleontology portal Evolution of mammals Lists of synapsids References [ edit ] ^ Cluver, Michael Albert (1978).

Fossil reptiles of the South African Karoo . The South African Museum.

ISBN 9780908407583 .

^ Damiani, R.J.; Neveling, J.; Modesto, S.P. & Yates, A.M. (2004). "Barendskraal, a diverse amniote locality from the Lystrosaurus assemblage zone, Early Triassic of South Africa".

Palaeontologia Africana .

39 : 53– 62.

^ a b Wallace, David Rains (2000).

The Bonehunters' Revenge: Dinosaurs, Greed, and the Greatest Scientific Feud of the Gilded Age . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. pp.

44– 45.

ISBN 978-0-618-08240-7 .

^ Liddell, Henry George & Scott, Robert , eds. (1980).

A Greek-English Lexicon (abridged ed.). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-910207-5 .

^ Lubick, Naomi (February 2005).

"Investigating the Antarctic" . Geotimes.

American Geosciences Institute – via agiweb.org.

^ Trewick, Steve (2016). "Plate Tectonics in Biogeography".

International Encyclopedia of Geography: People, the Earth, Environment and Technology . John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. pp.

1– 9.

doi : 10.1002/9781118786352.wbieg0638 .

ISBN 9781118786352 .

^ a b c d e f Surkov, M.V.; Kalandadze, N.N. Of & Benton, M.J. (June 2005).

" Lystrosaurus georgi , a dicynodont from the Lower Triassic of Russia" (PDF) .

Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology .

25 (2): 402– 413.

doi : 10.1671/0272-4634(2005)025[0402:LGADFT]2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0272-4634 .

S2CID 59028100 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 December 2008 . Retrieved 7 July 2008 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Botha, J. & Smith, R.M.H. (2005). " Lystrosaurus species composition across the Permo–Triassic boundary in the Karoo Basin of South Africa".

Lethaia .

40 (2): 125– 137.

doi : 10.1111/j.1502-3931.2007.00011.x .

Full version available at Botha; Smith (2007).

Lystrosaurus species composition across the Permo–Triassic boundary in the Karoo Basin of South Africa (PDF) (Report). Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 September 2008 . Retrieved 2 July 2008 .

^ Grine, F.E.; Forster, C.A.; Cluver, M.A. & Georgi, J.A. (2006).

Amniote Paleobiology: Perspectives on the evolution of mammals, birds, and reptiles . University of Chicago Press. pp.

432– 503.

^ Bandyopadhyay, Saswati; Ray, Sanghamitra (1 March 2020).

"Gondwana vertebrate faunas of India: Their diversity and intercontinental relationships" .

Episodes Journal of International Geoscience .

43 (1): 438– 460.

doi : 10.18814/epiiugs/2020/020028 .

^ Angielczyk, Kenneth D.; Liu, Jun; Sidor, Christian A.; Yang, Wan (1 November 2022).

"The stratigraphic and geographic occurrences of Permo-Triassic tetrapods in the Bogda Mountains, NW China — Implications of a new cyclostratigraphic framework and Bayesian age model" .

Journal of African Earth Sciences .

195 : 104655.

doi : 10.1016/j.jafrearsci.2022.104655 .

ISSN 1464-343X .

^ Han, Fenglu; Zhao, Qi; Liu, Jun (18 March 2021).

"Preliminary bone histological analysis of Lystrosaurus (Therapsida: Dicynodontia) from the Lower Triassic of North China, and its implication for lifestyle and environments after the end-Permian extinction" .

PLoS One .

16 (3): e0248681.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0248681 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 7971864 .

PMID 33735263 .

^ Cosgriff, J.W.; Hammer, W.R.; Ryan, W.J. (1982).

"The Pangaean reptile, Lystrosaurus maccaigi , in the Lower Triassic of Antarctica" .

Journal of Paleontology .

56 (2): 371– 385.

ISSN 0022-3360 .

JSTOR 1304463 .

^ "Lystrosaurus" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica . Fossils & Facts . Retrieved 18 March 2019 .

^ Cowen, R. (2000).

The History of Life (3rd ed.). Blackwell Scientific. pp.

167– 168.

ISBN 978-0-632-04444-3 .

^ Benton, Michael J.

(2004). "Origin and relationships of Dinosauria". In Weishampel, David B.; Dodson, Peter & Osmólska, Halszka (eds.).

The Dinosauria (2nd ed.). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. pp.

7 –19.

ISBN 978-0-520-24209-8 .

^ Smith, R.M.H.; Botha, J.; Vigilietti, P.A. (2022). "Taphonomy of drought afflicted tetrapods in the Early Triassic Karoo Basin, South Africa".

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

604 . 111207.

Bibcode : 2022PPP...60411207S .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2022.111207 .

S2CID 251781291 .

^ "These fossil mummies reveal a brutal world long before T. rex lived" .

gizmodo.com . 20 September 2022.

^ a b c Benton, M.J.

(2006).

When Life Nearly Died: The greatest mass extinction of all time . London, UK: Thames & Hudson.

ISBN 978-0-500-28573-2 .

^ a b Cokinos, Christopher (12 October 2007) [May-June 2007].

"The consolations of extinction" .

Orion . Archived from the original on 12 October 2007.

^ "Clash of titans".

Life before Dinosaurs (renamed 'Walking with Monsters') . Series 3. November 2005.

BBC , Discovery Channel .

^ Huttenlocker, A.K.; Sidor, C.A.; Smith, R.M.H. (2011). "A new specimen of Promoschorhynchus (Therapsida: Therocephalia: Akidnognathidae) from the Lower Triassic of South Africa and its implications for theriodont survivorship across the Permo-Triassic boundary".

Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology .

31 (2): 405– 421.

Bibcode : 2011JVPal..31..405H .

doi : 10.1080/02724634.2011.546720 .

S2CID 129242450 .

^ Sahney, S. & Benton, M.J. (2008).

"Recovery from the most profound mass extinction of all time" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

275 (1636): 759– 65.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2007.1370 .

PMC 2596898 .

PMID 18198148 .

^ Erwin, D.H. (1993).

The Great Paleozoic Crisis: Life and death in the Permian . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-07467-4 .

^ "Fossil evidence of 'hibernation-like' state in 250 million-year-old Antarctic animal" .

phys.org . August 2020 . Retrieved 7 September 2020 .

^ "Fossil suggests animals have been hibernating for 250 million years" .

UPI . Retrieved 7 September 2020 .

^ Whitney, Megan R.; Sidor, Christian A. (27 August 2020).

"Evidence of torpor in the tusks of Lystrosaurus from the Early Triassic of Antarctica" .

Communications Biology .

3 (1): 471.

doi : 10.1038/s42003-020-01207-6 .

ISSN 2399-3642 .

PMC 7453012 .

PMID 32855434 .

Text and images are available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lystrosaurus .

"Dicynodontia" .

Palaeos.com . 400.725. Archived from the original on 22 February 2006.

Rance, Hugh.

"Mammal-like reptiles of Pangea" .

geowords.com . The present is the key to the past. Archived from the original on 27 April 2006.

v t e Anomodontia Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Clade : Synapsida Clade : Therapsida Synapsida see Synapsida Anomodontia see below↓ Anomodontia Anomodontia Biseridens Novocynodon ?

Anomocephaloidea Anomocephalus Tiarajudens Venyukovioidea Otsheria Parasuminia Suminia Ulemica Venyukovia Chainosauria Galechirus Galeops Galepus Patranomodon Anomocephaloidea ?

Dicynodontia see below↓ Dicynodontia Dicynodontia Brachyprosopus Colobodectes Eodicynodon Lanthanostegus Nyaphulia Pristerodon Pylaecephalidae Diictodon Eosimops Prosictodon Robertia Endothiodontia Abajudon Endothiodon Niassodon Therochelonia Emydopoidea Digalodon Emydorhinus ?

Palemydops ?

Emydopidae Compsodon Emydops Myosauridae Myosauroides Myosaurus Kingoriidae Dicynodontoides Kombuisia Thliptosaurus Cistecephalidae Cistecephaloides Cistecephalus Kawingasaurus Kembawacela Sauroscaptor Bidentalia see below↓ Bidentalia Bidentalia Daqingshanodon Idelesaurus Keyseria Mdomowabata Odontocyclops Rastodon Syops Elphidae Elph Interpresosaurus Katumbia Geikiidae Aulacephalodon Bulbasaurus Geikia Pelanomodon Oudenodontidae Australobarbarus Oudenodon Tropidostoma Rhachiocephalidae Kitchinganomodon Rhachiocephalus Dicynodontoidea Counillonia Daptocephalus Delectosaurus Dicynodon Dinanomodon Gordonia Kunpania Peramodon Repelinosaurus Taoheodon Turfanodon Vivaxosaurus Lystrosauridae Basilodon ?

Euptychognathus ?

Jimusaria ?

Kwazulusaurus Lystrosauravus Madumabisa Lystrosaurus Sintocephalus ?

Kannemeyeriiformes see below↓ Kannemeyeriiformes Kannemeyeriiformes Angonisaurus Dinodontosaurus Elephantosaurus Woznikella Shansiodontidae Shansiodon Tetragonias Vinceria Rhinodicynodon Kannemeyeriidae Acratophorus Dolichuranus Kannemeyeria Parakannemeyeria Rabidosaurus Rechnisaurus Rhadiodromus Shaanbeikannemeyeria Sinokannemeyeria Uralokannemeyeria Wadiasaurus Xiyukannemeyeria Stahleckeriidae Sungeodon Placeriinae Argodicynodon Lisowicia Moghreberia Pentasaurus Placerias Zambiasaurus Stahleckeriinae Eubrachiosaurus Ischigualastia Jachaleria Sangusaurus Stahleckeria Ufudocyclops Other articles Nomina dubia Azarifeneria Baiopsis Calleonasus Chelyoposaurus Cristonasus Diaelurodon Dicranozygoma Elatosaurus Eurycarpus Haughtoniana Keirognathus Koupia Nasoplanites Opisthoctenodon Parvobestiola Planitorostris Platypodosaurus Putillosaurus Taognathus Paraphyletic groups Cryptodontia ?

Dromasauria v t e Geology of South Africa Geological formations List of fossiliferous stratigraphic units in South Africa Palaeoarchaean Bushveld Igneous Complex Fig Tree Formation Komatii Formation Moodies Group Onverwacht Group Transvaal Supergroup Paleozoic Carboniferous Dwyka Group Ganigobis Formation Waaipoort Formation Devonian Bokkeveld Group Table Mountain Sandstone Waterloo Farm lagerstätte Permian Abrahamskraal Formation Balfour Formation Dwyka Group Ganigobis Formation Teekloof Formation Whitehill Formation Ordovician Soom Shale Mesozoic Cretaceous Uitenhage Group Buffelskloof Formation Enon Formation Kirkwood Formation Sundays River Formation Kalahari Deposits Jurassic Drakensberg Group Enon Formation Uitenhage Group Karoo Supergroup Beaufort Group Abrahamskraal Formation Balfour Formation Katberg Formation Middleton Formation Teekloof Formation Dwyka Group Ecca Group Whitehill Formation Stormberg Group Bushveld Sandstone Clarens Formation Elliot Formation Triassic Elliot Formation Katberg Formation Molteno Formation Normandien Formation Cenozoic Algoa Group ‎Tectonics and orogeny Algoa Basin Cape Fold Belt Ellisras Basin Gondwanide orogeny Kaapvaal Craton Kalahari Craton Makhonjwa Mountains Tectonic evolution of the Barberton greenstone belt Terra Australis Orogen Transvaal Basin Witteberg Witwatersrand Basin Volcanism List of volcanoes in South Africa Pilanesberg Pilanesberg Game Reserve Prince Edward Islands Diatremes Big Hole Finsch diamond mine Jagersfontein Mine Koffiefontein mine Barberton Greenstone Belt Drakensberg Karoo-Ferrar Earthquakes 1620 Robben Island earthquake 1969 Tulbagh earthquake 2006 Mozambique earthquake 2014 Orkney earthquake Impact craters Kalkkop crater Morokweng impact structure Tswaing crater Vredefort impact structure Meteorites Bellsbank meteorite ‎Mineral deposits Kimberlite Merensky Reef Witwatersrand Banket (mining term) Coal in South Africa Iron ore in Africa Platinum in Africa Titanium in Africa Uranium in Africa Minerals Council South Africa Department of Mineral Resources (South Africa) Department of Mineral Resources and Energy Paleontology‎ List of fossiliferous stratigraphic units in South Africa Archean life in the Barberton Greenstone Belt Ordovician Keurbos Notiodella Onychopterella Promissum Soomaspis Devonian Africanaspis Angelacanthus Antarctilamna Bainella Deltacephalaspis Gondwanascorpio Priscomyzon Serenichthys Tutusius Umzantsia Carboniferous Dadoxylon Dwykia Hibbertopterus Lepidodendron Sundayichthys Permian Abdalodon Alopecognathus Anomocephalus Basilodon Bulbasaurus Charassognathus Cistecephaloides Crapartinella Cynosaurus Dicynodontoides Diictodon Dinanomodon Dinogorgon Dwykaselachus Endothiodon Eunotosaurus Galechirus Glanosuchus Glossopteris Hofmeyria Ictidognathus Ictidosuchoides Lepidodendron Lycosuchus Mesosaurus Moschops Odontocyclops Procynosuchus Scylacosaurus Scymnosaurus Simorhinella Stereosternum Theriognathus Thliptosaurus Trochosaurus Youngina Beaufort Group Aelurosaurus Anomocephalus Basilodon Blattoidealestes Brachyprosopus Broomistega Cistecephaloides Choerosaurus Clelandina Colobodectes Compsodon Cryptocynodon Cynariognathus Cynosaurus Diictodon Dinanomodon Eodicynodon Eohyosaurus Emyduranus Euchambersia Homodontosaurus Icticephalus Ictidochampsa Ictidodon Ictidodraco Ictidostoma Lanthanostegus Leontosaurus Lepidodendron Lycideops Macroscelesaurus Moschorhinus Paliguana Pelictosuchus Polycynodon Pristerodon Pristerognathoides Pristerognathus Procolophon Promoschorhynchus Scalopocephalus Silpholestes Tamboeria Uranocentrodon Assemblages Cistecephalus Assemblage Zone Daptocephalus Assemblage Zone Eodicynodon Assemblage Zone Pristerognathus Assemblage Zone Tapinocephalus Assemblage Zone Tropidostoma Assemblage Zone Triassic Batrachosuchus Blikanasaurus Bolotridon Cynognathus Diademodon Dinanomodon Elliotherium Ericiolacerta Erythrosuchus Erythrotherium Eucnemesaurus Euskelosaurus Galesaurus Howesia Ictidosuchoides Kannemeyeria Lepidodendron Lydekkerina Lystrosaurus Melanorosaurus Mesosuchus Microgomphodon Micropholis Myosaurus Noteosuchus Olivierosuchus Orosaurus Pentasaurus Plateosauravus Platycraniellus Procolophon Progalesaurus Prolacerta Proterosuchus Ptychoceratodus Regisaurus Scaloposaurus Scymnosaurus Shansiodon Tetracynodon Thrinaxodon Trirachodon Ufudocyclops Zorillodontops Assemblages Cynognathus Assemblage Zone Lystrosaurus Assemblage Zone Jurassic Aardonyx Abrictosaurus Antetonitrus Arcusaurus Coelophysis Coelophysis rhodesiensis Dracovenator Eocursor Erythrotherium Fabrosaurus Geranosaurus Gigantoscelus Gryponyx Gyposaurus Heterodontosaurus Ledumahadi Lesothosaurus Litargosuchus Lycorhinus Massospondylus Ngwevu Pegomastax Ptychoceratodus Pulanesaura Sefapanosaurus Sphenosuchus Tritheledon Cretaceous Acanthohoplites Algoasaurus Baculites Kangnasaurus Macroscaphites Nqwebasaurus Paranthodon Ptychoceratodus Paleogene Nummulite Neogene Africanacetus Nummulite Pleistocene Boskop Man Homo naledi Panthera shawi Vulpes skinneri Other Cradle of Humankind Planolites Scylacorhinus West Coast Fossil Park Waterloo Farm lagerstätte Research and administration‎ Council for Geoscience Evolutionary Studies Institute Geological Commission of the Cape of Good Hope Geological Society of South Africa Geologists Hans Merensky Paleontologists Andrew Geddes Bain Lieuwe Dirk Boonstra Charles Kimberlin Brain Robert Broom Alfred Brown Anusuya Chinsamy-Turan H. Basil S. Cooke Alfred W. Crompton Daniel Rossouw Kannemeyer Andre Keyser James Kitching John Talbot Robinson George William Stow Eduard Meine van Zinderen-Bakker Regional articles Geology of Cape Town Other Pothole (geology) Steep structure Swazian Geology portal South Africa portal Category Glossary Taxon identifiers Lystrosaurus Wikidata : Q131680 BioLib: 417226 EoL : 4529455 GBIF : 4817808 IRMNG : 1195743 Open Tree of Life : 4126421 Paleobiology Database : 39049 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lystrosaurus&oldid=1305799998 " Categories : Dicynodontia Triassic synapsids Permian–Triassic extinction event Prehistoric synapsids of Asia Lopingian synapsids of Africa Early Triassic synapsids Prehistoric vertebrates of Antarctica Triassic Antarctica Taxa named by Edward Drinker Cope Fossil taxa described in 1870 Lopingian genus first appearances Changhsingian genera Induan genera Early Triassic genus extinctions Anomodont genera Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2024 Articles with 'species' microformats Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 04:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lystrosaurus 33 languages Add topic

