Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Influence 3 Claimed works Toggle Claimed works subsection 3.1 Medical works 3.2 Philosophical works 3.3 Attributed works 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Isaac Israeli ben Solomon 17 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית Latina Magyar مصرى Polski Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 9th-century Jewish philosopher and physician This article is about the Jewish physician and philosopher from the Abbasid Caliphate. For the Jewish diplomat and merchant from the Carolingian Empire, see Isaac the Jew . For the Israeli-American rabbi and scholar, see Yitzhak Israeli .

Isaac Israeli ben Solomon יצחק בן שלמה הישראלי ‎ De febribus Born c.

832 Abbasid Egypt Died c.

932 Kairouan , Abbasid Caliphate (now Tunisia) Philosophical work Era Medieval philosophy Region Jewish philosophy School Neoplatonism Correspondence theory of truth [ 1 ] (according to Aquinas ) Part of a series on Jewish philosophy Hellenistic Positions: Hasmonean Sadducean Pharisee Boethusian People: Aristobulus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Medieval Influenced by: Brethren of Purity ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ismaili philosophy Jewish Kalam Kabbalah Rabbinic Judaism Spanish and European: Hasdai ibn Shaprut Ibn Gabirol Abraham bar Hiyya Bahya ibn Paquda Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Joseph ibn Tzaddik Abraham ibn Ezra Maimonides Nachmanides Samuel ibn Tibbon Joseph ben Judah Shem-Tov ibn Falaquera Gersonides Moses of Narbonne Isaac ben Sheshet Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Elia del Medigo Judah Minz Isaac Abarbanel Judah Leon Abravanel Yemenite: Natan'el al-Fayyumi Mansur ibn Sulayman al-Ghamari Other: Isaac Israeli Saadia Gaon al-Muqqamaṣ Hibatullah ibn Malka Ibn Kammuna Positions: Maimonidean / Anti-Maimonidean Kabbalist Karaism Talmudic Tosafist Modern Positions: Orthodox Sephardic Chabad Chassidic Conservative Reform Existentialist Reconstructionist Holocaust Renewal Neo-Hasidic Mussar Rambamist People: Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa Baruch Spinoza Salomon Maimon Joseph Solomon Delmedigo Elijah Ba'al Shem of Chelm Eliezer ben Elijah Ashkenazi Tzvi Ashkenazi Jacob Emden Samuel Hirsch Shneur Zalman of Liadi Simcha Bunim of Peshischa Samson Raphael Hirsch Jacob Abendana Isaac Cardoso David Nieto Isaac Orobio de Castro Moses Mendelssohn Samuel David Luzzatto Elijah Benamozegh Moses Hess Eliezer Berkovits Eliyahu Dessler Monsieur Chouchani Emmanuel Levinas Martin Buber Gershom Scholem Abraham Isaac Kook Joseph Soloveitchik Menachem Mendel Schneerson Topics Anger Chosen people Cosmology Eschatology Ethics Faith God Happiness Holiness Holocaust Messiah Microcosm–macrocosm Righteousness v t e Isaac Israeli ben Solomon ( Hebrew : יצחק בן שלמה הישראלי Yitzhak ben Shlomo ha-Yisraeli ; Arabic : أبو يعقوب إسحاق بن سليمان الإسرائيلي Abu Ya'qub Ishaq ibn Suleiman al-Isra'ili ; c.

832 – c.

932 ), also known as Isaac Israeli the Elder and Isaac Judaeus , was a Jewish physician and philosopher. He was one of the foremost Jewish academics living in the Arab world of his time, and is regarded as the father of medieval Jewish Neoplatonism .

[ 2 ] His works, all written in Arabic and subsequently translated into Hebrew , Latin , and Spanish , entered the medical curriculum of European universities in the early 13th century and remained popular throughout the rest of the Middle Ages .

[ 3 ] Biography [ edit ] Little is known of Israeli's background and career. Much that is known comes from the biographical accounts found in The Generations of the Physicians , a work written by the Andalusian Arab author Ibn Juljul in the second half of the 10th century, and in Tabaqāt al-ʼUmam (Categories of Nations) by Sa'id of Toledo , who wrote in the mid-11th century.

[ 4 ] In the 13th century, Ibn Abi Usaybi'a also produced an account, which he based on Ibn Juljul as well as other sources, including the History of the Fatimid Dynasty by Israeli's pupil Ibn al-Jazzar .

[ 5 ] Israeli was born in around 832 into a Jewish family in Egypt . He lived the first half of his life in Cairo where he gained a reputation as a skillful oculist . He corresponded with Saadya ben Joseph al-Fayyumi (882–942), one of the most influential figures in medieval Judaism, prior to his departure from Egypt. In about 904, Israeli was nominated court physician to the last Aghlabid prince, Ziyadat Allah III . Between the years 905–907 he travelled to Kairouan where he studied general medicine under Ishak ibn Amran al-Baghdadi , with whom he is sometimes confounded ("Sefer ha-Yashar," p. 10a). Later he served as a doctor to the founder of the Fatimid Dynasty of North Africa, 'Ubaid Allah al-Mahdi , who reigned from 910–934. The caliph enjoyed the company of his Jewish physician on account of the latter's wit and of the repartees in which he succeeded in confounding the Greek al-Hubaish when pitted against him. In Kairouan his fame became widely extended, the works which he wrote in Arabic being considered by the Muslim physicians as "more valuable than gems." His lectures attracted a large number of pupils, of whom the two most prominent were Abu Ja'far ibn al-Jazzar , a Muslim, and Dunash ibn Tamim . Israeli studied natural history , medicine , mathematics , astronomy , and other scientific topics; he was reputed to be one who knew all the "seven sciences".

Biographers state that he never married or fathered children. He died at Kairouan , Tunisia , in 932. This date is given by most Arabic authorities who give his date of birth as 832. But Abraham ben Hasdai , quoting the biographer Sanah ibn Sa'id al-Kurtubi ("Orient, Lit." iv., col. 230), says that Isaac Israeli died in 942.

Heinrich Grätz ( Geschichte v. 236), while stating that Isaac Israeli lived more than one hundred years, gives the dates 845–940; and Steinschneider ("Hebr. Uebers." pp. 388, 755) places his death in 950.

Influence [ edit ] In 956 his pupil Dunash Ibn Tamim wrote an extensive commentary on Sefer Yetzirah , a mystical work of cosmogony which attributes great importance to the letters of the Hebrew alphabet and their combinations in determining the structure of the universe. In this work he cites Israeli so extensively that a few nineteenth-century scholars misidentified the commentary as Israeli's.

Israeli's medical treatises were studied for several centuries both in the original Arabic and in Latin translation. In the eleventh century, Constantine Africanus, a professor at the prestigious Salerno school of medicine, translated some of Israeli's works into Latin. Many medieval Arabic biographical chronicles of physicians list him and his works.

Israeli's philosophical works exercised a considerable influence on Christian and Jewish thinkers, and a lesser degree of influence among Muslim intellectuals. In the twelfth century, a group of scholars in Toledo transmitted many Arabic works of science and philosophy into Latin. One of the translators, Gerard of Cremona , rendered Israeli's Book of Definitions ( Liber de Definicionibus/Definitionibus ) and Book on the Elements ( Liber Elementorum ) into Latin. Israeli's work was quoted and paraphrased by a number of Christian thinkers including Gundissalinus , Albertus Magnus , Thomas Aquinas , Vincent de Beauvais , Bonaventura , Roger Bacon and Nicholas of Cusa . Isaac Israeli's philosophical influence on Muslim authors is slight at best. The only known quotation of Israeli's philosophy in a Muslim work occurs in Ghayat al-Hakim, a book on magic, produced in eleventh-century Spain, translated into Latin and widely circulated in the West under the title Picatrix. Although there are passages which correspond directly to Israeli's writings, the author does not cite him by name.

His influence also extended to Moses Ibn Ezra (c. 1060–1139) who quotes Isaac Israeli without attribution in his treatise The Book of the Garden , explaining the meaning of Metaphor and Literal Expression . The poet and philosopher Joseph Ibn Tzaddiq of Cordoba (d. 1149) authored a work The Microcosm containing many ideas indebted to Israeli.

As Neoplatonist philosophy waned, in addition to the Galenic medical tradition of which Israeli was a part, the appreciable influence of Isaac Israeli diminished as well.

Claimed works [ edit ] Omnia opera Ysaac . The cover shows an illustration of 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi (Haly Abbas), Isaac and Constantine the Jew .

A number of works in Arabic, some of which were translated into Hebrew, Latin and Spanish were ascribed to Israeli, and several medical works were allegedly composed by him at the request of al-Mahdi. In 1515 Opera Omnia Isaci was published in Lyon , France , and the editor of this work claimed that the works originally written in Arabic and translated into Latin in 1087 by Constantine of Carthage , who assumed their authorship, were a 'plagiarism' and published them under Israeli's name, together in a collection with works of other physicians that were also and erroneously attributed to Israeli. Those works translated by Constantine of Carthage were used as textbooks at the University of Salerno , the earliest university in Western Europe , where Constantine was a professor of medicine,  and remained in use as textbooks throughout Europe until the seventeenth century.

He was the first physician to write about tracheotomy in Arabic. He advised a hook to grasp the skin in the neck as Paulus of Aegina did and afterwards Avicenna and Albucasis .

[ 6 ] Medical works [ edit ] Kitab al-Ḥummayat , The Book on Fevers , in Hebrew Sefer ha-Ḳadaḥot, ספר הקדחות , a complete treatise, in five books, on the kinds of fever , [ 7 ] according to the ancient physicians, especially Hippocrates and Galen .

The Book on Fevers appeared in the Articella .

[ 8 ] Kitab al-Adwiyah al-Mufradah wa'l-Aghdhiyah , a work in four sections on remedies and aliments. The first section, consisting of twenty chapters, was translated into Latin by Constantine under the title Diætæ Universales , and into Hebrew by an anonymous translator under the title Ṭib'e ha-Mezonot . The other three parts of the work are entitled in the Latin translation Diætæ Particulares ; and it seems that a Hebrew translation, entitled Sefer ha-Mis'adim or Sefer ha-Ma'akalim , was made from the Latin.

Kitab al-Baul , or in Hebrew Sefer ha-Shetan , a treatise on urine, of which the author himself made an abridgement.

Kitab al-Istiḳat , in Hebrew Sefer ha-Yesodot and Latin as De Elementis , a medical and philosophical work on the elements, which the author treats according to the ideas of Aristotle , Hippocrates, and Galen . The Hebrew translation was made by Abraham ben Hasdai at the request of the grammarian David Kimhi .

Manhig ha-Rofe'im , or Musar ha-Rofe'im , a treatise, in fifty paragraphs, for physicians, translated into Hebrew (the Arabic original is not extant), and into German by David Kaufmann under the title Propädeutik für Aerzte (Berliner's "Magazin," xi. 97–112).

Kitab fi al-Tiryaḳ , a work on antidotes. Some writers attribute to Isaac Israeli two other works which figure among Constantine's translations, namely, the Liber Pantegni and the Viaticum , of which there are three Hebrew translations. But the former belongs to Mohammed al-Razi and the latter to 'Ali ibn 'Abbas or, according to other authorities, to Israeli's pupil Abu Jaf'ar ibn al-Jazzar.

Philosophical works [ edit ] Kitab al-Ḥudud wal-Rusum , translated into Hebrew by Nissim b. Solomon (fourteenth century) under the title Sefer ha-Gebulim weha-Reshumim , a philosophical work of which a Latin translation is quoted in the beginning of the Opera Omnia . This work and the Kitab al-Istiḳat were severely criticized by Maimonides in a letter to Samuel ibn Tibbon ( Iggerot ha-Rambam , p. 28, Leipsic, 1859), in which he declared that they had no value, inasmuch as Isaac Israeli ben Solomon was nothing more than a physician.

Kitab Bustan al-Ḥikimah , on metaphysics .

Kitab al-Ḥikmah , a treatise on philosophy .

Kitab al-Madkhal fi al-Mantiḳ , on logic . The last three works are mentioned by Ibn Abi Uṣaibi'a, but no Hebrew translations of them are known.

Sefer ha-Ruaḥ weha-Nefesh , a philosophical treatise, in a Hebrew translation, on the difference between the spirit and the soul , published by Steinschneider in Ha-Karmel (1871, pp. 400–405). The editor is of opinion that this little work is a fragment of a larger one.

A philosophical commentary on Genesis, in two books, one of which deals with Genesis i. 20.

Attributed works [ edit ] Eliakim Carmoly ("Ẓiyyon," i. 46) concludes that the Isaac who was so violently attacked by Abraham ibn Ezra in the introduction to his commentary on the Pentateuch , and whom he calls in other places "Isaac the Prattler", and "Ha-Yiẓḥaḳ," was none other than Isaac Israeli. But if Israeli was attacked by Ibn Ezra he was praised by other Biblical commentators, such as Jacob b. Ruben, a contemporary of Maimonides, and by Ḥasdai.

Another work which has been ascribed to Israeli, and which more than any other has given rise to controversy among later scholars, is a commentary on the "Sefer Yeẓirah." Steinschneider (in his "Al-Farabi," p. 248) and Carmoly (in Jost's "Annalen," ii. 321) attribute the authorship to Israeli, because Abraham ibn Ḥasdai (see above), and Jedaiah Bedersi in his apologetical letter to Solomon ben Adret ("Orient, Lit." xi. cols. 166–169) speak of a commentary by Israeli on the "Sefer Yeẓirah," though by some scholars the words "Sefer Yeẓirah" are believed to denote simply the "Book of Genesis." But David Kaufmann ("R. E. J." viii. 126), Sachs ("Orient, Lit." l.c.), and especially Grätz ( Geschichte v. 237, note 2) are inclined to attribute its authorship to Israeli's pupil Dunash ibn Tamim.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Vol. 2, "Correspondence Theory of Truth", auth.: Arthur N. Prior , Macmillan, 1969, pp. 223–224.

^ "Isaac ben Solomon Israeli" .

Britannica .

^ Jacquart and Micheau, "La Médecine Arabe et l'Occident Médiéval", Paris: Editions Maisonneuve et Larose, 1990, p. 114 ^ Stern, "Biographical note", pp. xxiii–xxiv ^ Stern, "Biographical note", p. xxv.

^ Missori, Paolo; Brunetto, Giacoma M.; Domenicucci, Maurizio (7 February 2012). "Origin of the Cannula for Tracheotomy During the Middle Ages and Renaissance".

World Journal of Surgery .

36 (4): 928– 934.

doi : 10.1007/s00268-012-1435-1 .

PMID 22311135 .

S2CID 3121262 .

^ Ferre, Lola; Delgado, José Martínez (2015-03-27).

"Arabic into Hebrew, A Case Study: Isaac Israeli's Book on Fevers" .

Medieval Encounters .

21 (1).

Brill Publishers : 50– 80.

doi : 10.1163/15700674-12342183 .

ISSN 1570-0674 .

^ Ferre, Lola; Veit, Raphaela (2009).

"The Textual Traditions of Isaac Israeli's 'Book on Fevers' in Arabic, Latin, Hebrew, and Spanish" .

Aleph .

9 (2).

Indiana University Press : 309– 334.

doi : 10.2979/ALE.2009.9.2.309 .

ISSN 1565-1525 .

JSTOR 40385979 .

S2CID 170205381 .

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Richard Gottheil and Max Seligsohn (1901–1906).

"Israeli, Issac ben Solomon" . In Singer, Isidore ; et al. (eds.).

The Jewish Encyclopedia . New York: Funk & Wagnalls.

Stern, S. M. (2009) [1958]. "Biographical note". In Alexander Altmann (ed.).

Isaac Israeli: A Neoplatonic Philosopher of the Early Tenth Century . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

xxiii– xxix.

ISBN 978-0-226-01613-9 .

Further reading [ edit ] Altmann, Alexander ; Stern, Samuel Miklos (2009) [1958].

Isaac Israeli: A Neoplatonic Philosopher of the Early Tenth Century . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-01613-9 .

Older sources Jewish Encyclopedia bibliography: Ibn Abi Usaibia , Uyun al-Anba , ii. 36, 37, Bulak, 1882; 'Abd al-Laṭif , Relation de l'Egypte (translated by De Sacy), pp. 43, 44, Paris, 1810; Joseph von Hammer-Purgstall , Literaturgesch. der Araber , iv. 376 (attributing to Israeli the authorship of a treatise on the pulse); Wüstenfeld, Geschichte der Arabischen Aerzte , p. 51; Sprenger, Geschichte der Arzneikunde , ii. 270; Leclerc, Histoire de la Médecine Arabe , i. 412; Eliakim Carmoly , in Revue Orientale , i. 350–352; Heinrich Grätz , Geschichte 3d ed., v. 257; Haji Khalfa , ii. 51, v. 41, et passim; Moritz Steinschneider , Cat. Bodl. cols. 1113–1124; idem, Hebr. Bibl. viii. 98. xii. 58; Dukes, in Orient, Lit. x. 657; Gross, in Monatsschrift, xxviii. 326: Jost's Annalen, i. 408.

External links [ edit ] Isaac Israeli , Stanford University.

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland 2 Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Isaac_Israeli_ben_Solomon&oldid=1303437842 " Categories : People from Kairouan Medieval Jewish physicians of Egypt Jews from Ifriqiya Philosophers of Judaism 10th-century physicians 10th-century Jews Medieval Jewish philosophers 10th-century people from Ifriqiya Physicians from the Fatimid Caliphate 10th-century people from the Fatimid Caliphate 9th-century Arabic-language writers 10th-century Arabic-language writers 9th-century physicians 9th-century Jews Oculists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 01:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Isaac Israeli ben Solomon 17 languages Add topic

