Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 1.1 Books 1.2 Translations 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Paul J. Olscamp Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Olscamp Hall at Bowling Green State University was named after Paul J. Olscamp [ 1 ] Paul J. Olscamp (August 29, 1937 – October 14, 2014) was a Canadian-American academic and university administrator, born in Montreal , Quebec . While attending the University of Western Ontario , Olscamp was a member of the Delta Upsilon fraternity.

[ 2 ] He received his Bachelor of Arts and Master of Arts degrees in 1958 and 1960, respectively. He received his doctorate in philosophy from the University of Rochester in 1962, the first such degree awarded there. His continuing love of the subject was evident during his time at Bowling Green State University (BGSU) because he taught a philosophy course almost every semester, despite managing all his duties as president. While studying at the University of Rochester, Olscamp was a student of Colin Murray Turbayne .

[ 3 ] He served as Dean of Faculties at Roosevelt University , Chicago , Illinois , from 1970 to 1972.  He also taught one course each semester, including seminars on the philosophy of George Berkeley.

Olscamp served as president of Western Washington University for seven years, from 1975 to 1982.

[ 4 ] While president of BGSU, he held a position on the board of directors of the American Association of State Colleges and Universities . He was appointed to the National Council on the Humanities by President Ronald Reagan in 1987. In 1989 he was elected as the Mid-American Conference representative to the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Presidents' Commission.  Following his retirement from BGSU in 1995, Dr. Olscamp served as interim president of the University of South Dakota and then went on to hold the same position at Mayville State University in North Dakota . He died at the age of 77 on October 14, 2014, in Coeur d'Alene, Idaho .

[ 5 ] Publications [ edit ] Books [ edit ] External videos You may read Paul J. Olscamp's "The Moral Philosophy of George Berkeley" (1970) Here on archive.org The Moral Philosophy of George Berkeley (1970) [ 6 ] An Introduction to Philosophy (1971) [ 7 ] Moral Leadership: Ethics and the College Presidency (2003) [ 8 ] Translations [ edit ] Descartes' Discourse on Method, Optics, Geometry and Meteorology (1965) [ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ "President Paul J. Olscamp" .

Bowling Green State University . Retrieved 9 October 2019 .

^ "Delta Upsilon at the University of Western Ontario" . Archived from the original on 2010-09-26.

^ In Memorium: Colin Murray Turbayne Paul J. Olscamp  - President Emeritus Bowing Green State University "Berkely Newsletter" on berkelystudies.philosophy.fsu ^ "In memoriam: Paul Olscamp" . 16 October 2014.

^ "President Paul J. Olscamp" . Archived from the original on 2010-06-13.

^ The Moral Philosophy of George Berkeley . Olscamp, Paul J. Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague, 1970 on Google Books ^ An Introduction to Philosophy . Olscamp, Paul J. Ronald Press, New York, 1971 on Worldcat.org ^ Moral Leadership: Ethics and the College Presidency , Olscamp, Paul J., Rowman & Littlefield , New York, 2003 on Google Books ^ Rene Descartes Discourse on Method, Optics, Geometry and Meteorology Rene Descartes,  Paul J. Olscamp translator Bobbs-Merrill, Indianapolis, 1965  on Google Books External links [ edit ] Publications by Paul J. Olscamp on jstor.org Publications by Paul J. Olscamp on Worldcat.org Academic offices Preceded by Hollis A. Moore President of Bowling Green State University 1982-1995 Succeeded by Sidney A. Ribeau Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States France BnF data Netherlands Israel Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_J._Olscamp&oldid=1288790344 " Categories : University of Western Ontario Bowling Green State University faculty 2014 deaths University of Western Ontario alumni Western Washington University faculty Philosophy academics People from Montreal 1937 births University of Rochester alumni Presidents of the University of South Dakota Delta Upsilon members Hidden category: CS1: unfit URL This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 19:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul J. Olscamp Add languages Add topic

