Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions and history 2 Relationship to music sociology 3 Criticism 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Citations 4.2 Sources 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents New musicology 3 languages العربية Français Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from New Musicology ) Subset of musicology since the 1980s This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( November 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) New musicology is a wide body of musicology since the 1980s with a focus upon the cultural study, aesthetics , criticism , and hermeneutics of music. It began in part a reaction against the traditional positivist musicology—focused on primary research —of the early 20th century and postwar era . Many of the procedures of new musicology are considered standard, although the name more often refers to the historical turn rather than to any single set of ideas or principles. Indeed, although it was notably influenced by feminism , gender studies , queer theory , postcolonial studies , and critical theory , new musicology has primarily been characterized by a wide-ranging eclecticism.

Definitions and history [ edit ] New musicology seeks to question the research methods of traditional musicology by displacing positivism , working in partnership with outside disciplines , including the humanities and social sciences , and by questioning accepted musical knowledge. New musicologists seek ways to employ anthropology , sociology , cultural studies , gender studies , feminism , history , and philosophy in the study of music.

In 1980 Joseph Kerman published the article "How We Got into Analysis, and How to Get Out", calling for a change in musicology.

[ 1 ] He asked for "a new breadth and flexibility in academic music criticism [musicology]", [ 2 ] that would extend to musical discourse, critical theory and analysis . In the words of Rose Rosengard Subotnik : "For me...the notion of an intimate relationship between music and society functions not as a distant goal but as a starting point of great immediacy...the goal of which is to articulate something essential about why any particular music is the way it is in particular, that is, to achieve insight into the character of its identity." [ 3 ] Susan McClary suggests that new musicology defines music as "a medium that participates in social formation by influencing the ways we perceive our feelings, our bodies, our desires, our very subjectivities—even if it does so surreptitiously, without most of us knowing how".

[ 4 ] For Lawrence Kramer , music has meanings "definite enough to support critical interpretations comparable in depth, exactness, and density of connection to interpretations of literary texts and cultural practices".

[ 5 ] New musicology combines cultural studies with the analysis and criticism of music, and it accords more weight to the sociology of musicians and institutions and to non-canonical genres of music, including jazz and popular music , than traditional musicology did. (A similar perspective became common for American ethnomusicologists during the 1950s.) This has caused many musicologists to question previously held views of authenticity and to make assessments based on critical methods "concerned with finding some kind of synthesis between [musical] analysis and a consideration of social meaning".

[ 6 ] New musicologists question the processes of canonization.

Gary Tomlinson suggests that meaning be searched out in a "series of interrelated historical narratives that surround the musical subject" [ 7 ] – a "web of culture" [ 8 ] For example, the work of Beethoven has been examined from new perspectives by studying his reception and influence in terms of hegemonic masculinity , the development of the modern concert, and the politics of his era, among other concerns. The traditional contrast between Beethoven and Schubert has been revised in the light of these studies, especially with reference to Schubert's possible homosexuality .

[ 9 ] [ 5 ] [ 10 ] Relationship to music sociology [ edit ] New musicology is distinct from German music sociology in the work of Adorno , Max Weber and Ernst Bloch . Although some new musicologists claim some allegiance to Adorno, their work has little in common with the wider field of Adorno studies, especially in Germany. New musicologists frequently exhibit strong resistance to German intellectual traditions, especially in regard to nineteenth-century German music theorists including Adolf Bernhard Marx and Eduard Hanslick , and also the twentieth-century figures Heinrich Schenker and Carl Dahlhaus .

A fundamental distinction has to do with attitudes towards modernism and popular culture . Influential, oft-cited essays such as McClary (1989) and McClary (2006) are highly dismissive of modernist music. German music sociologists tend to be more favorable towards modernism (though by no means uncritically) and severely critical of popular music as inextricably tied to the aesthetics of distraction as demanded by the culture industry .

[ citation needed ] Heinz-Klaus Metzger describes "a fascistic element" in the music of The Rolling Stones .

[ citation needed ] New musicology, on the other hand, often overlaps with postmodern aesthetics; various new musicologists are highly sympathetic towards musical minimalism .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Criticism [ edit ] Vincent Duckles writes, "As musicology has grown more pluralistic , its practitioners have increasingly adopted methods and theories deemed by observers to mark the academy as irrelevant, out of touch with 'mainstream values', unwelcoming of Western canonic traditions or simply incomprehensible. Paradoxically, such approaches have distanced music scholarship from a broad public at the very moment they have encouraged scholars to scrutinize the popular musics that form the backbone of modern mass musical culture." [ 13 ] Critics of new musicology include Pieter van den Toorn and to a lesser extent Charles Rosen . In response to an early essay of McClary, [ 14 ] Rosen says that "she sets up, like so many of the 'new musicologists', a straw man to knock down, the dogma that music has no meaning, and no political or social significance. (I doubt that anyone, except perhaps the nineteenth-century critic Hanslick , has ever really believed that, although some musicians have been goaded into proclaiming it by the sillier interpretations of music with which we are often assailed.)" [ 15 ] For David Beard and Kenneth Gloag, however, writing at two later moments, [ 16 ] the methods of new musicology have been fully incorporated into mainstream musicological practice.

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Kerman 1980 .

^ Kerman 1994 , p. 30.

^ Subotnik 1991 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Brett, Wood & Thomas 1994 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ a b Kramer 1990 .

^ Beard & Gloag 2016 , 38.

^ Beard & Gloag 2016 , 123.

^ Tomlinson 1984 .

^ McClary in Brett, Wood & Thomas 1994 , p.

[ page needed ] ^ Mathew 2012 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ McClary 2000 .

^ Fink 2005 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Duckles 2020 .

^ McClary 1987 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Rosen 2000 .

^ Beard & Gloag 2016 .

Sources [ edit ] Beard, David; Gloag, Kenneth (2016) [2005].

Musicology: The Key Concepts (2nd ed.). Routledge.

Duckles, Vincent; et al. (2020). "Musicology".

Grove Music Online (8th ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.46710 .

ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0 .

Brett, Philip ; Wood, Elizabeth; Thomas, Gary C., eds. (1994).

Queering the Pitch : The New Gay and Lesbian Musicology .

Fink, Robert (2005).

Repeating Ourselves: American Minimal Music as Cultural Practice . Berkley: University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-24550-1 .

JSTOR 10.1525/j.ctt1pntqm .

Kerman, Joseph (1980). "How We Got into Analysis, and How to Get Out".

Critical Inquiry .

7 (2): 311– 331.

doi : 10.1086/448101 .

JSTOR 1343130 .

Kerman, Joseph (1994).

Write All These Down: Essays on Music . Berkely: University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-08355-4 .

Kramer, Lawrence (1990).

Music as Cultural Practice, 1800-1900 .

Mathew, Nicholas (2012).

Political Beethoven . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1107005891 .

McClary, Susan (1987). "The blasphemy of talking politics during Bach Year". In McClary; Leppert, Richard (eds.).

Music and Society: The politics of composition, performance and reception . Cambridge University Press.

McClary, Susan (1989). "Terminal Prestige: The Case of Avant-Garde Music Composition".

Cultural Critique (12): 57– 81.

doi : 10.2307/1354322 .

JSTOR 1354322 .

McClary, Susan (2000). "Women and Music on the Verge of the New Millennium".

Signs .

25 (4): 1283– 1286.

doi : 10.1086/495561 .

McClary, Susan (2006). "The World According to Taruskin ".

Music & Letters .

87 (3): 408– 415.

doi : 10.1093/ml/gcl001 .

Rosen, Charles (2000). "The New Musicology".

Critical Entertainments: Music Old and New . Harvard University Press. pp.

255– 272.

Subotnik, Rose Rosengard (1991).

Developing Variations: Style and Ideology in Western Music . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. p. 141.

ISBN 0-8166-1873-9 .

Tomlinson, Gary (April 1984). "The Web of Culture: A Context for Musicology".

19th-Century Music .

7 (3): 350– 362.

doi : 10.2307/746387 .

JSTOR 746387 .

Further reading [ edit ] Agawu, Kofi (2003).

Representing African Music: Postcolonial Notes, Queries, Positions . Taylor & Francis.

Carter, Tim (2002). "An American In", review of McClary 's Conventional Wisdom , in Music & Letters , vol. 83, no. 2, pp. 274–279.

Cook, Nicholas and Everist, Mark , ed. (1999).

Rethinking Music .

Feldman, Morton ; Earle Brown ; and Heinz-Klaus Metzger (1972).

"Morton Feldman, Earle Brown and Heinz-Klaus Metzger in Discussion" , cnvill.net (Chris Villars) Fink, Robert. (1998) Elvis Everywhere: Musicology and Popular Music Studies at the Twilight of the Canon .

Heile, Björn (2004). "Darmstadt as Other: British and American Responses to Musical Modernism" in twentieth-century music , vol. 1, issue 2, pp. 161–178.

Hisama, Ellie M.

(2001).

Gendering Musical Modernism: The Music of Ruth Crawford , Marion Bauer , and Miriam Gideon . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-64030-X .

Kerman, Joseph (1985).

Contemplating Music: Challenges to Musicology . UK edition: Musicology .

McClary, Susan (2000).

Conventional Wisdom .

O'Neill, Maggie, ed. (1999).

Adorno, Culture and Feminism . Sage Publications.

Ross, Alex (2003).

'Ghost Sonata: Adorno and German Music' Rycenga, Jennifer (2002). "Queerly Amiss: Sexuality and the Logic of Adorno's Dialectics", in Gibson, Nigel and Rubin, Andrew, eds.

Adorno : A Critical Reader . Blackwell.

Taruskin, Richard (2005). "Speed Bumps", in 19th-Century Music , vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 185–207.

Watson, Ben (1995). "McClary and Postmodernism" in Frank Zappa : The Negative Dialectics of Poodle Play . Quartet Books.

Williams, Alistair (2001).

Constructing Musicology . Ashgate.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to New musicology .

Contemporary Music Theory and the New Musicology: An Introduction "Letters to the editor" by Lawrence Kramer et al., The New York Review of Books , re: " 'Music à La Mode', Lawrence Kramer, reply by Charles Rosen ", vol. 41, no. 15, September 22, 1994 GregSandow.com: Beethoven Howls , The Village Voice , December 17, 1985 GregSandow.com The Secret of the Silver Ticket The Village Voice , April 1, 1986, see deconstruction The comeback of systematic musicology Original version of article for New Grove on "Lesbian and Gay Music", by Philip Brett and Elizabeth Wood v t e Music History of music Prehistoric Ancient Dance Martial Religious Biblical Secular Art music Afghan classical music—Klasik Andalusi classical music Arabic music Azerbaijani Mugham Burmese classical music—Mahāgīta Cambodian ceremonial music—Pinpeat Chinese traditional music Indian classical music Byzantine music Indonesian art music—Gamelan Japanese court music—Gagaku Korean court music Lao classical music Mandé art music Ottoman music Persian classical music Philippine art songs—Kundiman Scottish Ceòl Mór Kandyan dance of Sri Lanka Thai classical music—Piphat Vietnam imperial court music—Nhã nhạc Western classical music Vernacular music Circus music Folk music Blues Country music Electronic music Hip hop music Jazz Pop music Progressive music Psychedelic music Soul music Musical instruments Arched Harp Angular harp History of the harpsichord History of lute-family instruments Nafir Evolution of timpani in the 18th and 19th centuries History of the trumpet History of the violin Musician Ensembles Band (rock and pop) Backup band All-female band Rhythm section Big band Concert band Disc jockey Military band Lead vocalist Backing vocalist Theory Composition Form Genre Notation Improvisation Lyrics Singing Song Technique Education and study Bachelor of Music Master of Music Doctor of Musical Arts PhD Method Music archaeology Music history Music psychology Music school Composition Musicology Biomusicology Cognitive musicology Computational musicology Ecomusicology Ethnomusicology New musicology Organology Sociomusicology Zoomusicology Production Single A-side and B-side Extended play Compilation Live Remix Audio engineer Record label Record producer Sampling Music technology (electric) Music technology (electronic and digital) Sound recording and reproduction Cover Remix Cultural and regional genres African Central East North Southern West Asian Central East Middle Eastern South Southeast European Balkan Nordic Latin American Central American South American North American Caribbean Oceanian Melanesian Micronesian Polynesian By sovereign state Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of the Congo Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Sweden Switzerland Syria São Tomé and Príncipe Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Lists Index Outline Timeline Albums Classical and art music traditions Classical music genres Cultural and regional genres Instruments Jazz and popular music glossary Music genres and styles Songs Terminology related articles Aesthetics of music Album era Fictional music Music and emotion Music and exercise Music and fashion Music industry Music and politics Censorship Environmentalism Warfare Music and sleep Music community Music festival Music technology Music therapy Musical escapism Musical instrument Classification Folk Women in music Music portal Record production portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_musicology&oldid=1304646683 " Category : Musicology Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2023 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2025 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2023 Use shortened footnotes from January 2025 Articles that may contain original research from November 2017 All articles that may contain original research Wikipedia articles with style issues from August 2023 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Wikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove template Wikipedia articles incorporating the Cite Grove template with an id parameter This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 08:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents New musicology 3 languages Add topic

