Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Known activities and operations 3 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 3.1 Operational responsibilities 3.2 Bases 4 Selection and training 5 Future plans Toggle Future plans subsection 5.1 Integrated Combat System 5.2 Midget submarines 6 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 6.1 Firearms 6.2 Support weapons 6.3 Transport 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents MARCOS 8 languages অসমীয়া Français हिन्दी Italiano עברית മലയാളം Simple English தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian Navy special operations force This article is about the Indian Navy special forces. For other uses, see Marcos .

Not to be confused with MARSOC .

MARCOS MARCOS Patch Active February 1987 – present (38 years, 6 months) [ 1 ] Country India Branch Indian Navy Type Special Operations Forces Size 1,200-2,000 (est.) ( Classified ) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Headquarters INS Karna , Vishakapatnam , India Nickname(s) Magarmach (The Crocodiles), [ 4 ] Dadhiwala Fauj (The Bearded Army) [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Motto(s) "The Few, The Fearless" [ 7 ] [ 5 ] Anniversaries 14 February Engagements Operation Cactus Operation Leech Operation Pawan Kargil War Operation Black Tornado Operation Cyclone Counter-insurgency operations in Kashmir Operation Sankalp Insignia MARCOS badge Special Forces shoulder tab Military unit The Marine Commando Force (MCF) , abbreviated to MARCOS , are
the special forces of the Indian Navy .

[ 7 ] [ 1 ] The MARCOS were originally named Indian Marine Special Force, which was later changed to Marine Commando Force to impart "an element of individuality" to it, according to the Indian Navy. The abbreviation 'MARCOS' was coined afterwards.

[ 8 ] On 16 March 2024, IAF C-17 , in cooperation with INS Kolkata , paradropped two Combat Rubberised Raiding Craft, armament load and MARCOS teams were inserted to rescue 17 crew members of MV Ruen held hostage by 35 pirates.

The MARCOS were founded in February 1987. The MARCOS are capable of operating in all types of environments; at sea, in air and on land.

[ 1 ] [ 9 ] The force has gradually acquired more experience and an international reputation for professionalism.

[ 1 ] [ 10 ] The MARCOS regularly undertake specialised maritime operations in Jammu and Kashmir through the Jhelum River and Wular Lake , a 65 square kilometres (16,000 acres) freshwater lake, and conduct counter-insurgency operations in the region.

[ 11 ] [ 9 ] Some MARCOS units are a part of the tri-services Armed Forces Special Operations Division .

[ 12 ] History [ edit ] Statue of a Marine Commando on display at Visakha Museum In 1955, the Indian military established a diving school at Cochin with the assistance of the British Special Boat Service and began teaching combat divers skills such as explosive disposal , clearance, and salvage diving . The combat divers failed to achieve their desired outcomes during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971 as they were not adequately trained for sabotage missions.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The combat divers had also taught basic underwater demolition training to Muktibahinis (Freedom Fighters) from Bangladesh , who were then sent on missions during the war and inflicted heavy damage to Pakistani logistics ship. The Indian Navy assisted the Indian Army in landing operations against the Pakistani military base in Cox's Bazar . After the war ended, army units were often drafted into amphibious exercises. In 1983, the Indian Army formation called 340th Army Independent Brigade was converted into an amphibious assault unit and a series of joint airborne-amphibious exercises were conducted in later years.

[ 14 ] In April 1986, the Indian Navy started planning for the creation of a special forces unit that would be capable of undertaking missions in a maritime environment, conducting raids and reconnaissance, and counter-terrorism operations. Three volunteer officers from the diving unit, which was created in 1955, were selected and underwent training courses with the United States Navy SEALs at Coronado . They later went on training exchanges with the Special Boat Service . In February 1987, the Indian Marine Special Force (IMSF) officially came into existence and the three officers were its first members.

[ 14 ] [ 13 ] The IMSF was renamed as 'Marine Commando Force' in 1991.

[ 15 ] Known activities and operations [ edit ] MARCOS and US Navy SEALs, Urban Combat Training, MALABAR (2021) The MARCOS are capable of undertaking operations in all types of terrain but are specialised in maritime operations. The force has undertaken numerous joint exercises with special forces from around the world. As of 2012 [update] , the MARCOS has about 2,000 personnel, though the exact number remains classified. Operations undertaken by MARCOS usually remain classified; some of the known operations are: [ 3 ] [ 16 ] MARCOS performing a simulated Visit, board, search, and seizure (VBSS) exercise aboard MV Ocean Valor at RIMPAC 2022 MARCOS boarding the Iranian flagged vessel FV Omari held captive by Somali pirates MARCOS rescued a Bulgarian crew member from the hijacked MV Ruen on 16 March 2024.

This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources .

Name Date Notes Operation Pawan 1987 The Indian Marine Special Force, as the MARCOS was then known, helped capture the harbours of Jaffna and Trincomalee , Sri Lanka, as part of the Indian Peace Keeping Force .

[ 15 ] [ 14 ] [ 17 ] On 21 October, MARCOS conducted a successful amphibious raid against a Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) base at Guru Nagar.

[ 18 ] MARCOS swam 12 km (7.5 miles) to their target with their combat load in a tow. They rigged the LTTE harbour with explosives without being detected. After they detonated the explosives and destroyed the harbour, LTTE militants started firing upon them. MARCOS fired back and swam to safety after the gunfight with no casualties.

[ 16 ] [ 5 ] [ 19 ] [ 6 ] A team of 18 MARCOS were involved in this operation. The team was led by Lt. Aravind Singh, an officer trained by the US Navy SEALs . He was awarded the Maha Vir Chakra for this mission.

[ 10 ] Operation Cactus 1988 The MARCOS, as part of the Indian Navy contingent, defended the democratic government of President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom of the Maldives from a coup. The force played a supporting role in India's successful military aid, helping foil the attempted coup by Sri Lankan militants from the PLOTE and ENDLF . A group of 47 mercenaries attempted to escape by sea with 23 hostages on a hijacked vessel, MV Progress Light. The MCF was pressed into service along with INS Godavari , a multi-role frigate carrying Seaking helicopters and Alize aircraft operating from the Navy's base at Kochi .

Godavari trailed the hijacked vessel for two days, firing intermittently on the vessel's superstructure. An Alize anti-submarine aircraft dropped two depth charges near the vessel, causing the militants to appear on the upper decks and surrender. A contingent of MARCOS operating from Ratmalana Airfield on the outskirts of Colombo, with some help from the Sri Lankan Army , boarded the ship and accepted the surrender of the militants and took them into custody.

[ 17 ] Operation Tasha 1991 Operation Tasha, which was instituted after Operation Pawan wound up, was a coastal security operation on the Tamil Nadu coast to thwart operations of the LTTE there.

[ 15 ] [ 20 ] Operation Zabardust 1992 MARCOS personnel intercepted an LTTE vessel smuggling arms and ammunition.

[ 20 ] UNOSOM II 1993 MARCOS were deployed off Mogadishu in support of the Indian contingent in Somalia. The team provided Maritime Special Operations support to the Naval Task Force.

[ 3 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Operation Rakshak ongoing Counter-insurgency (COIN) operations in Jammu and Kashmir : In the Jhelum River and Wular Lake , two to four teams of MARCOS are deployed through the year at Wular Lake. Militants were using this 250 km 2 (97 square miles) lake, [ 20 ] which is surrounded by mountains, to reach Srinagar, saving them from having to travel 100 km (62 miles) through the mountains. In 1995, a team of MARCOS was positioned at the lake and within weeks, militant activity on the lake ceased.

[ 20 ] Some MARCOS personnel are also attached to the Army special forces units conducting counter-terrorism operations in the area.

[ 17 ] MARCOS use tactics similar to those of Israeli undercover special warfare units Mista'arvim , wearing beards and the 'pheren' (Kashmiri suit), making them indistinguishable from the locals.

[ 22 ] During Operation Rakshak, MARCOS have undertaken missions in which they have engaged and killed heavily armed militants. These operations have included close-quarters combat and intense gunfights.

[ 23 ] As of 2017, a team of 30 MARCOS personnel was permanently deployed in Wular Lake. MARCOS has also helped the Indian Army to eliminate militants from islands in the Jhelum River, where militants use plantations as hiding spots.

[ 24 ] Kargil War 1999 MARCOS were involved alongside the Indian Army during the Kargil War.

[ 16 ] [ 20 ] Operation Rahat in Yemen 2015 In March 2015, the Indian Navy undertook this operation to rescue thousands of civilians from war-torn Yemen. Amid intense fighting and airstrikes being conducted by a coalition led by Saudi Arabia , MARCOS was tasked with ensuring the safe passage of civilians. Both Indian and foreign nationals were rescued during the operation.

[ 25 ] Operation Black Tornado 2008 MARCOS stormed the Trident and Taj Hotels at Mumbai during the terrorist attacks on 26 November 2008 during the November 2008 Mumbai attacks .

[ 26 ] Anti-Piracy 2008 In its first-ever action in the Gulf of Aden , MARCOS thwarted an attempt by pirates to capture the Indian merchant vessel MV Jag Arnav on 11 November 2008.

[ 27 ] Exercise 'Balance Iroquois' 03-1/Vajra Prahar 2003 MARCOS participated in joint training exercises called Exercise 'Balance Iroquois' 03-1/Vajra Prahar with US Special Operations Forces in Mizoram .

[ 28 ] Anti-Piracy 2008 On 13 December 2008 MARCOS units operating from the Indian Naval warship INS Mysore (D60) foiled a pirate hijack attempt of Ethiopian vessel MV Gibe off the Somali coast. Twenty-three pirates were arrested.

[ 29 ] Anti-Piracy 2011 On 16 July 2011, INS Godavari and MARCOS foiled a piracy attempt on a Greek ship MV Elinakos in the Gulf of Aden.

[ 30 ] Anti-Piracy 2013 On 12 August 2013, the Indian Navy spotted an Iranian cargo ship Nafis-1 that was off-course in the Arabian Sea. Surveillance of the ship continued until 14 August, when a nine-strong MARCOS unit was deployed to intercept the ship via helicopter and support from the INS Mysore . The commandos detained the hijackers. The Iranian ship had reportedly sailed from Chah Bahar in Iran. Navy Intelligence reports said the ship was being used to smuggle weapons and contraband. A store of automatic assault weapons found on board was confiscated.

[ 31 ] Anti-Piracy 2017 On 16 May, MARCOS responded to a distress call from a Liberian ship near the Gulf of Aden and thwarted a piracy attempt.

[ 32 ] On 6 October, MARCOS rescued an Indian bulk carrier that had been overtaken by pirates in the Gulf of Aden.

[ 33 ] Rescue of Dubai princess Sheikha Latifa 2018 On 4 March 2018, Indian special forces—suspected to be MARCOS—captured Dubai princess Sheikha Latifa off the coast of India and handed her over to authorities from the United Arab Emirates .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] China-India skirmishes 2020 In October 2020, Hindustan Times reported that MARCOS are being deployed in the Eastern Ladakh alongside the Indian Army against the Chinese military.

[ 36 ] According to subsequent reports, MARCOS are present in the vicinity of the Pangong Tso lake where they will soon be conducting missions using boats.

[ 37 ] Anti-Piracy and Red Sea crisis 2024 On 5 January 2024, MARCOS based on the INS Chennai in the Arabian Sea boarded and rescued 21 crew members from the hijacked vessel MV Lila Norfolk.

[ 38 ] On 18 January 2024, MARCOS and Naval Explosive Ordnance Disposal Team secured MV Genco Picardy following the drone attack by Houthi militia .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] During Marlin Luanda missile strike , MARCOS led Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical Defence (NBCD) and firefighting team of 10 personnel battled for six hours to extinguish the fire.

[ 41 ] [ 40 ] On January 24, 2024, MARCOS aboard INS Sumitra freed 17 Iranian hostages from Somalian pirates aboard the captured fishing vessel FV Iman.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] The fishing boat Al Naeemi, flying the Iranian flag, was found and intercepted on 29 January 2024, by MARCOS. 19 Pakistani crew members and the ship were safely freed from Somali pirate control.

[ 44 ] [ 43 ] On January 29, 2024, MARCOS from INS Sharda , along with Seychelles People's Defence Force and Sri Lanka Navy , successfully rescued LORENZO PUTHA 04 from Somalian pirates.

[ 45 ] On 17 March 2024, INS Kolkata and a MARCOS PRAHARs (squad of 8 commandos) jointly operated to rescue 17 crew members and captured 35 pirates from MV Ruen, which was hijacked after a 40-hour long operation under Operation Sankalp . The entire action was supported by INS Subhadra , UAVs and P-8I aircraft. The hijacked ship was acting like a mothership for the pirates. The operation, under the larger Operation Sankalp , was successful.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] Organization [ edit ] Operational responsibilities [ edit ] HAL Dhruv MKIII and Commandos doing Heliborne operations Indian Navy MARCOS during urban combat training at RIMPAC 2022 Indian Marine Commandos conduct live-fire lateral drills during Rim of the Pacific (RIMPAC) 2022.

MARCOS at Defence Expo 2020 As a specialised force, the MARCOS is responsible for conducting operations at the strategic and the tactical level.

[ 1 ] MARCO operations are usually conducted in support of naval forces, although MARCOS are also deployed in other domains.

[ 9 ] [ 8 ] The responsibilities of MARCOS has evolved with time.

[ 5 ] Some of the duties of MARCOS include:- [ 8 ] [ 49 ] [ 19 ] [ 5 ] [ 1 ] Providing support to amphibious operations Special surveillance and amphibious reconnaissance operations Clandestine operations inside hostile territory, including diving operations and special raids Direct action Hostage rescue operations Counter-terrorism operations Asymmetric warfare Foreign internal defence MARCOS can also assist the Indian Air Force in Suppression of Enemy Air Defences (SEAD) missions.

[ 50 ] Bases [ edit ] Commissioning of INS Karna, a dedicated base for MARCOS Diving training of MARCOS off the coast of Kochi MARCOS are capable of para-dropping into the sea with a full combat load.

The MCF currently operates out of the naval bases at Mumbai , Visakhapatnam , Goa , Kochi and Port Blair .

[ 22 ] There are plans to shift the current training facility at the Naval Special Warfare Training and Tactical Centre to a new facility to be set up at the erstwhile Naval Academy in Goa .

[ 51 ] INS Abhimanyu, located in Mumbai, was the base where MARCOS was formed. It is named after Abhimanyu , a character from the epic Mahābhārata . The base is a part of the Western Naval Command . It was originally created in 1974 and was commissioned on 1 May 1980. The Indian Marine Special Force (IMSF) was located there in 1987.

[ 5 ] [ 8 ] On 12 July 2016, the naval base INS Karna was commissioned near Visakhapatnam as the garrison
& permanent base for the unit.

[ 52 ] The smallest unit of MARCOS is known as Prahar and consists of eight commandoes.

[ 47 ] Selection and training [ edit ] All MARCOS personnel are selected from the Indian Navy when they are in their early 20s and have to go through a stringent selection process and training. The selection standards are extremely high. Training is a continuous process. American and British special forces assisted in setting up the initial training program, which now consists of a seven and a half to eight months course for new recruits. The training regimen includes airborne operations, combat diving courses, counter-terrorism, anti-hijacking, anti-piracy operations, direct action, infiltration and exfiltration tactics, special reconnaissance and unconventional warfare . Most of the training is conducted at INS Abhimanyu, which is also the home base of MARCOS.

All MARCOS personnel are freefall qualified ( HALO/HAHO ). A few also qualify to operate the Cosmos CE-2F/X100 two-man submarines.

[ 15 ] MARCOS train with the Special Forces officers of the Indian Army the Para SF at the Indian Special Forces Training School , Nahan and Army's other schools for unconventional warfare. These include the Junior Leaders' Commando Training Camp in Belgaum, Karnataka, the Parvat Ghatak School for high altitude mountain warfare in Tawang, Arunachal Pradesh , desert warfare school in Rajasthan , the High Altitude Warfare School (HAWS) in Sonamarg , Kashmir, and the Counter-insurgency and Jungle Warfare School (CIJWS) in Vairengte , Mizoram.

[ 7 ] These schools routinely host students from other countries. MARCOS are then trained at agencies within the navy.

The pre-training selection process is made up of two parts. Indian Navy personnel who want to join MARCOS must undergo a three-day physical fitness and aptitude test. Within this process, 80% of the applicants are screened out. A further screening process known as 'hell's week' is similar to the United States Navy SEALs ' " Hell Week ".

[ 53 ] This involves a high degree of physical exercise and sleep deprivation. After this process, actual training begins.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Around 80-85% of the volunteers who enroll fail to fully qualify as MARCOS.

[ 5 ] The total duration of training of MARCOS is between seven and eight months.

[ 57 ] Recruits receive warfare training through field operations in counter-insurgency and anti-terrorist operations, and are trained to operate in any kind of environment and in situations like hostage rescue, urban combat and piracy.

[ 15 ] A notably rigorous training program is the "death crawl"—an 800-metre (2,600 ft) struggle through thigh-high mud while loaded with 25 kg (55 lb) of gear and after a 2.5-kilometre (1.6-mile) obstacle course that most soldiers would fail.

[ 5 ] After that, when the trainee is exhausted and sleep-deprived, he must shoot a target 25 metres (82 ft) away, with a partner standing next to it.

[ 5 ] The MARCOS are trained in every kind of weapon and instruments, including knives, crossbows, sniper rifles, handguns, assault rifles, submachine guns and bare hands. Being divers, they can reach hostile shores swimming underwater.

Further training includes: [ 5 ] Open and closed circuit diving Basic commando skills including advanced weapon skills, demolitions, endurance training and martial arts Airborne training Intelligence training Operation of submersible craft Offshore operations Counter-terrorism operations Operations from submarines Skydiving Various special skills such as language training, insertion methods, etc.

Explosive ordnance disposal techniques They are also trained to parachute into open water with full combat load.

[ 22 ] In 2013, the MARCOS introduced a larger duck-drop system that will be fitted on Ilyushin Il-76 aircraft. Each system of two boats can accommodate 32 commandos, their weapons and fuel for the boats.

[ 58 ] Once para-dropped from the aircraft, it allows for the commandos to assemble inflatable motorised boats within ten minutes and quickly reach ships in distress. Such rescue missions can be mounted by the commandos deployed within an hour.

[ 59 ] The MARCOS are also preparing for urban warfare and have begun practicing on 3D virtual models of offshore installations to ensure a swift response during a terrorist attack. The marine commandos undergo regular training sessions in this computer-generated programme to be well-prepared for a strike similar to the 26/11 attack.

[ 60 ] The average MARCOS training drop-out rate is more than 80%. The force has its own training facility as an adjunct to the operational company at INS Abhimanyu, Mumbai, [ 15 ] later as the Naval Special Warfare Tactical Training Centre. For combat diving training, the commandos are sent to the Naval Diving School in Kochi. There are plans to move the Naval Special Warfare Tactical Training Centre to the erstwhile Naval Academy facility in Kerala, where it will focus on jungle warfare and counter-insurgency operations. The new facility will be modelled on the lines of CIJWS of the Indian Army in Mizoram.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Future plans [ edit ] Integrated Combat System [ edit ] To strengthen the capabilities of MARCOS to carry out special operations, the Indian Navy will procure an advanced Integrated Combat System (ICS) that will ensure an effective command, control and information-sharing structure to enhance the MARCOS' capabilities while engaging targets.

[ 61 ] The ICS will provide enhanced capabilities such as tactical awareness and the ability to fight in hostile environments, and can enable Group Commanders to remotely monitor and control operations. It will help integrate an individual sailor's capability of surveillance, ballistic protection, communication and firepower through an integrated network at individual and group level. Initiating the procurement process through a Request for Information (RFI), Navy's Directorate of Special Operations and Diving has sought details from global vendors about the ICS.

[ 61 ] The individual ICS equipment required by the Navy includes lightweight helmets, head-mounted displays, tactical and soft ballistic vests along with communication equipment. The group-level gear requirements include command and control and surveillance systems, and high-speed communication equipment. The devices would have a sight for the sniper, a laser rangefinder and a long-range thermal imager and near-IR laser pointer for a combat group to undertake surveillance, reconnaissance and targeting. The ICS would be compatible with assault rifles and close-quarter combat weapons.

[ 61 ] The Navy has recently started acquiring the Israeli IMI Tavor TAR-21 for the MARCOS.

[ 61 ] Midget submarines [ edit ] See also: Indian Navy Swimmer Delivery Vehicle In 2013, Visakhapatnam -based Hindustan Shipyard won the contract for building four 500-tonne mini-submarines , which were designed by Larsen & Toubro . The mini-submarines, to be delivered in the latter half of the 2010s, will be used exclusively by the Indian Navy's MARCOS.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] As of 2023, the procurement of the midget submarines was still being planned by the Indian Navy.

[ 64 ] Equipment [ edit ] Firearms [ edit ] Pistols Pistol Auto 9mm 1A 9mm semi-automatic pistol Beretta 92 FS [ 65 ] 9mm semi-automatic pistol Glock 9mm semi-automatic pistol IWI Masada 9mm semi-automatic pistol IWI Jericho 941 9mm semi-automatic pistol Sub-machine guns Heckler & Koch MP5 9mm sub-machine gun [ 66 ] Uzi 9mm sub-machine gun MP-9 9mm sub-machine gun Assault rifles AK-103 7.62×39mm assault rifle [ 67 ] IWI Tavor 5.56mm assault rifle series [ 68 ] IWI Tavor X95 5.56mm carbine M4 carbine 5.56mm carbine APS amphibious rifle 5.66×120mm underwater assault rifle Sniper rifles SAKO Tikka T3 TAC 7.62mm bolt-action sniper rifle (177 units) [ 69 ] [ 70 ] IMI Galil 7.62 Sniper/Galatz 7.62mm semi-automatic sniper rifle [ 68 ] OSV-96 anti-materiel rifle [ 71 ] Heckler & Koch PSG1 7.62mm semi-automatic rifle SVDS 7.62x54mmR semi-sutomatic DMR VSK-94 9×39mm suppressed sniper rifle VSS Vintorez 9×39mm suppressed sniper rifle [ 72 ] Light machine guns IWI Negev NG-7 7.62×51 mm light machine gun [ 73 ] [ 74 ] IMI Negev SF 5.56×45mm light machine gun MG 2A1 7.62×51 mm general purpose machine gun Support weapons [ edit ] GP-25 40mm under-barrel grenade launcher Arsenal UBGL 40×46mm under-barrel grenade launcher AGS-17 30×29mm automatic grenade launcher RCL Mk III 84mm recoilless rifle Shipon anti-tank weapon 9K38 Igla MANPADS Transport [ edit ] HAL Dhruv utility helicopter [ 75 ] Westland WS-61 Sea King transport helicopter [ 15 ] Chetak helicopters Cosmos CE-2F X100 two-man swimmer delivery vehicle All-terrain vehicles (ATVs) Indian Navy Swimmer Delivery Vehicle (future) See also [ edit ] Special Forces of India United States Navy SEALs List of military special forces units References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f "Chief of the Naval Staff commissions INS karna – Marine Commandos get a new Base at Visakhapatnam" .

Press Information Bureau, Government of India . 12 July 2016.

Archived from the original on 20 January 2020 . Retrieved 8 September 2019 .

^ "Agencies take shape for special operations, space, cyber war" .

The Times of India . 16 May 2019.

ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 22 October 2024 .

^ a b c "Indian Marine Commandos MARCOS celebrate 25 glorious years" .

Frontier India . 31 May 2012. Archived from the original on 2 June 2012 . Retrieved 6 July 2012 .

^ "Marine Commandos, kings of all special forces" .

in.com . 28 November 2008. Archived from the original on 1 December 2008 . Retrieved 25 July 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "Indian Navy Marine Commandos (MARCOS)" .

Boot Camp & Military Fitness Institute . 10 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 August 2019 .

^ a b "15 Reasons The Indian Navy MARCOS Are The Best in the World" .

India Times . 2 May 2015 . Retrieved 8 September 2019 .

^ a b c Bhattacharjee, Sumit (2 February 2016).

"IFR: MARCOS to showcase their might" .

The Hindu .

ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 22 September 2019 .

^ a b c d "INS Abhimanyu | Indian Navy" .

www.indiannavy.nic.in . Retrieved 8 September 2019 .

^ a b c "INS Abhimanyu" .

Indian Navy . Archived from the original on 24 October 2013 . Retrieved 18 September 2013 .

^ a b Admiral Ravindra Wijegunaratne (11 December 2020).

"Combat experience with Indian Navy Marine Commandos" .

The Island . Retrieved 12 December 2020 .

^ "With added emphasis on Special Forces, the army is set to change the face of war" .

Force . 18 March 2019. Archived from the original on 3 October 2019 . Retrieved 17 September 2019 .

^ "Major General A K Dhingra appointed as the first Special Operations Division Commander" .

The Economic Times . 15 May 2019. Archived from the original on 19 July 2019 . Retrieved 8 September 2019 .

^ a b Ryan, Mike; Mann, Chris; Stilwell, Alexander (2003).

The Encyclopedia of the World's Special Forces: Tactics, History, Strategy, Weapons .

Spellmount .

ISBN 9781862272316 .

Indian combat diving began in 1955, when a diving school, under British SBS instruction, was established at Cochin. However, the divers produced were in effect salvage and clearance specialists, and, when used for sabotage operations in the 1971 Indo-Pakistan War, they were largely unsuccessful. It was not until 1986 that steps were taken to form a proper naval commando element capable of undertaking a range of missions, from beach reconnaissance to maritime counter-terrorism. Volunteers from the diving unit were sent to train with the US Navy SEALs at Coronado, and a series of exchanges followed with the SBS. The result of this training in maritime special forces practice led to the formation of the Indian Marine Special Forces in February 1987.

^ a b c d "Marine Commandos: India's Flexible Elite, Archived" .

Jane's Intelligence Review . 1 May 1996. Archived from the original on 3 November 2012 . Retrieved 15 July 2012 .

^ a b c d e f g "Marine Commando Force" . Specialoperations.com. Archived from the original on 5 July 2012 . Retrieved 15 July 2012 .

^ a b c Hiranandani, G.M. (2009).

Transition to Eminence: The Indian Navy 1976–1990 (PDF) . Delhi: Lancer.

ISBN 978-8170622666 .

^ a b c "Crocodiles of Wullar" . Bharat Rakshak. Archived from the original on 8 October 2013 . Retrieved 15 July 2012 .

^ India. Marine Commando Force Archived 5 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine Special Operations.Com ^ a b "Major Lessons from Operation Pawan for Future Regional Stability Operations" .

Journal of Defence Studies, Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses .

6 : 29– 52. 3 July 2012.

^ a b c d e f Hiranandani, Vice Adm (Retd) GM (24 March 2014).

"Navy's Marine Commandos" .

Indian Defence Review (Book Excerpt: Transition to Guardianship: The Indian Navy 1991–2000) . Retrieved 15 September 2014 .

^ "Marine commandos celebrate silver jubilee" .

First Post . 31 May 2012 . Retrieved 6 July 2012 .

^ a b c "MARCOS – Pride of India" . funonthenet.com. Archived from the original on 29 June 2017 . Retrieved 6 July 2012 .

^ "Gallantry medals to naval personnel on Independence day 2019" .

Press Information Bureau, Government of India . Retrieved 29 February 2020 .

^ "Now, MARCOS helping Army flush out terrorists in Kashmir" .

India Today . 18 July 2017 . Retrieved 22 January 2020 .

^ "Gallantry Awards (Navy)" .

Press Information Bureau, Government of India . Ministry of Defence. 14 August 2015 . Retrieved 29 February 2020 .

^ "MARCOS – Bravehearts who rescued Mumbai's hostages" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 28 November 2008 . Retrieved 28 November 2008 .

^ Pandit, Rajat (11 November 2008).

"Navy foils Indian ship's hijack attempt off Aden" .

The Times of India .

Archived from the original on 22 October 2012 . Retrieved 11 November 2008 .

^ MARCOS joint exercises "Vajra Prahar" Archived 19 April 2006 at the Wayback Machine Hindu Vivek Kendra news article ^ "India plays globo cop off Somali coast as Western navies play safe" .

Bharat Rakshak . Archived from the original on 23 December 2008 . Retrieved 24 December 2008 .

^ "INS Godavari Foils Piracy Attempt" (PDF) (Press release). Indian Navy. 19 July 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 October 2013 . Retrieved 22 November 2014 .

^ "Indian Marine commandos apprehend hijacked vessel MV Nafis-1 290 nm off Mumbai" .

Frontier India . 15 August 2011. Archived from the original on 1 April 2012 . Retrieved 6 July 2012 .

^ "How Indian Navy foiled piracy attempt in Gulf of Aden – Job well done" .

The Economic Times . 18 May 2017 . Retrieved 22 September 2019 .

^ "Indian Navy's Special Commandos Save Ship From Pirates in Gulf of Aden" .

NDTV . 6 October 2017 . Retrieved 22 September 2019 .

^ "The failed escape: Sheikha Latifa's doomed flight from Dubai" .

Reuters . 6 March 2020 . Retrieved 9 March 2020 .

^ "Govt keeps mum after UK judge talks of 'capture' of Dubai princess by Indian commandos" .

ThePrint . 7 March 2020 . Retrieved 9 March 2020 .

^ "Gen Rawat asks tri-services to curb peace-time activities in deference to deployed troops in Ladakh" .

Hindustan Times . 26 October 2020 . Retrieved 26 October 2020 .

^ "India-China faceoff: Indian Navy's MARCOS deployed near Ladakh's Pangong lake" .

Hindustan Times . 28 November 2020 . Retrieved 29 November 2020 .

^ "Indian navy commandos board hijacked ship clear it of hijackers" . Retrieved 7 January 2024 .

^ Singh, Rahul (18 January 2024).

"Indian warship responds to drone attack on merchant vessel in Gulf of Aden" .

Hindustan Times . Retrieved 8 September 2024 .

^ a b Linganna, Girish (4 September 2024).

"Where Is The Anti-Piracy Escort Force?: The Crisis In The Red Sea Exposes Chinese Inaction – Analysis" .

Eurasia Review . Retrieved 8 September 2024 .

^ Deshpande, Smruti (27 January 2024).

"Yet another Houthi missile strike on merchant vessel with Indian crew, Navy responds to SOS call" .

ThePrint . Retrieved 8 September 2024 .

^ Pubby, Manu (30 January 2024).

"Indian Navy rescues hijacked Iranian ship FV Iman from Somali pirates in Arabian Sea" .

The Economic Times .

ISSN 0013-0389 . Retrieved 8 September 2024 .

^ a b "INS Sumitra Carries out 2nd Successful Anti Piracy Ops – Rescuing 19 Crew members and Vessel from Somali Pirates" . Press Information Bureau. Ministry of Defence. 30 January 2024 . Retrieved 8 September 2024 .

^ Singh, Rahul (30 January 2024).

"Indian Navy foils second hijacking bid in Arabian Sea in 24 hours" .

Hindustan Times . Retrieved 8 September 2024 .

^ "INDIAN NAVY RESPONDS TO THE HIJACKING OF SRI LANKAN FISHING VESSEL IN COLLABORATION WITH SEYCHELLES DEFENCE FORCES AND SRI LANKA NAVY" . Press Information Bureau. Ministry of Defence. 30 January 2024 . Retrieved 8 September 2024 .

^ "Ships, Drones, Commandos: How Indian Navy Rescued Hijacked Vessel" .

NDTV.com . Retrieved 17 March 2024 .

^ a b "Indian navy rescues hijacked vessel MV Ruen from 35 pirates; all crew-members safe" .

The Times of India .

ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 17 March 2024 .

^ "Indian navy captures ship from Somali pirates, rescuing 17 crew members" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 17 March 2024 .

^ "Meet the 7 mighty commando forces of India" .

The Economic Times . 10 June 2015 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ Menon, Murli (24 July 2020).

"Augmenting air defence in Ladakh with Navy" .

The Tribune . Retrieved 7 August 2020 .

Naval maritime commandos (MARCOS) or the Army special forces could thus find employability within the IAF's counter-air, counter-terror or suppression of enemy air defence (SEAD) campaigns.

^ "Special Elite Forces Of Indian Defence Forces: Indian Army, Indian Navy And Indian Airforce. That Will Make You Proud" . Retrieved 7 January 2024 .

^ Subrahmanyam, G. S. (12 July 2016).

"Admiral Lanba commissions Marine Commandos unit 'INS Karna' " .

The Hindu . Retrieved 25 July 2016 .

^ "16 Impressive Things Indian Navy Marine Commandos Do in Training That Deserve Our Respect" . Storypick. 7 April 2016 . Retrieved 22 October 2016 .

^ a b "MARCOS – The uber elite forces of the Indian Navy" .

navioline.com . Archived from the original on 27 April 2012 . Retrieved 25 July 2016 .

^ a b "India's best commandos fight terrorists" .

Rediff.com . Retrieved 6 July 2012 .

^ "15 Reasons The Indian Navy MARCOS Are The Best in the World" . India times. 2 May 2015.

^ "नेवी के जांबाज़ मार्कोस" .

ndtv.com . Retrieved 25 July 2016 .

^ "Navy's Marcos get 'duck drops' " .

asianage.com . Retrieved 25 July 2016 .

^ "Indian marine commandos need 60 minutes to target" .

Deccan Chronicle . 6 February 2013. Archived from the original on 6 February 2013 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ "Marcos begin counter-terror training on east coast" . 7 January 2011. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 25 July 2016 .

^ a b c d "Navy to procure integrated combat system for Marine Commandos" .

Jagran Post . 9 November 2011 . Retrieved 6 July 2012 .

^ "Account Suspended" .

proud2bindian.in . Archived from the original on 27 January 2013 . Retrieved 29 August 2016 .

^ "Indian Navy to procure five midget submarines – Latest News & Updates at Daily News & Analysis" .

dnaindia.com . 1 November 2009 . Retrieved 25 July 2016 .

^ Dutta, Amrita Nayak (10 December 2023).

"Navy plans to get undersea chariots, made in India, for special operations" .

The Indian Express . Retrieved 12 September 2024 .

^ "Mizoram Police to Get Latest Weapons" . Sinlung. 14 September 2010 . Retrieved 12 August 2016 .

^ "How AK-203, superior to INSAS, will end forces' hunt for a reliable rifle" .

The Times of India . 4 March 2019 . Retrieved 21 April 2020 .

Special forces like Para commandos, Marine Commandos (popularly known as Marcos), Garud Commando Force (IAF special force) and even National Security Guard (anti-terror force) also rely on German or Israel automatic rifles like Heckler and Koch MP5 sub-machine guns ^ "Indian Air Force to replace INSAS rifles with new AK-103 weapons, details here" .

Hindustan Times . 29 August 2021 . Retrieved 20 May 2024 .

^ a b "Navy's elite commandos Marcos get leaner and meaner look" .

India Today . 24 July 2012 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ Bedi, Rahul.

"Snipers Only Shoot to Kill" .

The Wire . Retrieved 14 October 2020 .

^ Rahul Bedi (29 July 2016).

"Indian Navy special forces to get 177 sniper rifles" .

janes.com .

IHS Markit . Archived from the original on 18 May 2017 . Retrieved 2 December 2019 .

^ "India turns to Russia for small weapons" .

The New Indian Express . 16 February 2010. Archived from the original on 14 February 2020 . Retrieved 14 February 2020 .

^ P, Rajat (19 July 2019).

"Elite special forces of Army, IAF, Navy get major weapons upgrade | India News – Times of India" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 18 July 2019 .

^ Gurung, Shaurya Karanbir (14 July 2018).

"India opens small arms manufacturing unit in MP in a joint venture with Israel" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved 14 April 2020 .

All the guns to be produced in the factory are already in service with the army's Special Forces, Navy's MARCOS and IAF's Garud Commandos ^ Bedi, Rahul (22 March 2020).

"India signs USD117.8 million deal with IWI for LMGs | Jane's 360" .

Jane's Defence Weekly . Retrieved 14 April 2020 .

^ "India Navy to display assault, search and rescue demonstration during DefExpo2020" .

The Economic Times . 5 February 2020 . Retrieved 9 February 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to MARCOS .

v t e Naval special operations forces Current Tactical Divers Group Clearance Diving Branch 641st Naval Special Operations Brigade Special Warfare Diving and Salvage GRUMEC COMANF Canadian Armed Forces Divers 7th Marine Brigade Frogman Corps Commandos Marine Coastal Jaegers Kampfschwimmer Underwater Demolition Command MARCOS Denjaka KOPASKA Taifib Sepah Navy Special Force 1st Marine Brigade Shayetet 13 COMSUBIN Special Boarding Unit Marine Commandos PASKAL Fuerzas Especiales Netherlands Maritime Special Operations Forces Marinejegerkommandoen Special Service Group (Navy) Naval Special Operations Command JW Formoza Special Actions Detachment 101st Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion Amphibious Reconnaissance and Patrol Unit Russian commando frogmen Naval Diving Unit 4 Special Forces Regiment Republic of Korea Navy Special Warfare Flotilla Special Boat Squadron FGNE Kustjägarna Naval Special Warfare Command Reconnaissance Battalion Sualtı Taaruz Sualtı Savunma Special Boat Service Navy SEALs Special warfare combatant-craft crewmen Defunct Navy Beach Commandos Kampfschwimmer Decima Flottiglia MAS UOE Royal Naval Commandos Beach Jumpers Underwater Demolition Team v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐5n66l
Cached time: 20250817044125
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.302 seconds
Real time usage: 1.624 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13502/1000000
Revision size: 55547/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 695389/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12436/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 292790/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.604/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10730113/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1075.933      1 -total
 42.36%  455.781      1 Template:Reflist
 25.35%  272.716     48 Template:Cite_web
 20.53%  220.863      1 Template:Naval_special_operations_forces
 20.35%  218.944      1 Template:Military_navigation
 13.16%  141.623     46 Template:Flag_icon
  8.93%   96.101      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  8.55%   92.039     20 Template:Cite_news
  8.54%   91.909      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  7.48%   80.458     35 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2996918:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044125 and revision id 1301133897. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=MARCOS&oldid=1301133897 " Categories : 1987 establishments in India Military counterterrorist organizations Special forces of India Indian Navy Units of the Indian Peace Keeping Force Military units and formations established in 1987 Naval special forces units and formations Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Indian English from December 2017 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012 All articles containing potentially dated statements Dynamic lists Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 07:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents MARCOS 8 languages Add topic

