Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Towards the Liberal Democratic Party of Moldova 1.2 Towards the Democratic Party of Moldova 1.3 Towards the Liberal Party (2005) 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Moldova 1 language Bahasa Melayu Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e This article gives an overview of liberalism in the Republic of Moldova . In the years from 1918 through 1940 and 1941 through 1944, what is today the Republic of Moldova was part of Romania , so the Romanian political parties were active in Moldova. It is limited to liberal parties with substantial support, principally those with a history of representation in parliament.

History [ edit ] After independence from the former Soviet Union numerous liberal parties were founded.

Towards the Liberal Democratic Party of Moldova [ edit ] 1993: The National Liberal Party ( PNL ) is established.

1995: The Party of Rebirth and Conciliation of Moldova ( PRCM ) is established.

[ 1 ] 1997: The Social Democratic Alliance of Moldova ( ASDM ) is established.

1997: The Popular Democratic Party of Moldova ( PDPM ) is established.

[ 2 ] 2000: The PNL merged with the Social-Political Movement "For Order and Justice" ( POD ) to create the Social Liberal Union Force of Moldova ( USLFM ).

2001: The Independents' Alliance of Moldova ( AIRM ) is established.

2002: The USLFM merged with the PRCM and the Christian Democratic National Peasants' Party of Moldova ( PNŢCDM ) to create the Liberal Party (2002) ( Partidul Liberal ).

2003: The Liberal Party (2002) merged with the ASDM, the AIRM and the PDPM to create the Party Alliance Our Moldova ( PAMN ).

2006: The National Liberal Party is re-founded.

2011: The PAMN is absorbed by the Liberal Democratic Party of Moldova .

Towards the Democratic Party of Moldova [ edit ] 1993: The Party of Democratic Forces ( PFD ) is established.

2001: The Social Liberal Party ( PSL ) is founded, incorporating the Social-Liberal Initiative Group, the Christian Democratic League of Women ( LCDF ) and the National Youth League of Moldova ( LNTM ).

2002: The PFD merged into the party.

2008: The PSL is absorbed by the Democratic Party of Moldova .

Towards the Liberal Party (2005) [ edit ] 1993: The Party of Reform ( PR ) is established.

2005: The PR adopts the name Liberal Party ( PL ).

2013: The Liberal Reformist Party ( PLR ) splits from the PL.

See also [ edit ] History of Moldova Politics of Moldova List of political parties in Moldova Liberalism and radicalism in Romania Timeline of liberal parties in Romania References [ edit ] ^ Dieter Nohlen & Philip Stöver (2010) Elections in Europe: A data handbook , p1335 ISBN 978-3-8329-5609-7 ^ "Partidul Democrat-Popular din Moldova (PDPM) [1997–2003] / partide.md" .

www.e-democracy.md . Retrieved 2023-11-23 .

v t e Liberalism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard This liberalism -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_Moldova&oldid=1235655578 " Categories : Liberalism in Moldova Liberalism by country Liberalism stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles with excerpts All stub articles This page was last edited on 20 July 2024, at 13:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Moldova 1 language Add topic

