Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Administration and scoring 3 Reliability and validity 4 Applications 5 References Toggle the table of contents Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medical diagnostic method Luria–Nebraska neuropsychological battery MeSH D008182 The Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery (LNNB) is a standardized test that identifies neuropsychological deficiencies by measuring functioning on fourteen scales. It evaluates learning, experience, and cognitive skills. The test was created by Charles Golden in 1981 and based on previous work by Alexander Luria that emphasizes a qualitative instead of quantitative approach. The original, adult version is for use with ages fifteen and over, while the Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery for Children (LNNB-C) can be used with ages eight to twelve; both tests take two to three hours to administer. The LNNB has 269 items divided among fourteen scales, which are motor, rhythm, tactile, visual, receptive speech, expressive speech, writing, reading, arithmetic, memory, intellectual processes, pathognomonic, left hemisphere, and right hemisphere. The test is graded on scales that are correlated to regions of the brain to help identify which region may be damaged. The Luria–Nebraska has been found to be reliable and valid; it is comparable in this sense to other neuropsychological tests in its ability to differentiate between brain damage and mental illness. The test is used to diagnose and determine the nature of cognitive impairment, including the location of the brain damage, to understand the patient's brain structure and abilities, to pinpoint causes of behavior, and to help plan treatment.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] The purpose of early neuropsychological tests was simply to determine whether or not a person had a brain injury or brain damage . Although they can still perform this function, modern brain imaging has made it less necessary. Instead, these tests now serve to describe the injury, including its location and the degree of impairment. The ability to perform these functions began with Alexander Luria's original qualitative procedures.

[ 1 ] The work of this Russian neuropsychologist would become the basis for the theory behind the Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery.

[ 2 ] Compared to traditional tests, these procedures were better at determining patients' strengths and weaknesses; however, their standardization was prevented by their lack of fixed content and the fact they had no definite method of scoring or accuracy determination.

[ 1 ] Luria's original method, released in 1966, was revised by Anne-Lise Christensen in 1975 to describe the procedure more in-depth.

[ 3 ] This revision made possible a version that combined the qualitative and quantitative aspects of the procedures. In 1977 Charles Golden presented the Luria-South Dakota, a new version of the battery created at the University of South Dakota that combined Luria and Christensen's works. To develop this version and ensure it covered everything from both Luria and Christensen, Golden first created an exam that took approximately 18 hours to administer and contained nearly 2,000 procedures. From this base items were selectively removed if they were found to lack reliability or validity , be repetitive, be too long, or fail to accurately discriminate a brain injury. Existing interest in Luria's work made this battery instantly popular, and as it was circulated, demand and research only grew. Western Psychological Services created the current revision, the Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery. It was published in 1980 in the Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology and the International Journal of Neuroscience .

[ 1 ] The Luria–Nebraska has been the subject of some debate that has split the neuropsychology field. It faced criticism for its combination of quantitative and qualitative methods, the wide variety of its fourteen scales, and the possibility that it did not include enough different neuropsychological skills or did not distinguish brain dysfunction adequately. Large empirical studies have suggested these criticisms are largely unfounded and based on misinformation or lack of understanding of how the test is interpreted. However, these concerns resulted in a decrease in use of the battery, and some negative views of it still persist despite evidence of its reliability and validity.

[ 2 ] Administration and scoring [ edit ] For the adult version of this standardized test, used with ages 15 and above, there are 269 items that are scored from 0 to 2. On this continuum a score of 0 represents a normal non-damaged brain and a higher score near 2 depicts brain damage. None of these items measures exactly the same thing, although each of them may have alternative ways of measuring the same behavior. These 269 items are divided among fourteen scales, which are motor, rhythm, tactile, visual, receptive speech, expressive speech, writing, reading, arithmetic, memory, intellectual processes, pathognomonic, left hemisphere, and right hemisphere. The time it takes to administer the task is about 2 to 3 hours.

[ 4 ] The reason for the long length of time is the several items that need to be tested, and this is also why the test cannot be administered to very young children. By testing the limits of patients' performance, it is then able to make correlations between a normal and damaged brain. There is some discussion on the standardized interruption of the test.

[ 2 ] The children's version of the test is for 8–12 years old. This test has 149 different items that also measure on a continuum from 0 to 2. It also takes roughly 2 to 3 hours to administer and the same constructs are being measured.

[ citation needed ] Reliability and validity [ edit ] Studies have shown that the LNNB is stable over time. A study has shown that the lowest test re-test reliability of the LNNB is a .77 and this is within the limitations of clinical tests.

[ 5 ] Also, studies have combined the Luria–Nebraska Battery with existing tests in psychology, speech, and education to look at the reliability of the battery. This version of the test had 33 scales and by comparing non-brain-injured control groups to brain-injured patients it was found that the test is very effective at discriminating between normal and brain-injured subjects.

[ 6 ] Studies have shown that the LNNB has yielded an 86% correct hit rate for identifying patients correctly.

[ 7 ] When looking at the left and right hemisphere scales, the test is based on the assumption that the left hemisphere is verbally dominant and composed of the motor and tactile scales that represent right-hand sensory/motor performance while the right hemisphere consists of items representing left-hand sensory/ motor performance. When looking at lateralization reports of the test, it yields an average hit rate of 78% on comparison of left and right scales with the highest hit rate being 92%.

[ 8 ] Also, when looking at localization of chronic hospitalized patients with injuries in the frontal, sensorimotor, temporal, and parietal-occipital areas, the test was 88% effective in localizing the brain damage, but the limit to this report was a small sample size of 60 patients.

[ 9 ] Applications [ edit ] Applications of the LNNB are generally seen in clinical settings such as hospitals, counseling, and research. Research has shown its shorter testing time, cost to administer, and effectiveness allow for cost-efficient and reliable results.

[ 10 ] The LNNB has been used to determine brain functions after trauma to the brain occurs and to pin-point what mental disorder is present. Through its development and revision, the battery has also been shown to aid in presenting other underlying ailments that could not be detected by other sources. In some cases the LNNB has been seen to show sensitivity to more subtle abnormalities in brain functioning,  which researchers did not expect.

[ 11 ] Due to its ability to target the damage of the brain, if any, as well as the mental disorder, the LNNB is useful in finding treatment options, assessing research, and aiding in choosing research participants.

[ 12 ] Disorders that the LNNB has been seen to detect include schizophrenia, borderline personality, post-traumatic stress disorder, brain trauma, epilepsy tumor, metabolic problems, and degenerative disorders.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Golden, C. J. (2004). The Adult Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery. In G. Goldstein, S. R. Beers, & M. Hersen (Eds.), Comprehensive handbook of psychological assessment, Vol. 1: Intellectual and neuropsychological assessment (pp. 133-146). Hoboken, NJ, US: John Wiley & Sons Inc.

^ a b c Purisch, A. D. (2001). Misconceptions about the Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery. Neurorehabilitation, 16(4), 275-280.

^ Christensen, Anne-Lise (1975), Luria's neuropsychological investigation. Text (1. ed., 1. print ed.), New York: S P Books Division of Spectrum Publications, ISBN 978-0-470-15610-0 ^ Golden, C. J., Ariel, R. N., Wilkening, G. N., Moses, J. J., McKay, S. E., & MacInnes, W. D. (1982). Analytic techniques in the interpretation of the Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 50(1), 40-48. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.50.1.

^ Golden, C. J., Berg, R. A., & Graber, B. (1982). Test–retest reliability of the Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery in stable, chronically impaired patients. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 50(3), 452-454. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.50.3.452 ^ Teichner, G., Golden, C.J., Crum, T., & Bradley, J. (1998). Establishing the reliability and validity of the Luria Nebraska neuropsychological battery-III. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 13(1), 99-100.

^ Golden, G. J.,  Moses, J. A., Ftshbume, F. J., Engum, E., Lewis, G. P., Wisniewski, A. M., Conley,  F. K., Berg, R. A., and Graber, B. 1961. Cross-validation of the Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery for the presence, lateralization and localization of brain damage. Journal o f Consulting and Clinical Psychology 49, 491-507.

^ Golden, C. J. 1961. Diagnosis and Rehabilitation in Clinical Neuropsychology. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas.

^ Lewis, G. P., Golden, C. J., Moses, J. A., Osmon, D. G, Purisch, A D. and Hammeke, T. A. 1979. Localization of cerebral dysfunction with a standardized version of Luna's neuropsychological battery. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 47, 1003-1019.

^ Guilmette, T. J., & Faust, D. (1991). Characteristics of neuropsychologists who prefer the Halstead-Reitan or the Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery. Professional Psychology: Research And Practice, 22(1), 80-83. doi:10.1037/0735-7028.22.1.80 ^ Mittenberg, W., Kasprisin, A., & Farage, C. (1985). Localization and diagnosis in aphasia with the Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 53(3), 386-392. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.53.3.386 ^ Schaughency, E. A., Lahey, B. B., Hynd, G. W., Stone, P. A., Piacentini, J. C., & Frick, P. J. (1989). Neuropsychological test performance and the attention deficit disorders: Clinical utility of the Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery — Children's Revision. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57(1), 112-116. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.57.1.112 v t e Neuropsychological tests Battery Cognistat Halstead-Reitan Neuropsychological Battery Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery Montreal Cognitive Assessment Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status Arousal/Attention Continuous performance task D2 Test of Attention Four boxes test Galveston Orientation and Amnesia Test Morningness–eveningness questionnaire Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test Posner cueing task Test of everyday attention Test of Variables of Attention Sensation/Perception Bender-Gestalt Test Benton Visual Retention Test Dot cancellation test Judgment of Line Orientation Navon figure Rey–Osterrieth complex figure Memory 1-2-AX working memory task California Verbal Learning Test Corsi block-tapping test Digit symbol substitution test Doors and People MCI Screen Wechsler Memory Scale Language Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination Boston Naming Test Comprehensive aphasia test Controlled Oral Word Association Test Thurstone Word Fluency Test Motor Compensatory tracking task Purdue Pegboard Test Problem-solving Delis–Kaplan Executive Function System Hayling and Brixton tests Tower of London test Trail Making Test Wisconsin Card Sorting Test Sleep Epworth Sleepiness Scale Specific impairments British Columbia Postconcussion Symptom Inventory Clinical Dementia Rating Digit Cancellation Test Disability Rating Scale Florida Cognitive Activities Scale Glasgow Coma Scale Glasgow Outcome Scale Pediatric Attention Disorders Diagnostic Screener Rivermead post-concussion symptoms questionnaire Intelligence National Adult Reading Test Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence Wechsler Test of Adult Reading Raven's Progressive Matrices Bed-side Abbreviated mental test score Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination General Practitioner Assessment of Cognition Mini–mental state examination Social Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale Malingering Test of Memory Malingering v t e Psychological and psychiatric evaluation and testing Intelligence tests Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scales Woodcock–Johnson Tests of Cognitive Abilities Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children Cognitive Assessment System Differential Ability Scales Ammons Quick Test Raven's Progressive Matrices Binet–Simon Intelligence Test Personality tests Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 16PF Questionnaire Revised NEO Personality Inventory Projective tests Thematic apperception test Ink blot test ( Rorschach test , Holtzman inkblot test ) Szondi test Animal Metaphor Test Sentence completion tests Neuropsychological test Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure Delis–Kaplan Executive Function System (D-KEFS) Other tests Mental status examination Wechsler Memory Scale Benton Visual Retention Test Vineland Social Maturity Scale Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Luria–Nebraska_Neuropsychological_Battery&oldid=1295980342 " Category : Neuropsychological tests Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 02:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery Add languages Add topic

