Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Geography 3 Play 4 Variations of play Toggle Variations of play subsection 4.1 4-a-side 5 Classification 6 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 6.1 Swimwear 6.2 Mask 6.3 Snorkel 6.4 Fins 6.5 Stick 6.6 Puck 6.7 Caps 6.8 Glove 6.9 Goal 7 Referees 8 Spectators 9 Injuries 10 International competition Toggle International competition subsection 10.1 World Championships 10.2 European Championships 10.3 South East Asian Games 10.4 Celtic Cup 11 Governing bodies 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Underwater hockey 29 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Underwater sport of pushing a puck into the opposing goal Underwater hockey Two players competing for the puck at the British Student Nationals in Bangor , 2009.

Highest governing body CMAS Nicknames UWH, Octopush First played 18 November 1954 ; 70 years ago ( 1954-11-18 ) [ 1 ] Southsea , Portsmouth , Hampshire , England Characteristics Contact Limited Team members up to 10 (6 in play) Mixed-sex Yes Type Aquatic Equipment Diving mask snorkel swimfins water polo cap stick or pusher protective glove exterior mouth guard underwater puck Venue Swimming pool Presence Olympic No Paralympic No World Games Yes Underwater hockey ( UWH ),  also known as Octopush in the United Kingdom , is a globally played limited-contact sport in which two teams compete to manoeuvre a puck across the bottom of a swimming pool into the opposing team's goal by propelling it with a hockey stick (or pusher) .

A key challenge of the game is that players are not able to use breathing devices such as scuba gear whilst playing, they must hold their breath. The game  originated in Portsmouth , England in 1954 when Alan Blake, a founder of the newly formed Southsea Sub-Aqua Club, invented the game he called Octopush as a means of keeping the club's members interested and active over the cold winter months when open-water diving lost its appeal.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Underwater hockey is now played worldwide, with the Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques , abbreviated CMAS, as the world governing body.

[ 4 ] The first Underwater Hockey World Championship was held in Canada in 1980.

History [ edit ] A 2014 underwater hockey tournament in Coetsenburg , South Africa Originally called "Octopush" (and still known locally by that name in the United Kingdom), the original rules called for teams of eight players (hence "octo-"), a bat reminiscent of a tiny shuffleboard stick called a "pusher" (hence the "-push"), an uncoated lead puck called a "squid", and a goal known at first as a "cuttle" but soon thereafter a "gulley". Apart from 'pusher' and to a lesser extent 'Octopush' much of this original terminology is now consigned to history.

Underwater hockey was started in the United Kingdom by Alan Blake in 1954. Blake was a founder-member of the newly formed Southsea Sub-Aqua Club ( British Sub-Aqua Club No.9), he and other divers including John Ventham, Jack Willis, and Frank Lilleker first played this game in the Guildhall Baths in Portsmouth , United Kingdom.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The first rules were tested in a 1954 two-on-two game and Alan Blake made the following announcement in the November 1954 issue of the British Sub-Aqua Club 's then-official magazine Neptune : "Our indoor training programme is getting under way, including wet activities other than in baths, and our new underwater game "Octopush". Of which more later when we have worked out the details".

[ 7 ] The first Octopush competition was a three-way tournament between teams from Southsea, Bournemouth , and Brighton underwater hockey clubs in early 1955. Southsea won then, and they are still highly ranked at national level today winning 20 out of 52 national championships.

[ 8 ] The sport spread to Durban , South Africa in the mid/late 1950s, thanks to the spearfishermen of the Durban Undersea Club (DUC), [ 9 ] when dirty summer seas prevented the young bloods from getting their weekly exercise and excitement. The first games were played in the pool of club member Max Doveton. However it soon became so popular that weekly contests were held in a municipal pool. The UK's Octopush used a small paddle to push the puck whilst the South Africans used a mini hockey stick. Whilst the "long stick" version of underwater hockey did spread outside of South Africa, the UK's 'short stick' version ultimately prevailed and is how UWH is universally played now.

[ citation needed ] In the Americas , the game first came to Canada in 1962 via Norm Leibeck, an unconventional Australian scuba diving instructor and dive shop owner, who introduced the sport to a Vancouver dive club. Ten years later, the Underwater Hockey Association of British Columbia (UHABC) was formed and received support from the BC government.

[ citation needed ] Underwater hockey has been played in Australia since 1966, again because of Norm Leibeck, the same Australian who returned from Canada with his Canadian bride Marlene, and it now attracts players from a wide range of backgrounds there.

[ 10 ] The first Australian Underwater Hockey Championships were held in Margaret River, Western Australia in 1975. A Women's division was added to the championships in 1981 and a Junior division commenced in 1990.

[ 11 ] In Asia , the game first came to the Philippines in the late 1970s through growing awareness of Octopush within the scuba diving community.

[ citation needed ] Footage from British Pathe of an early game at Aldershot Lido in 1967, [ 12 ] and from British Sub-Aqua Club archives, [ 13 ] is evidence of the evolution of the sport in terms of equipment and playing style. It can be seen that the game was much slower and the puck was not flicked at all, in contrast to the modern sport [ 14 ] where the substantial changes in equipment, team size, and other factors have helped make the game the international sport it is today, with 68 teams from 19 [ 15 ] countries competing at the 18th World Championship in 2013 at Eger in Hungary making this the pinnacle in terms of international competition to date.

Geography [ edit ] Country First Played Article Body National Team Great Britain [ a ] 1954 Underwater hockey in Great Britain British Octopush Association ( SUWH ) ( UHW ) Great Britain South Africa 1957 None South African Underwater Sports Federation Canada 1962 New Zealand 1964 Underwater Hockey New Zealand Australia 1966 Underwater hockey in Australia Underwater Hockey Australia Australia France 1967 None Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins United States 1970 The Netherlands 1971 The Philippines 1979 Philippine Underwater Hockey Confederation Japan 1979 [ b ] Hong Kong 1980 [ c ] Switzerland 1982 [ d ] Argentina 1983 Colombia 1990 Serbia 1996 Germany 1997 Israel 1997 Italy 1997 Spain 1997 Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Turkey 1999 Underwater hockey in Turkey Turkish Underwater Sports Federation Turkey Moldova 2000 None Singapore 2004 China 2009 Indonesia 2010 Saudi Arabia 2016 Brazil 2016 Malaysia 2016 United Arab Emirates 2007 South Korea 2019 Belgium ????

Nelos (Flanders), [ 16 ] Lifras (Wallonia) [ 17 ] Red Piranhas (Men) & Red Mermaids (Women) [ 18 ] Portugal ????

Ireland ????

Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Play [ edit ] Typical dimensions of an underwater hockey pool Two teams of up to ten players compete, with six players in each team in play at any one time.

[ 19 ] The remaining four players are continually substituted into play from a substitution area, which may be either on deck or in the water outside the playing area.

Before the start of play the puck is placed in the centre of the pool, and the players wait in the water whilst touching the wall above the goal they are defending. At the start-of-play signal (usually a buzzer or a gong) members of both teams are free to swim anywhere in the play area and try to score by manoeuvring the puck into the opponents' goal using only their stick. Players hold their breath [ 20 ] [ 21 ] as they dive to the bottom of the pool (a form of dynamic apnoea , as in free-diving ). Play continues until either a goal is scored, when players return to their wall to start a new point, or a break in play is signalled by a referee (most commonly due to a foul or calling time for the half).

Games consist of two halves of fifteen minutes with a three-minute half-time , with teams switching ends at the end of the first half. Timing of games can vary by competition due to a number of reasons, most commonly organisational logistics; however, tier tournaments tend not to see any variation.

Black team defends the goal (back right of the image) from the White attack Unlike most other sports, formations are read from front to back instead of back to front: 3-3 formation Left Forward Centre Right Forward Left Back Centre Back Right Back The typical playing formation is 3-3 consisting of three forwards and three backs. Other common formations include 2-3-1, 1-3-2, and 2-2-2. Formations are generally very fluid and are constantly evolving with different national teams being proponents of particular tweaks in formations. One example of this is New Zealand with their "box formation" (2-1-2-1).

1-3-2 formation Centre Forward Left Forward Centre Right Forward Left Back Right Back 2-3-1 formation Left Forward Right Forward Left Back Centre Right Back Centre Back During the game, each team gets unlimited rolling substitution with the (maximum of) four players in their sub box. Substitution strategy is imperative in underwater hockey as  errors might result in a foul i.e. too many players in the play area at one time (an offence punishable by the sin bin ) or  a tactical blunder (e.g. an incorrect balance of forwards and backs due to an incorrect substitution).

There are a number of penalties described in the official underwater hockey rules, ranging from the use of the stick against something (or someone) other than the puck, playing or stopping the puck with something other than the stick, and "blocking" (interposing one's self between a teammate who possesses the puck and an opponent; one is allowed to play the puck but not merely block opponents with one's body). If the penalty is minor, referees award an advantage puck: the team that committed the foul is pushed back 3 metres (9.8 ft) from the puck, while the other team gets free possession. For major penalties such as a dangerous pass (e.g. striking an opponent's head) or intentional or repeated fouls, the referees may eject players for a specified period of time or for the remainder of the game, or even - in the case of very serious or deliberate fouls - for the remainder of a tournament.  A defender committing a serious foul sufficiently close to his own goal may be penalised by the award of a penalty shot or even a penalty goal awarded to the fouled player's team.

Often players who are most successful in this game are strong swimmers, have a great ability to hold and recover their breath, and are able to produce great speed underwater while demonstrating learned skills in puck control. It is also important that they are able to work well with their team members and take full advantage of their individual skills.

Variations of play [ edit ] 4-a-side [ edit ] 4-a-side underwater hockey is when there is four people per team playing at a given time. The teams usually consist of up to eight players with four subs. 4-a-side competitions are less common, though notable examples are the Hamilton 4-asides, Dunedin 4's (both New Zealand), and the BOA 4s .

Classification [ edit ] There have been debates throughout the sport's history on its classification as either a breath-control sports or an extreme- apnoea sport. Though a 2023 study on submersion times in matches ranging from club friendlies to national championship matches found that the average player's submersion time was 12.1 seconds when in possession of the puck and 9.3 when without the puck, thus falling short of the 45 second breath hold requirement for clarification as an extreme- apnoea sport.

[ 22 ] Equipment [ edit ] Annotated Player 1.

snorkel and mouth guard 2.

hat with ear guards 3.

mask 4.

fins 5.

stick 6.

puck 7.

glove Players wear a diving mask , snorkel and fins , and carry in one (either) hand a short stick or pusher for playing the puck. A full list of equipment is given below: Swimwear [ edit ] There are usually no restrictions on swimwear, however baggy trunks or shorts are not recommended as they reduce speed and increase drag in the water. Typical swimwear is swim briefs or jammers for male players and athletic style racerback two-piece swimsuits with drawstring bottoms or one-piece swimsuits for female players.  Additionally, wetsuits are not allowed according to Rule 3.3.8 of the CMAS International Rules for Underwater Hockey, Eleventh Edition.

Mask [ edit ] Worlds Competition Grade Equipment A diving mask is used for several reasons: Players can equalise their ears (using the Valsalva manoeuvre ) as the nose is covered Unlike swim goggles , a mask sits outside the eye's orbit , reducing the effects of any impact Improved underwater vision A low-volume mask with minimal protrusion from the face reduces the likelihood of the mask being knocked causing it to leak or flood and temporarily obstruct the player's vision. The published rules require masks to have two lenses to reduce the risk and extent of possible injury from puck impact; the danger of a single lens mask is that the aperture may be large enough to allow a puck to pass through it on impact, and hence into the player's eyes. A number of webbing strap designs are available to replace the original head strap with a non-elastic strap that can reduce the possibility of the player being unmasked.

Snorkel [ edit ] A snorkel enables players to watch the progress of the game without having to lift their head from the water to breathe. This allows them to keep their position on the surface, ready to join play once they are able. In order to maximise the efficiency of breathing and reduce drag underwater snorkels are often short with a wide bore and may include a drain valve. The published rules mandate that they must not be rigid or have any sharp edges or points.

The snorkel may accommodate an external mouthguard which may be worn in conjunction with, or instead of, an internal mouthguard.

Fins [ edit ] Technisub Ala underwater hockey fins with fin grips A fin grip positioned to secure a full-foot fin on the foot Fins allow the player to swim faster through the water. A wide variety of fins are used in the sport, but large plastic/rubber composite fins or smaller, stiffer fibreglass or carbon fibre fins are commonplace at competitions. As with any of the equipment, the published rules mandate fins without sharp edges or corners. All sharp edges must be covered up by a protective film or tape to prevent injury. Players are also normally required to use closed-heel fins (without buckles) as a further injury prevention measure.

[ 23 ] Even well-fitting full-foot fins can occasionally be pulled off during play, either because of physical contact with something in the playing area or as a result of the power the wearer is transmitting through them into the water. When this occurs, stopping to refit a lost fin takes time and reduces a team to only five players.

Fin grips , also known as fin retainers or fin keepers, are triple-strap devices enabling a closed-heel fin to be held more securely on a player's foot. They are worn around the arch, the heel and the instep to try and prevent the wearer's foot from slipping out of the foot-pocket of the fin.

Stick [ edit ] Stick design constraints The stick (also referred to as a pusher) is relatively short and is coloured either white or black to indicate the player's team. The stick may only be held in one hand, which is usually determined by the player's handedness , although players may swap hands during play. The shape of the stick may affect playing style and is often a very personal choice. A wide variety of stick designs are allowed within the constraints of the rules of the game, the principal rules being that the stick (including the handle) must fit into a box of 100 mm × 50 mm × 350 mm (3.9 in × 2.0 in × 13.8 in) and that the stick must not be capable of surrounding either the puck or any part of the hand. A rule concerning the minimum radius of edges tries to address the risk of injury should body contact occur. Construction materials may be of wood or plastics and current rules now supersede those that previously required sticks to be homogeneous , although they almost always are anyway. Many underwater hockey players manufacture their own sticks to their preferred shape and style, although there are increasingly more mass-produced designs to suit the majority (such as Bentfish, Britbat, CanAm, Dorsal, Stingray etc.).

[ 23 ] Puck [ edit ] Underwater Hockey puck pushed by stick The puck is approximately the size of an ice hockey puck but is made of lead or lead-based material - (adult size weighs 1.3–1.5 kg (2.9–3.3 lb), junior 800–850 g (1.76–1.87 lb)) - and is encapsulated or surrounded by a plastic covering which is usually performance-matched to different pool bottoms (e.g. tiles, concrete etc.) to facilitate good grip on the stick face while preventing excessive friction on the pool bottom. The puck's weight brings it to rest on the pool bottom, though it can be lofted during passes.

[ 23 ] Caps [ edit ] Safety gear includes ear protection, usually in the form of a water polo cap [ 24 ] and as a secondary indicator of the player's team (coloured black/dark or white/pale as appropriate). Water referees wear red caps.

Glove [ edit ] A glove should be worn on the playing hand to protect against pool-bottom abrasion and, in some designs, for protection against puck impact on knuckles and other vulnerable areas, however no rigid protection is permitted. Players may choose to wear a protective glove on both hands, either as additional protection from the pool bottom or, for ambidextrous players, to switch the stick between hands mid-play.  A glove used in competition must be a contrasting colour to the wearer's stick, but not orange which is reserved for referees' gloves - this is so water referees might be able to better distinguish between a pusher making a legal contact with the puck and a hand making an illegal contact with the puck. It is also usually preferred that a players glove is a different colour to the puck. As the puck is usually pink or orange it means players should avoid gloves coloured black, white, red, orange, yellow and pink. A referee at any match or tournament can ask a player to use different kit before they play, hence players should be careful when choosing the colour of their gloves. Blue is often used due to the limitations on glove colours, but others have also been used.

[ 23 ] Goal [ edit ] The goals (or 'gulleys') are 3 metres (9.8 ft) wide and are sited on the pool bottom at opposite ends of the playing area in the centre of the end lines. They consist of a shallow slope leading up to a trough into which the puck may be pushed or flicked.

Goals are commonly constructed from aluminium , galvanised steel or stainless steel . This makes them negatively buoyant and durable in the chlorinated water of swimming pools.

Referees [ edit ] Referee (back right) in yellow Officiating the game are two (or three) water referees (i.e. in the pool with full snorkelling gear, and wearing a distinctive red cap, orange gloves and golden yellow shirt) to observe and referee play at the pool bottom, and one or more poolside deck referees to track time (both playing times and penalty times for penalised players), maintain the score, and call fouls (such as excessive number of players in play, failure to start a point from the end of the playing area, or another foul capable of being committed at or noticed from the surface). The deck (chief) referee responds to hand signals given by the water referees to start and stop play, including after an interruption such as a foul or time-out, or indeed to stop play if they themself see a rule infringement.

The Official Rules, which are available for download in PDF form without charge, define (with illustrations) a valid goal, the fouls and signals, the dimensions of the playing area, sticks, and goals, team composition and substitution procedure, and additional rules and arrangements for multi-team tournaments and championships.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Spectators [ edit ] Octopush contest seen from the surface, at Crystal Palace Pool, London At a club or training level, underwater hockey is not seen as particularly spectator-friendly. Very few pools have underwater viewing ports, and since the action is all below the surface, an observer would usually have to enter the water to see the skill and complexities of the game. Spectators may either put on mask, fins and snorkel and enter the pool for a view of the playing area, or possibly take advantage of the work of underwater videographers who have recorded major tournaments.

[ 27 ] Such tournaments often have live footage on large screens for the spectators. The 2006 ( Sheffield , England) and 2010 ( Durban , South Africa) Underwater Hockey World Championships were screened poolside and simultaneously webcast live to spectators around the world, while the 2008 European Championship in Istanbul , Turkey had excellent video coverage but no live streaming.

[ 28 ] Filming the games is challenging even for the experienced videographer, as the players' movements are fast and there are few places on the surface or beneath it which are free from their seemingly frenzied movements.

[ original research?

] Games are often played width-wise across a 50-metre pool to provide spaces in between simultaneous games for player substitutes, penalty boxes, coaches and camera crews. However, research and development of filming techniques is ongoing.

[ clarification needed ] Organisers of major tournaments are usually the point of contact for acquiring footage of underwater hockey matches. Although no official worldwide repository exists for recorded games, there are websites and instructional DVDs.

[ citation needed ] A variety of related footage can be found on video sharing sites.

[ 14 ] [ failed verification ] Injuries [ edit ] Although it is a limited-contact sport, there is a significant risk of injury. Many injuries are typical sports injuries such as sprains, torn muscles and light scratches. More major injuries might include deeper cuts, broken fingers, impacts to the head causing concussion or dental trauma, and there is also a minor risk of life-threatening injury from being struck on the head with the possibility of a major concussion or blackout underwater. There is an obvious risk of drowning if knocked unconscious underwater, but the players are under observation by the referees during competition, and players in any case tend to be very aware of what their teammates are doing or not doing; in practice an unconscious or seriously injured player is likely to be noticed and assisted or rescued very promptly.

Personal protective equipment is available to reduce injury risks, and the published rules make items such as gloves, mouth guards and ear guards mandatory. There is a risk of pulmonary capillary stress failure ( Hemoptysis ) in some players.

[ 29 ] International competition [ edit ] World Championships [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main article: Underwater Hockey World Championships The Underwater Hockey World Championships , organised by the Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS), [ 30 ] [ 31 ] have been held every two years since 1980. The tournament began with a men's competition only, with a women's tournament added in 1982. 1992 saw the addition of a men's master's tournament with the women's master's tournament coming in 1998. 2002 saw a youth league trialled at the tournament with a full U-19 division for both men and women coming in 2004.

In 2007, CMAS attempted to start the CMAS World Games, an Olympic-style event for all the sports CMAS governed. This ultimately failed, however, as it required all the sports to move away from their pre-established calendars, resulting in the 2007 World Games being the only one ever played. This move also caused a schism, with the World Aquachallenge Association attempting to create their own World Championships, but again just one version ultimately took place (in 2008), with CMAS asserting control again with the 2009 Championships but in the case of elite competitions only. In 2013, master's tournaments were again added and the youth tournaments became a separate event, involving U-23 divisions in addition to the U-19 division. Elite and master's competitions reverted to even years in 2016 with the youth competition remaining on odd years. This switch following the resumption of international hockey after the COVID-19 pandemic began with the 2023 elite and master's World Championships.

At Elite level, New Zealand are the current Men's World Champions, and Australia are the current Women's World Champions.

[ when?

] At Masters level, United States are the current Men's World Champions, and France are the current Women's World Champions.

[ when?

] At U-24 level, New Zealand are the current Men's World Champions, and New Zealand are the current Women's World Champions.

[ when?

] At U-19 level, New Zealand are the current Men's World Champions, and Australia are the current Women's World Champions.

[ when?

] European Championships [ edit ] Main article: Underwater Hockey European Championships The Underwater Hockey European Championships , also ran by CMAS, are every two years on alternate years to the world championships. Unlike the world championships there are no masters or youth division.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic , no editions have been played since 2019 where Turkey won the men's competition and France won the women's competition.

South East Asian Games [ edit ] Main article: Underwater hockey at the 2019 Southeast Asian Games Underwater Hockey was included as a sport for the first and only time in South East Asia Games in 2019 .

[ 32 ] Celtic Cup [ edit ] The Celtic Cup was instituted in 2022 for the national teams of Scotland , Wales , and Ireland .

Governing bodies [ edit ] Political turmoil within the CMAS Underwater Hockey Commission (Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques), [ 33 ] the underwater hockey world governing body, came to a head soon after the 2006 Underwater Hockey World Championships , resulting in the CMAS Underwater Hockey Commission members resigning en masse and soon thereafter forming an alternative 'world governing body' solely for the sport of UWH, known as the World Aquachallenge Association (WAA), and which was officially ratified at the 1st WAA World Championship in April–May 2008.

[ 34 ] Consequently, from this point the UWH community had two world governing bodies, CMAS and WAA.

CMAS has continued to organise international world competitions on a bi-annual basis.  CMAS tried unsuccessfully to hold another World Underwater Games event in 2009 after a successful event in 2007.  These were intended to be multi-disciplinary events thereby grouping UWH with other CMAS-represented sports including fin swimming and underwater rugby .  The 1st World Games were held in Bari , Italy in 2007 while the 2nd was scheduled for Tunisia in 2009 but was cancelled and rescheduled as an UWH-only event held in Kranj , Slovenia during August 2009. It was billed as a World Championship but only one non-European country competed ( South Africa ); France won the Open division while Great Britain took the Women's title.  In the years in between World Games CMAS holds Zone Championships (e.g. the 15th European Championship in Eger , Hungary during 2017).

WAA attempted to continue with the original World Championship series on a biennial basis during years ending with an even number. The 1st WAA Championships (renumbered; it would have been the CMAS 15th) was held in 2008 in Durban , South Africa . The 2nd competition was scheduled for Medellin , Colombia in August 2010 but it proceeded as an International Event without WAA sanctioning and became the precursor for the development of the independent America's Cup International Tournament.

[ 35 ] The European (CMAS) and the rest of the World (WAA) events following the split were held over exactly the same period in 2008 a continent apart. This dichotomy of championships coupled with the real possibility of future sanctions by CMAS on their member countries' organisations and athletes led to many countries being forced to choose which competition to send their team to. As a result, neither competition in 2008 was as well attended as had been the case in previous years, nor as competitive. Subsequently, no WAA sanctioned events have taken place since 2008.  However, in Europe at least, well-organised international tournaments without CMAS or WAA influence (such as at Breda in the Netherlands, Barcelona in Spain, or České Budějovice in the Czech Republic) continue to be regularly attended by a range of club teams from across the continent.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] In 2009, a new CMAS Underwater Hockey Commission was appointed for a 4-year period to guide the sport on a technical level and gradually it has reconsolidated the sport and produced a development plan to cope with future growth. The commission continues to work to develop relationships with CMAS Board of Directors and obtain support for its development plan.

As part of this plan the Commission developed an Age Group-based International Championship incorporating Under 19, Under 23 and Masters (Men >35, Women >32) Grades.  This Championship was held in July 2011 in Dordrecht , Netherlands . The event was to be sanctioned by CMAS but the Dutch organising team withdrew their hosting bid and proceeded to host the event successfully with 36 teams participating. As the event was non-compliant with the CMAS Competition procedures, Scotland was able to compete as a separate country rather than within a combined entity as Great Britain.

[ 39 ] As the surviving governing body, as of August 2013 CMAS has the following countries and territories affiliated with its Underwater Hockey Commission: Australia , Belgium , Canada , Colombia , Croatia , Cyprus , Czech Republic , France , Germany , Great Britain , Hong Kong , Hungary , Indonesia , Ireland , Italy , Japan , Malaysia , Netherlands , New Zealand , Portugal , Serbia , Slovenia , South Africa , Spain , Turkey , United States of America .

[ 40 ] See also [ edit ] Underwater Hockey World Championships – International event for the sport of Underwater Hockey Notes [ edit ] ^ Underwater hockey is organised on an all-Ireland basis, therefore information about  the sport in Northern Ireland is grouped with the Republic of Ireland.

^ Suspended from 1989 to 2004 ^ Activities started in 1980 but almost immediately stopped, restarted 2015 ^ No activities between 1986 and 2007 References [ edit ] ^ "The Evolution of Octopush at Southsea Sub-Aqua Club" .

^ "The History of Underwater Hockey" .

Archived from the original on 2017-04-05 . Retrieved 2014-08-05 .

^ "Alan Blake - How Octopush was created" .

Archived from the original on 2019-06-04 . Retrieved 2019-06-04 .

^ "CMAS Underwater Hockey Commission" .

Archived from the original on 2014-07-24 . Retrieved 2014-08-05 .

^ Blake, A.

"Octopush: An original name invented on the same night as Octopush an original sport was invented" .

Archived from the original on 2020-08-14 . Retrieved 2020-10-16 .

^ "First Underwater Swimming Gala" .

Portsmouth Evening News . 1955-03-15. p. 8 . Retrieved 2021-10-26 .

^ "Round the Branches: It's Back to the Baths", Neptune Vol. 1 No. 3, November 1954. p. 10.

^ "The British Octopush Association - History" .

Gbuwh.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 2018-04-17 . Retrieved 2018-04-16 .

^ CMAS.

"Underwater Hockey in South Africa" .

Archived from the original on 2014-08-21 . Retrieved 2013-08-29 .

^ Quilford, R. (17 December 2007).

"Breath-taking fun for anyone" .

The Age .

Archived from the original on 2013-12-05 . Retrieved 2012-10-03 .

^ "The History of Underwater Hockey in Australia" .

BBC News . 11 September 2011.

Archived from the original on 2012-09-30 . Retrieved 2012-10-03 .

^ "Underwater Hockey video newsreel film" . British Pathe. December 1967 . Retrieved 2011-06-28 .

^ "BSAC Archives Footage" .

facebook . BSAC.

Archived from the original on 2020-09-19 . Retrieved 2020-06-25 .

^ a b "Various UWH clips" . YouTube . Retrieved 2011-06-28 .

^ "2006 CMAS Underwater Hockey World Championships" . August 2006.

Archived from the original on 2011-08-16 . Retrieved 2011-06-28 .

^ "Nederlandstalige Liga voor Onderwateronderzoek en -Sport" .

Nederlandstalige Liga voor Onderwateronderzoek en -Sport (in Dutch) . Retrieved 2024-04-15 .

^ "Lifras asbl - Hockey Subaquatique" .

www.lifras.be . Retrieved 2024-04-15 .

^ "BelgiumUwh.be" .

uwhbelgium.be . Retrieved 2024-04-15 .

^ CMAS (September 2005).

"International Rules for Underwater Hockey: Rules of Play" .

Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques .

Archived from the original on 2014-08-21 . Retrieved 2012-08-30 .

^ Davis FM; Graves MP; Guy HJ; Prisk GK; Tanner TE (November 1987).

"Carbon dioxide response and breath-hold times in underwater hockey players" .

Undersea Biomed Res .

14 (6): 527– 34.

PMID 3120387 . Archived from the original on 2009-03-04 . Retrieved 2008-07-22 .

^ Lemaître F, Polin D, Joulia F, Boutry A, Le Pessot D, Chollet D, Tourny-Chollet C (December 2007).

"Physiological responses to repeated apneas in underwater hockey players and controls" .

Undersea Hyperb Med .

34 (6): 407– 14.

ISSN 1066-2936 .

PMID 18251437 . Archived from the original on 2012-09-28 . Retrieved 2011-06-28 .

^ L. Meisenheimer Jr., J. Meisenheimer, and J. A. Meisenheimer: Cureus . 2023 Jul; 15(7): e41816.

^ a b c d "INTERNATIONAL RULES FOR UNDER WATER HOCKEY" (PDF) .

www.gbuwh.co.uk . 2011.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-05-14 . Retrieved 2019-07-11 .

^ Landsberg PG (December 1976).

"South African Underwater Diving Accidents, 1969-1976" (PDF) .

SA Medical Journal .

50 (55): 2156.

PMID 1013870 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-09-30 . Retrieved 2013-03-29 .

^ Hockey Rules Volume 1 and 2, [1] Archived 2018-04-02 at the Wayback Machine & [2] Archived 2018-04-16 at the Wayback Machine , retrieved 16/04/2018.

^ Rules Volumes 1 and 2, "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-28 . Retrieved 2012-08-29 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) & "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-28 . Retrieved 2012-08-29 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) , retrieved 30/08/2012.

^ "New sport is not out of its depth" .

BBC News . 17 December 2005.

Archived from the original on 2021-10-26 . Retrieved 2011-06-28 .

^ "2006 CMAS Underwater Hockey WC" . 247.tv. 2006.

Archived from the original on 2011-09-29 . Retrieved 2011-06-28 .

^ "Lung physiology at play: Hemoptysis due to underwater hockey" .

Respiratory Medicine Case Reports .

Archived from the original on 2021-10-26 . Retrieved 2016-10-25 .

^ "🇲🇾 Results – 6th CMAS World Age Group Underwater Hockey Championship – Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 2024" .

SPORTALSUB.NET . 2024-07-27 . Retrieved 2025-01-19 .

^ "2024 CMAS 6th World Championship Underwater Hockey Age group" .

Confédération Mondiale Des Activités Subaquatiques - CMAS . Retrieved 2025-01-19 .

^ Kng, Zheng Guan (28 November 2019).

"Chance to give Octopush a big push" .

New Straits Times .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2019 . Retrieved 28 November 2019 .

^ "About Underwater Hockey" . CMAS.

Archived from the original on 3 April 2013 . Retrieved 8 June 2013 .

^ "2008 Meeting Minutes (on WAA News Page)" (PDF) . WAA.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 November 2013 . Retrieved 8 June 2013 .

^ "Open World Cup UWH 2010 USA results" . USA Underwater Hockey.

Archived from the original on 26 July 2014 . Retrieved 8 June 2013 .

^ "Teams for the Argonauta 2013 UWH Tournament" .

Argonauta Underwaterhockey Tournament . 16 August 2013.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2013 . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

^ "XIV International UWH Tournament Barcelona 2013 Results" .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2013 . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

^ "6th International UWH Bud Pig Cup" .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2013 . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

^ "Netherlands Open Youth & Masters Underwater Hockey Tournament" . www.underwaterhockey-archive.com/.

Archived from the original on 1 June 2013 . Retrieved 8 June 2013 .

^ "CMAS, Sport, UWH Commission, Member Federations" .

Archived from the original on 27 September 2013 . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Underwater hockey .

Official CMAS UWH Commission page Alan Blake - How Octopush was created Official WAA web page Championship Records Underwater Hockey Tourist Video of an underwater hockey game USA vs. South Africa at Archive.org v t e Ice hockey History Leagues Teams Equipment Cooperalls Goaltending equipment Blocker Mask Trapper Glove Puck Skate Stick Tape T-Blades Uniform Helmet Jersey Pants Socks Skate guard Positions Main Goaltender Defenceman Centre Forward Power Two-way Winger Other Captain Coach Enforcer Grinder Pest Rover Rules Arena Awarded goal Face-off Goal Halifax Officials Overtime Penalty shot Rink Short-handed Shot Slot Tuck rule Penalties and infractions Boarding Charging Clipping Cross-checking Delay of game High-sticking Holding the stick Hooking Icing Offside Roughing Tripping Skills Butterfly style Deke One timer Pass Saucer pass Snap shot Wrist shot Levels of play College Junior Minor Minor league Olympic Professional Senior Variations Broomball Fantasy Pond Power‎ Rink bandy Shinny Sledge Special Table Underwater Strategy Analytics Backcheck Breakaway Checking Cycling Dump and chase Extra attacker Forecheck Left wing lock Line Loafing Neutral zone trap Screen Torpedo system Terminology Gameplay 200-foot game Assist Diving Empty net goal Five-hole Full strength Gordie Howe hat trick Michigan goal Point Save Scoring chance Scramble style Shot on goal Skatemill Slapshot Stop Culture Ceremonial first puck Hockeytown Playoff beard Puck bunny Three stars Towel Power Statistics Analytics Arenas by capacity Outdoor games Games with highest attendance Fenwick Point Shot quality In popular culture Films Video games Related topics Broadcasting Fighting Nicknames Violence Misogyny Transgender people Category Commons v t e Team sports Sport Governing bodies National sport Sportspeople Ball sports Invasion games Basket sports Basketball beach deaf 3x3 water wheelchair Cestoball Dueball Korfball Netball Fast5 indoor wheelchair Rezball Ringball SlamBall Football codes Australian rules football AFLX Lightning football Metro footy Nine-a-side Rec footy Gaelic football Ladies' Circle rules football Association football Association football amputee beach soccer freestyle futsal Indoor soccer minifootball paralympic powerchair roller soccer socca street Gridiron codes American football eight-man flag nine-man six-man sprint touch wheelchair Arena football Canadian football Hybrid codes Austus Eton wall game International rules football Samoa rules Speedball Swedish football Universal football Volata Medieval/historical football codes Ba' Game Caid Calcio fiorentino Camping Cnapan Cornish hurling Cuju Harpastum Kemari La soule Lelo burti Marn grook Pasuckuakohowog Royal Shrovetide Uppies and downies Rugby codes Rugby league masters mod nines sevens tag wheelchair Rugby union American flag beach mini sevens snow tag Tambo touch tens X Touch Wheelchair Other related codes Cuju Kī-o-rahi Jegichagi Yubi lakpi Stick-and-ball sports Bando Cammag Gateball Hurling Camogie Super11s Shinty–Hurling Indigenous North American stickball Iomain Knattleikr Knotty Lacrosse box/indoor field intercrosse women's Ritinis Shinty Shinty–Hurling Hockey sports Ball hockey Bandy rink Broomball Field hockey indoor Floor hockey Floorball Ice hockey pond power ice sledge Ringette Rinkball Roller hockey in-line quad Rossall hockey Shinny Street hockey Underwater hockey Unicycle hockey Polo sports Auto polo Cowboy polo Cycle polo Elephant polo Hobby horse polo Horseball Pato Polo Arena polo Chovgan Snow polo Polocrosse Segway polo Yak polo Other goal sports Angleball Cycle ball Flickerball Goalball Handball beach Czech field wheelchair Home Ball Motoball Pushball Quidditch Roll ball Underwater football Underwater rugby Water polo canoe inner tube Whirlyball Bat-and-ball games Baseball variants Baseball Baseball5 Brännboll Corkball Kickball Matball Over-the-line Pesäpallo Rounders Schlagball Softball Fastpitch 16-inch Stickball Vitilla British baseball English baseball Welsh baseball Wiffle ball Town ball Wireball Cricket variants Cricket One Day Test Twenty20 Indoor cricket Vigoro Other games Danish longball Lapta Oină Stoolball Net and wall games Ball badminton Biribol Bossaball Fistball Fives Eton Rugby Footbag net Football tennis Footvolley Jianzi Jokgu Newcomb ball Peteca Sepak takraw teqball Throwball Volleyball beach indoor sitting standing pioneerball snow Other ball games Dodgeball Gain-ground Balle à la main Ballon au poing Jeu de paume Longue paume Kaatsen Kin-Ball Lagori Mesoamerican ballgame Pelota mixteca Prisonball Tamburello Tchoukball Ulama Valencian pilota Llargues Yukigassen Tag sports Kabaddi Kho kho World Chase Tag Water sports Synchronized swimming Yacht racing Other non-ball sports Airsoft Bo-taoshi Buzkashi Combat (juggling) Curling wheelchair Guts Hornussen Jereed Makura-Nage Paintball Roller derby Synchronized skating Tug of war Ultimate v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐n7n99
Cached time: 20250817044059
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.537 seconds
Real time usage: 1.924 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10479/1000000
Revision size: 49716/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 739925/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15063/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 169144/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.758/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22687328/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1276.996      1 -total
 30.82%  393.557      2 Template:Reflist
 21.08%  269.197     30 Template:Cite_web
 19.53%  249.420     45 Template:Navbox
  9.05%  115.524      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  8.86%  113.143      1 Template:Annotated_link
  8.73%  111.491      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  7.34%   93.695      1 Template:Ice_hockey_navbox
  6.92%   88.401     10 Template:Fix
  6.17%   78.773     31 Template:Flag Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:488005:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044059 and revision id 1303770949. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Underwater_hockey&oldid=1303770949 " Categories : Underwater hockey Underwater sports Freediving Sports originating in the United Kingdom Sports originating in England Team sports Mixed-sex team sports Variations of hockey Stick sports Hidden categories: CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from December 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from December 2024 Articles needing additional references from June 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from December 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 00:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Underwater hockey 29 languages Add topic

