Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Significance 3 Description Toggle Description subsection 3.1 Part II: Aboriginal Land Trusts 3.2 Part III: Land Councils 3.3 Part IV: Mining 3.4 Part VII: Miscellaneous 3.4.1 Sacred sites 4 1997 Reeves Report 5 2006 Amendments 6 Local decision making 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Act of the Parliament of Australia Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 Parliament of Australia Long title An Act providing for the granting of Traditional Aboriginal Land in the Northern Territory for the benefit of Aboriginals, and for other purposes Citation No. 191, 1976 Territorial extent Northern Territory Royal assent 16 December 1976 Amended by Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Amendment Bill 2006;
Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Amendment (Economic Empowerment) Act 2021 Status: In force (amended) The Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 ( ALRA ) is Australian federal government legislation that provides the basis upon which Aboriginal Australian people in the Northern Territory can claim rights to land based on traditional occupation.  It was the first law by any Australian government that legally recognised the Aboriginal system of land ownership , and legislated the concept of inalienable freehold title, as such was a fundamental piece of social reform. Its long title is An Act providing for the granting of Traditional Aboriginal Land in the Northern Territory for the benefit of Aboriginals, and for other purposes .

The Act has been amended 27 times between 1978 and 2021. Significant amendments were the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Amendment Act 2006 , and Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Amendment (Economic Empowerment) Act 2021.

History [ edit ] The results of the 1967 Australian referendum meant that the Federal Government could make special laws relating to Aboriginal people which could override any state-based legislation; this was seen as a great victory in the struggle for Aboriginal land rights in Australia .

[ 1 ] The Labor government under Gough Whitlam , after making land rights one of his election campaign priorities, first introduced a land rights Bill to Parliament.  Whitlam chose to establish a precedent in the Northern Territory (NT), which was controlled by the Commonwealth (federal) government, rather than attempt federal legislation first off. He appointed Justice Woodward in February 1973 to head an inquiry into how best to recognise Aboriginal land rights in the NT, called the Aboriginal Land Rights Commission (also known as the "Woodward Royal Commission"). Woodward produced his final report in April 1974, expressing the opinion that one of the main aims of land rights was "The doing of simple justice to a people who have been deprived of their land without their consent and without compensation". He said that Aboriginal land should be granted as inalienable freehold title , meaning "it could not be acquired, sold, mortgaged or disposed of in any way", and title should be communal.

[ 1 ] The Bill lapsed upon the dismissal of the government in 1975 .

[ 2 ] The Liberal government, led by Malcolm Fraser , reintroduced a similar Bill, and this was signed  by the Governor-General of Australia on 16 December 1976.

[ 3 ] Significance [ edit ] It was the first law by any Australian government that legally recognised the Aboriginal system of land ownership, legislating the concept of inalienable freehold title, and thus the first of all Aboriginal land rights legislation in Australia .

The Land Rights Act is a fundamental piece of social reform.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] It established the legal basis on which Aboriginal people could claim rights to land based on customary or traditional occupation, also known as native title , if evidence could be shown. (The South Australian Pitjantjatjara Lands Act 1956 had granted land to the Pitjantjatjara people , but as a one-off, did not provide a basis for future claims by others.) [ 2 ] Description [ edit ] The main purpose of the Act is "to reinstate ownership of traditional Aboriginal land in the Northern Territory to Aboriginal people" ( Austrade ). It provides for the grant of inalienable freehold title for Aboriginal land, meaning that the land cannot be bought or otherwise acquired, including by any NT law.

[ 5 ] In the original Act, only claims to unalienated Crown land in the NT were permissible, under three district sections, and the Act specified an end date of June 1997 by which claims had to be lodged.

[ 2 ] The Act allows for a claim of Australian native title if claimants can provide evidence of their traditional association with land. About 50% of the Northern Territory land and 85% of its coastline are owned communally by Aboriginal peoples.

[ 5 ] Since 1976, many amendments to the Act have been passed. As of July 2020 [update] , the most recent compilation (No. 41) came into force on 4 April 2019. As of 2021 [update] , the major sections of the Act are: [ 6 ] Part I—Preliminary Part II—Grants of land to Aboriginal Land Trusts Part IIA—Executive Director of Township Leasing Part III—Aboriginal Land Councils Part IV—Mining Part V—Aboriginal Land Commissioners Part VI—Aboriginals Benefit Account Part VIA—Northern Territory Aboriginal Investment Corporation Part VII—Miscellaneous Schedules 1–7 Part II: Aboriginal Land Trusts [ edit ] Aboriginal Land Trusts are established under the Act. Their main functions are: [ 6 ] to hold title to land vested in it in accordance with this Act; and to exercise its powers as owner of land for the benefit of the Aboriginal people concerned.

Title to the land granted under the Act is held by these land trusts; as of 2020 [update] , there are 151 Aboriginal land trusts, each administered by the a land council, dependent on location of the trust.

[ 5 ] Part III: Land Councils [ edit ] The Act specified that at least two Land Councils must be created.

[ 2 ] The Central Land Council , covering the southern part of the NT, and the Northern Land Council , covering the northern part of the NT, were created by the Act. The Tiwi Land Council , covering Bathurst and Melville Islands north of Darwin , and the Anindilyakwa Land Council , covering Groote Eylandt and Bickerton Island in the Gulf of Carpentaria , were later created from parts of the Northern Land Council.

[ 4 ] New Land Councils can be created under the Act: Section 23 of the Act specifies the functions of Land Councils; [ 2 ] [ 6 ] however, the four original land councils continue to exist as of 2020 [update] .

[ 5 ] Part IV: Mining [ edit ] Land development, including exploration and mining activities, on Aboriginal land are undertaken through negotiations with traditional owners groups and facilitated by land councils. Various types of payment for the land, other financial and non-financial benefits may be included in negotiations. The Act prescribes how the land councils and land trusts may grant usage rights and access, but in some circumstances a federal or NT Minister's approval is also required. Income received for the use of the land is distributed by the land councils according to the agreements with the traditional owners and as the Act provides.

Royalties paid to the NT and Federal governments for the use of the land are processed and directed to the Aboriginals Benefit Account (ABA) (Part VI of the Act [ 6 ] ) and the funds are to be used for certain purposes prescribed by the Act which benefit Aboriginal peoples in the NT.

[ 5 ] Part VII: Miscellaneous [ edit ] Sacred sites [ edit ] Section 69 (under "Part VII - Miscellaneous") of the Act defines a special category of land, the sacred site , which is a site of significance according to Aboriginal tradition. It prohibits a person from entering a sacred site, with penalties of a fine or prison sentence.

[ 6 ] (There is also additional protection for sacred sites in the NT under the Northern Territory Aboriginal Sacred Sites Act 1989 .

[ 5 ] ) 1997 Reeves Report [ edit ] A significant review of the Act (referred to as ALRA) was undertaken from October 1997, when the government appointed barrister John Reeves to examine its effectiveness, operation of aspects relating to mining and the Aboriginal Benefits Trust Account, and the role of the Land Councils. The Reeves Report concluded that the ALRA had been very effective in granting traditional Aboriginal land in the NT, with benefits exceeding their costs for the Aboriginal people, but it also made many recommendations for change.

[ 7 ] After examination of the recommendations by various bodies in the following years, the Northern Territory Government and the Land Councils produced a joint response in June 2003, in their Detailed Joint Submission to the Commonwealth - Workability Reforms of the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 (ALRA) . Over some years, the issue of private versus communal ownership of Aboriginal land was considered and debated by many parties, including Warren Mundine , Mick Dodson , Galarrwuy Yunupingu , Noel Pearson and others.

Tom Calma , as Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Justice Commissioner , said in his Native Title Report 2005 that it was "not necessary to put the communal tenure of Indigenous land at risk" by converting to individual freehold titles.

[ 7 ] It was agreed that there were benefits in the new proposals, but various details were debated at length. Following the Government making changes to the ALRA in 2005, Australians for Native Title and Reconciliation expressed concern about Land Council funding and function changes and the establishment of new Land Councils.

[ 7 ] Tom Calma commented at length in July 2006, starting with three main concerns: that the amendments had been made without the full understanding and consent of traditional owners and Indigenous Northern Territorians; that the intention of the amendments was to reduce the capacity for Indigenous people to have decision making influence over their lands; and that it was likely that the amendments would have a range of negative impacts on Indigenous peoples’ rights and interests.

[ 8 ] 2006 Amendments [ edit ] On 17 August 2006, the Howard government amended the Act. The Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Amendment Bill 2006 , in effect from 1 July 2007, [ 9 ] added several clauses to the Act.

The government summary of the Amendments includes "to increase access to Aboriginal land for development, especially exploration and mining; facilitate the leasing of Aboriginal land and the mortgaging of leases; provide for a tenure system for townships on Aboriginal land that will allow individuals to have property rights; devolve decision-making powers to regional Aboriginal communities", and change the provisions governing land councils to increase accountability.

[ 10 ] The most significant amendments enabled Aboriginal groups to more directly manage their land. Two Land Councils (Central and Northern) manage manage mainland NT Aboriginal land. By comparison, New South Wales has 121 Land Councils. These new sections of the Act included Section 19a, which introduced the option of Township Leasing, and Section 28a, which introduced the option of a 'delegation of powers' to a local Aboriginal corporation.

Local decision making [ edit ] The Act specifies methods for Land Councils to support local Aboriginal groups to make decisions regarding their land, including: [ 6 ] Part II (Grants of Land to Aboriginal Land Trusts): Section 19A: Land Trust may grant headlease over township Part III (Aboriginal Land Councils), Section 28A: Delegation of a Land Council’s functions or powers to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander corporation ALRA S.19A (Township Lease) v S.28A (Delegation) comparison ALRA Section S.19A Township Lease S.28A Delegation of Powers Legal Structure Different CATSI or ASIC Corporation, or Office of Township Leasing CATSI Corporation Representation of TOs and Residents Similar Defined in the rules of the receiving Corporation (S.19A and S.28A) and / or S.19A Lease. Both alternatives support the same representation options.

Governance Similar Defined in the rules of the receiving Corporation (S.19A and S.28A) and / or S.19A Lease. Both alternatives support similar governance options.

Length of Agreement Different Minimum 40 years; maximum 99 years May be enduring or limited by agreement Revocation Different Virtually non-revokeable, even for poor performance.

Subject to revocation by the Land Council Consultation for Establishment Different For both S.19A and S.28A, the Land Council consults with TOs and residents, and must be satisfied that the decision is reasonable, and broadly understood and supported.

For a S.19A Township Lease, a failure by the Land Council to consult properly with TOs and residents, or a failure to consult at all, does not invalidate the Lease.

Sub-Agreements Different S.19 Sub-Leases Maximum term is dependent on the remaining S.19A term.

S.19 Leases Term is not dependent on S.28A term.

Consultation for Sub-Agreements Different Consultation is different from traditional Land Council practice.

Any requirements for consultation for sub-leases would be part of the S.19A head lease. It is possible that no consultation with TOs and residents is necessary.

Approval by TOs and residents at the time the S.19A Lease is issued, effectively bind later TOs and residents.

Consultation is consistent with traditional Land Council practice.

Each sub-agreement (S.19 Lease or Licence) is subject to a clear process of consultation to ensure input/approval by current TOs and residents.

Existing Section 19A Township Leases: [ 11 ] Location Land Council Towns Included Lease Term Issue Date Tiwi Islands Tiwi LC Wurrumiyanga 99 Years 20 Aug 2007 Milikapiti & Wurankuwu 99 Years 22 Nov 2011 Pirlangimpi 99 Years 26 Jun 2017 Groote & Bickerton Islands Anildilyakwa LC Anguragu, Umbakumba, & Milyakburra 40 Years 4 Dec 2008 Mutijulu Central LC Mutijulu (near Uluru) 67 Years 16 Mar 2017 See also [ edit ] Indigenous land rights in Australia Aboriginal land rights legislation in Australia Indigenous land rights List of laws concerning Indigenous Australians References [ edit ] ^ a b "The History of the Land Rights Act" .

Central Land Council, Australia . Retrieved 23 July 2020 .

^ a b c d e "Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 (Cth)" .

Documenting A Democracy . Museum of Australian Democracy . Retrieved 23 July 2020 .

PDF of original version ^ "The History of the Central Land Council" .

Central Land Council, Australia . Archived from the original on 24 September 2020 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 .

^ a b "The Aboriginal Land Rights Act" .

Central Land Council, Australia . Archived from the original on 19 April 2012 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 .

^ a b c d e f g "Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander land" .

Austrade . 26 February 2016 . Retrieved 25 July 2020 .

^ a b c d e f "Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976" .

Federal Register of Legislation . No. 191, 1976: Compilation No. 41. Australian Government. 4 April 2019 . Retrieved 12 December 2019 .

s 3:  Aboriginal means a person who is a member of the Aboriginal race of Australia....12AAA. Additional grant to Tiwi Land Trust...

^ a b c "Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Amendment Bill 2006: Bills Digest no. 158 2005-06" .

Parliament of Australia . Retrieved 23 July 2020 .

^ Calma, Tom (13 July 2006).

"Submission - The Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Amendment Bill 2006 (Cth)" .

Australian Human Rights Commission . Retrieved 23 July 2020 .

^ "Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Amendment Act 2006" .

Federal Register of Legislation . 11 July 2007 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 .

^ "Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Amendment Bill 2006" .

Parliament of Australia . Retrieved 23 July 2020 .

^ captovate (27 July 2017).

"Township Leasing Map" .

Office of Township Leasing . Retrieved 22 August 2024 .

External links [ edit ] "Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 - Series" .

Federal Register of Legislation . Australian Government.

v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aboriginal_Land_Rights_Act_1976&oldid=1303999686 " Categories : Aboriginal land rights in Australia 1976 in Australian law Acts of the Parliament of Australia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Australian English from June 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from April 2020 Articles containing potentially dated statements from July 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2021 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2020 This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 09:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 1 language Add topic

