Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Philosophical work 3 Selected publications Toggle Selected publications subsection 3.1 Books 3.2 Articles 4 See also 5 Notes and references 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Scott Soames 4 languages Deutsch Íslenska 日本語 Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher Scott Soames Born 1945 Education Education Stanford University ( BA ) Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( PhD , 1976) Thesis A Critical Examination of Frege's Theory of Presupposition and Contemporary Alternatives (1976) Doctoral advisor Sylvain Bromberger Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Institutions University of Southern California Main interests Philosophy of language Notable ideas Having a belief (the basic representational phenomenon) as explicit predication (explicitly accepting a certain predication) [ 1 ] Criticism of semantic two-dimensionalism Scott Soames ( / s oʊ m z / ; born 1945) is an American philosopher. He is a professor of philosophy at the University of Southern California (since 2004), and before that at Princeton University . He specializes in the philosophy of language and the history of analytic philosophy . He is well known for defending and expanding on the program in the philosophy of language started by Saul Kripke as well as being a major critic of two-dimensionalist theories of meaning.

Life and career [ edit ] Scott Soames was born in 1945. He did his undergraduate work in philosophy at Stanford University and his graduate work at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in linguistics and philosophy. He received his Ph.D. in philosophy from MIT in 1976.

[ 2 ] Soames taught briefly at Yale University (from 1976 to 1980) and, then, from 1980 to 2004 at Princeton University .

[ 2 ] His departure from Princeton in 2004 was seen as a major loss at the philosophy department there.

Gilbert Harman , one of Soames's colleagues, was quoted at the time saying that "He's one of the most distinguished people we've got." [ 3 ] Since 2004, he has been a professor at the University of Southern California , Department of Philosophy. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2010.

[ 4 ] Soames is a public advocate and supporter of Donald Trump .

[ 5 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Soames specializes in the philosophy of language and the history of analytic philosophy . He has published books and articles primarily on issues concerning truth , reference , and meaning. Fairly early in his career, he and Nathan Salmon edited a book entitled Propositions and Attitudes (1989), a collection of readings that investigates philosophical issues surrounding the nature of propositions. Later in his career, Soames has been known for expanding on the anti-descriptivist philosophy of language developed by Saul Kripke in Naming and Necessity (1972/1980)—see Soames's Beyond Rigidity: The Unfinished Semantic Agenda of 'Naming and Necessity' (2002). He is also a major critic of two-dimensionalist theories of semantics —see his Reference and Description: The Case against Two-Dimensionalism (2005).

Philosophical Analysis in the Twentieth Century (2003), his two-volume history of analytic philosophy developed from a lecture course regularly given at Princeton, has been the subject of significant controversy among historians of analytic philosophy, with exchanges, often heated, on the Notre Dame Philosophical Review , Brian Weatherson 's blog , the journal The Philosophical Quarterly , and Soames's own web page.

[ 6 ] Selected publications [ edit ] The following are partial lists of publications by Scott Soames: Books [ edit ] (1989) Propositions and Attitudes , edited with Nathan Salmon (Oxford University Press).

(1999) Understanding Truth (Oxford University Press). ( Online .) (2002) Beyond Rigidity: The Unfinished Semantic Agenda of 'Naming and Necessity' (Oxford University Press).

(2003) Philosophical Analysis in the Twentieth Century, Volumes 1: The Dawn of Analysis and Volume 2: The Age of Meaning ( Princeton University Press ). (Online version: Vol. 1 and Vol. 2 .) (2005) Reference and Description: The Case against Two-Dimensionalism (Princeton University Press).

(2010) Philosophy of Language (Princeton University Press) (2010) What is Meaning?

(Princeton University Press) (2015) Rethinking Language, Mind and Meaning (Princeton University Press) (2019) The World Philosophy Made: From Plato to the Digital Age (Princeton University Press) Articles [ edit ] (1973) "Tacit Knowledge", The Journal of Philosophy , Vol. 70, No. 11., pp. 318–330 (with Christina Graves, Jerrold J. Katz, Yuji Nishiyama, Robert Stecker, and Peter Tovey).

(1983) "Generality, Truth Functions, and Expressive Capacity in the Tractatus", The Philosophical Review , Vol. 92, No. 4., pp. 573–589.

(1984) "What is a Theory of Truth?", The Journal of Philosophy , Vol. 81, No. 8., pp. 411–429.

(1989) "Semantics and Semantic Competence", Philosophical Perspectives , Vol. 3, pp. 575–596.

(1994) "Attitudes and Anaphora", Philosophical Perspectives , Vol. 8, pp. 251–272.

(1997) "The Truth about Deflationism", Philosophical Issues , Vol. 8, pp. 1–44.

(1998) "The Modal Argument: Wide Scope and Rigidified Descriptions", Noûs , Vol. 32, No. 1., pp. 1–22.

(1998) "Facts, Truth Conditions, and the Skeptical Solution to the Rule-Following Paradox", Noûs , Vol. 32, pp. 313–348.

(1999) "The Indeterminacy of Translation and the Inscrutability of Reference", Canadian Journal of Philosophy , Vol. 29, No. 3, pp. 321–370.

See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Mark Richard, Truth and Truth Bearers: Meaning in Context, Volume 2 , Oxford University Press, 2015, p. 152.

^ a b From Soames's web page at USC .

^ The Daily Princeton , "Soames leaves for USC, weakening philosophy dept." Archived 2006-10-20 at the Wayback Machine , March 8, 2004.

^ dornsife.usc.edu ^ Buskirk, Chris.

"Scholars & Writers for Trump" .

American Greatness . Retrieved 16 September 2019 .

^ See, e.g., Soames's "Reply to Critics of Philosophical Analysis in the Twentieth Century : Christopher Pincock, Thomas Hurka, Michael Kremer, and Paul Horwich" ; https://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/678/docs/Replies/Rep__Philosophical_Ayalysis.pdf External links [ edit ] Scott Soames, USC - his web site at USC.

"Soames leaves for USC, weakening philosophy dept." - the Daily Princeton of March 8, 2004.

The Moscow Center for Consciousness Studies video interview with Scott Soames May 27, 2010.

Interview with 3:AM Magazine Interview with What Is it Like to be a Philosopher ?

"The Passions of Logic: Appreciating Analytic Philosophy – A conversation with Scott Soames" , Ideas Roadshow , 2016 v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii PhilPeople People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scott_Soames&oldid=1293297064 " Categories : 1945 births Living people 21st-century American philosophers 20th-century American philosophers Analytic philosophers American philosophers of language American historians of philosophy University of Southern California faculty Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 22:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Scott Soames 4 languages Add topic

