Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Discovery of phosphorus 3 Notes 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Hennig Brand 29 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Kurdî مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German alchemist The Alchemist Discovering Phosphorus (1771) by Joseph Wright depicting Hennig Brand discovering phosphorus (the glow shown is exaggerated) Hennig Brand ( German pronunciation: [ˈhɛnɪç bʁant] ; c.

1630 – c.

1692 or c.

1710 ) was a German alchemist who lived and worked in Hamburg . In 1669, Brand accidentally discovered the chemical element phosphorus while searching for the " philosopher's stone ", a substance which was believed to transmute base metals into gold .

Biography [ edit ] This section includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this section by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The circumstances of Brand's birth are unknown but he was born in 1630 and died c.

1692 or 1710. Some sources describe his origins as humble and indicate that he had been an apprentice glassmaker as a young man. However, correspondence by his second wife Margaretha states that he was of high social standing. In any case he held a post as a junior army officer during the Thirty Years' War and his first wife's dowry was substantial, allowing him to pursue alchemy on leaving the army.

He was one of the many searchers for the philosopher's stone. In the process, he accidentally discovered phosphorus.

Discovery of phosphorus [ edit ] Like other alchemists of the time, Brand searched for the "philosopher's stone", a substance which supposedly transformed base metals (like lead ) into gold. By the time his first wife died he had exhausted her money on this pursuit. He then married his second wife Margaretha, a wealthy widow whose financial resources allowed him to continue the search.

[ 1 ] Like many before him, he was interested in urine and tried combining it with various other materials, in hundreds of combinations. He had seen for instance a recipe in a book 400 Auserlensene Chemische Process , [ 2 ] by F. T. Kessler of Strasbourg , published in 1630, for using alum , saltpetre ( potassium nitrate ) and concentrated urine to turn base metals into silver [ 3 ] (a recipe which did not work).

Around 1669 he heated residues from boiled-down urine on his furnace until the retort was red hot, where all of a sudden glowing fumes filled it and liquid dripped out, bursting into flames. He could catch the liquid in a jar and cover it, where it solidified and continued to give off a pale-green glow. What he collected was phosphorus, which he named from the Greek word for "light-bearing" or "light-bearer." [ 4 ] Phosphorus must have been awe-inspiring to an alchemist: it was a product of man, and seeming to glow with a "life force" that did not diminish over time (and did not need re-exposure to light like the previously discovered Bologna Stone ). Brand kept his discovery secret, as alchemists of the time did, and worked with the phosphorus trying unsuccessfully to use it to produce gold.

His recipe was: [ 5 ] Let urine stand for days until it gives off a pungent smell.

[ 4 ] (This step was not necessary, as later scientists discovered that fresh urine yielded the same amount of phosphorus).

[ 6 ] Boil urine to reduce it to a thick syrup.

Heat until a red oil distills up from it, and draw that off.

Allow the remainder to cool, where it consists of a black spongy upper part and a salty lower part.

Discard the salt, mix the red oil back into the black material.

Heat that mixture strongly for 16 hours.

First white fumes come off, then an oil, then phosphorus.

[ 5 ] The phosphorus may be passed into cold water to solidify.

The chemical reaction Brand stumbled on was as follows. Urine contains phosphates PO 4 3− , as sodium phosphate (i.e. with Na + ) in the form of microcosmic salt , and various carbon -based organics. Under strong heat the oxygen atoms from the phosphate react with carbon to produce carbon monoxide CO, leaving elemental phosphorus P, which comes off as a gas. Phosphorus condenses to a liquid below about 280°C and then solidifies (to the white phosphorus allotrope ) below about 44°C (depending on purity). This same essential reaction is still used today (but with mined phosphate ores, coke for carbon, and electric furnaces).

Brand's process yielded far less phosphorus than it could have. The salt part he discarded contained most of the phosphate.

[ citation needed ] He used about 1,500 US gallons (5,700 L) of urine [ 4 ] to produce just 120 grams of phosphorus. If he had ground up the entire residue he could have obtained many times more than this (1 litre of adult human urine contains about 1.4g of phosphorus salts, which amounts to around 0.11 grams of pure white phosphorus).

Though Brand initially kept his process for producing phosphorus from urine a secret, [ 7 ] he later sold the recipe for 200 thalers to a Johann Daniel Kraft ( de ) from Dresden.

[ 8 ] Subsequently, both Swedish chemist Johann Kunckel (in 1678) and English chemist Robert Boyle (in 1680) [ 9 ] were able to independently discover phosphorus; the latter's assistant, Ambrose Godfrey-Hanckwitz , later made a business of manufacturing phosphorus from 1707 onwards.

[ 10 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "Phosphorus Starts With Pee In This Tale Of Scientific Serendipity" .

NPR.org . Retrieved 2021-03-10 .

^ Kessler, Thomas (1713).

Keslerus Redivivus. Das ist/ Fünff hundert auserlesene Chymische Process und Artzneyen/ theils zu innerlichen und eusserlichen Leibskranckheiten/ theils auch zu Verbesserung der mindern Metallen hochnutzlich. Deren erstlich vier hundert durch Thomam Keslerum. An tag gegeben und zum vierdten mal auffgelegt/ an jetzo aber von einem vornehmen Chymico auffs new ubersehen/ und mit Hinzusetzung des fünfften hunderten in forliche Ordnung und gewisse Classes gesetzet . Frankfurt: J.B. Wachter for G.A. Hermsdorff.

^ Emsley 2000 , p. 14–15.

^ a b c "Did you know that phosphorus was discovered from ... urine?" .

Great Big Story . CNN. 2020-08-03.

^ a b "Technique to recover phosphorus from urine" .

phys.org . Retrieved 2021-03-10 .

^ Michael A. Sommers (2007-08-15).

Phosphorus . The Rosen Publishing Group, 2007. p.

25 .

ISBN 978-1404219601 .

^ Stillman, J. M. (1960).

The Story of Alchemy and Early Chemistry . New York: Dover. pp.

418– 419.

ISBN 0-7661-3230-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Parkes, G. D.; Mellor, J. W. (1939).

Mellor's Modern Inorganic Chemistry . Longman's Green and Co. p. 717.

^ "Hennig Brand | German chemist" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2021-03-10 .

^ "Godfrey-Hanckewitz; Ambrose (1660 - 1741)" .

Royal Society . Archived from the original on 2013-04-15 . Retrieved 2021-03-10 .

References [ edit ] Emsley, John (2000).

The Shocking History of Phosphorus . London: Macmillan.

ISBN 0-330-39005-8 .

Weeks, Mary Elvira (1933). "The discovery of the elements. XXI. Supplementary note on the discovery of phosphorus".

Journal of Chemical Education .

10 (5): 302.

Bibcode : 1933JChEd..10..302W .

doi : 10.1021/ed010p302 .

Further reading [ edit ] Today in Science History Elements - Phosphorus "Brandt, Nicholas" .

Encyclopedia Americana . 1920.

Alphons Oppenheim (1876). " Brand ".

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie (in German). Vol. 3. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. p. 236.

Hansen, Bert (July 30, 2019).

"Hennig Brandt and the Discovery of Phosphorus" .

Science History Institute .

v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany People Deutsche Biographie DDB Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hennig_Brand&oldid=1272484841 " Categories : German alchemists 17th-century German inventors Scientists from Hamburg Discoverers of chemical elements 1630s births 17th-century alchemists Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with German IPA Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2021 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference CS1 German-language sources (de) Year of death uncertain This page was last edited on 28 January 2025, at 21:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hennig Brand 29 languages Add topic

