Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Recent examples Toggle Recent examples subsection 2.1 Family size 2.2 Game shows 2.3 Smoking ban 2.4 Nuclear weapons testing 2.5 Vietnam War draft 2.6 Industrial melanism 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Natural experiment 17 languages العربية Български Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Suomi Svenska Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Empirical study A natural experiment is a study in which individuals (or clusters of individuals) are exposed to the experimental and control conditions that are determined by nature or by other factors outside the control of the investigators. The process governing the exposures arguably resembles random assignment . Thus, natural experiments are observational studies and are not controlled in the traditional sense of a randomized experiment (an intervention study ). Natural experiments are most useful when there has been a clearly defined exposure involving a well defined subpopulation (and the absence of exposure in a similar subpopulation) such that changes in outcomes may be plausibly attributed to the exposure.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In this sense, the difference between a natural experiment and a non-experimental observational study is that the former includes a comparison of conditions that pave the way for causal inference , but the latter does not.

Natural experiments are employed as study designs when controlled experimentation is extremely difficult to implement or unethical, such as in several research areas addressed by epidemiology (like evaluating the health impact of varying degrees of exposure to ionizing radiation in people living near Hiroshima at the time of the atomic blast [ 3 ] ) and economics (like estimating the economic return on amount of schooling in US adults [ 4 ] ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] History [ edit ] John Snow 's map showing the clustering of cholera cases in Soho during the London epidemic of 1854 One of the best-known early natural experiments was the 1854 Broad Street cholera outbreak in London , England. On 31 August 1854, a major outbreak of cholera struck Soho . Over the next three days, 127 people near Broad Street died. By the end of the outbreak 616 people died. The physician John Snow identified the source of the outbreak as the nearest public water pump, using a map of deaths and illness that revealed a cluster of cases around the pump.

[ 5 ] In this example, Snow discovered a strong association between the use of the water from the pump, and deaths and illnesses due to cholera. Snow found that the Southwark and Vauxhall Waterworks Company , which supplied water to districts with high attack rates, obtained the water from the Thames downstream from where raw sewage was discharged into the river. By contrast, districts that were supplied water by the Lambeth Waterworks Company , which obtained water upstream from the points of sewage discharge, had low attack rates. Given the near-haphazard patchwork development of the water supply in mid-nineteenth century London, Snow viewed the developments as "an experiment...on the grandest scale." [ 6 ] Of course, the exposure to the polluted water was not under the control of any scientist. Therefore, this exposure has been recognized as being a natural experiment.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Recent examples [ edit ] Family size [ edit ] An aim of a study Angrist and Evans (1998) [ 10 ] was to estimate the effect of family size on the labor market outcomes of the mother. For at least two reasons, the correlations between family size and various outcomes (e.g., earnings) do not inform us about how family size causally affects labor market outcomes. First, both labor market outcomes and family size may be affected by unobserved "third" variables (e.g., personal preferences). Second, labor market outcomes themselves may affect family size (called "reverse causality"). For example, a woman may defer having a child if she gets a raise at work. The authors observed that two-child families with either two boys or two girls are substantially more likely to have a third child than two-child families with one boy and one girl. The sex of the first two children, then, constitutes a kind of natural experiment: it is as if an experimenter had randomly assigned some families to have two children and others to have three. The authors were then able to credibly estimate the causal effect of having a third child on labor market outcomes. Angrist and Evans found that childbearing had a greater impact on poor and less educated women than on highly educated women although the earnings impact of having a third child tended to disappear by that child's 13th birthday. They also found that having a third child had little impact on husbands' earnings.

[ 10 ] Game shows [ edit ] Within economics, game shows are a frequently studied form of natural experiment. While game shows might seem to be artificial contexts, they can be considered natural experiments due to the fact that the context arises without interference of the scientist. Game shows have been used to study a wide range of different types of economic behavior, such as decision making under risk [ 11 ] and cooperative behavior.

[ 12 ] Smoking ban [ edit ] In Helena, Montana a smoking ban was in effect in all public spaces, including bars and restaurants, during the six-month period from June 2002 to December 2002. Helena is geographically isolated and served by only one hospital. The investigators observed that the rate of heart attacks dropped by 40% while the smoking ban was in effect. Opponents of the law prevailed in getting the enforcement of the law suspended after six months, after which the rate of heart attacks went back up.

[ 13 ] This study was an example of a natural experiment, called a case-crossover experiment , where the exposure is removed for a time and then returned. The study also noted its own weaknesses which potentially suggest that the inability to control variables in natural experiments can impede investigators from drawing firm conclusions.' [ 13 ] Nuclear weapons testing [ edit ] Nuclear weapons testing released large quantities of radioactive isotopes into the atmosphere, some of which could be incorporated into biological tissues. The release stopped after the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963, which prohibited atmospheric nuclear tests. This resembled a large-scale pulse-chase experiment , but could not have been performed as a regular experiment in humans due to scientific ethics. Several types of observations were made possible (in people born before 1963), such as determination of the rate of replacement for cells in different human tissues.

[ citation needed ] Vietnam War draft [ edit ] An important question in economics research is what determines earnings. Angrist (1990) evaluated the effects of military service on lifetime earnings.

[ 14 ] Using statistical methods developed in econometrics , [ 15 ] Angrist capitalized on the approximate random assignment of the Vietnam War draft lottery , and used it as an instrumental variable associated with eligibility (or non-eligibility) for military service. Because many factors might predict whether someone serves in the military, the draft lottery frames a natural experiment whereby those drafted into the military can be compared against those not drafted because the two groups should not differ substantially prior to military service. Angrist found that the earnings of veterans were, on average, about 15 percent less than the earnings of non-veterans.

[ 14 ] Industrial melanism [ edit ] With the Industrial Revolution in the nineteenth century, many species of moth, including the well-studied peppered moth , responded to the atmospheric pollution of sulphur dioxide and soot around cities with industrial melanism , a dramatic increase in the frequency of dark forms over the formerly abundant pale, speckled forms. In the twentieth century, as regulation improved and pollution fell, providing the conditions for a large-scale natural experiment, the trend towards industrial melanism was reversed, and melanic forms quickly became scarce. The effect led the evolutionary biologists L. M. Cook and J. R. G. Turner to conclude that " natural selection is the only credible explanation for the overall decline".

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Common garden experiment References [ edit ] ^ a b DiNardo, J. (2008).

"Natural experiments and quasi-natural experiments" . In Durlauf, Steven N.

; Blume, Lawrence E (eds.).

The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (Second ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

856– 864.

doi : 10.1057/9780230226203.1162 .

ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5 .

^ a b Dunning, Thad (2012).

Natural Experiments in the Social Sciences: A Design-Based Approach . Cambridge University Press.

^ Friedman, G. D. (1980).

Primer of Epidemiology (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-022434-6 .

^ Rosenzweig, M. R.; Wolpin, K. I. (2000). "Natural 'Natural Experiments' in Economics".

Journal of Economic Literature .

38 (4): 827– 874.

doi : 10.1257/jel.38.4.827 .

^ MacMahon B, Pugh TF.

Epidemiologic Methods (Little, Brown; 1960); reissued as Epidemiology: Principles and Methods (Little, Brown; 1970) ( ISBN 0316542598 ) ^ Snow, J. (1855).

On the Mode of Communication of Cholera (2nd ed.). London: Churchill. Excerpted in MacMahon, B. & Pugh, T.F. (1970).

Epidemiology . Boston: Little Brown.

^ The 1854 cholera outbreak is the example of a natural experiment discussed often by David A. Freedman , e.g. in Statistical Models: Theory and Practice (Cambridge University Press) [1] , chapter 1.3 (pp.  6–9).

^ MacMahon, B., & Pugh, T.F. (1970).

Epidemiology: Principles and Methods.

Boston: Little, Brown.

^ Snow's studies of the pattern of the disease were convincing enough to persuade the local council to disable the well pump by removing its handle . After the handle of the well-pump was replaced, the incidence of new cases dropped. In stopping the use of water from the well-pump, the authorities conducted, in effect, a second study, an uncontrolled intervention study, a study with an intervention group but no control group.

^ a b Angrist, J.

; Evans, W. (1998). "Children and Their Parents' Labor Supply: Evidence from Exogenous Variation in Family Size".

American Economic Review .

88 (3): 450– 477.

JSTOR 116844 .

^ Post; Van den Assem; Baltussen; Thaler (2008).

"Deal or No Deal? Decision Making under Risk in a Large-Payoff Game Show" (PDF) .

American Economic Review .

98 (1): 38– 71.

doi : 10.1257/aer.98.1.38 .

JSTOR 29729963 .

S2CID 12816022 .

SSRN 636508 .

^ van den Assem; van Dolder; Thaler (2012).

"Split or Steal? Cooperative Behavior When the Stakes Are Large" .

Management Science .

58 (1): 2.

doi : 10.1287/mnsc.1110.1413 .

hdl : 1765/31292 .

S2CID 1371739 .

SSRN 1592456 .

^ a b Sargent, R. P.; Shepard, R. M.; Glantz, S. A. (2004).

"Reduced incidence of admissions for myocardial infarction associated with public smoking ban: before and after study" .

British Medical Journal .

328 (7446): 977– 980.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.38055.715683.55 .

PMC 404491 .

PMID 15066887 .

^ a b Angrist, Joshua D. (1990). "Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Draft Lottery: Evidence from Social Security Administrative Records".

American Economic Review .

80 (3): 313– 336.

JSTOR 2006669 .

^ "Natural experiments in econometrics" . 4 August 2013 – via www.youtube.com.

^ Cook, L. M.; Turner, J. R. G. (2008).

"Decline of melanism in two British moths: spatial, temporal and inter-specific variation" .

Heredity .

101 (6): 483– 489.

Bibcode : 2008Hered.101..483C .

doi : 10.1038/hdy.2008.105 .

PMID 18941471 .

v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Natural_experiment&oldid=1287091686 " Categories : Epidemiology Experiments Observational study Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 This page was last edited on 23 April 2025, at 23:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Natural experiment 17 languages Add topic

