Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Original use 2 Use in onomastics Toggle Use in onomastics subsection 2.1 Places 2.2 Tribes, clans or families 2.3 People 2.4 Faith 2.5 Multiples 3 Examples 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Nisba (onomastics) 14 languages العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Element in Arabic names This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Nisba" onomastics – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Arabic names , a nisba ( Arabic : نسبة nisbah , "attribution"), also rendered as nesba or nesbat , is an adjective surname indicating the person's place of origin, ancestral tribe, or ancestry, used at the end of the name and occasionally ending in the suffix -iyy for males and -iyyah for females.

[ 1 ] Nisba , originally an Arabic word, has been passed to many other languages such as Turkish , Persian , Bengali , Hindi and Urdu .

In Persian, Turkish, and Urdu usage, it is always pronounced and written as nisbat . In Arabic usage , that pronunciation occurs when the word is uttered in its construct state only.

The practice has been adopted in South Asian Muslim names. The nisba to a tribe, profession or a town is the most common form of surname in Arabic.

Original use [ edit ] Main article: Arabic nouns and adjectives § nisba A nisba "relation" is a grammatical term referring to the suffixation of masculine - iyy , feminine -iyyah to a word to make it an adjective. As an example, the word ‘Arabiyy ( عربي ) means "Arab, related to Arabic, Arabian".

Nisba forms are very common in Arabic names.

Use in onomastics [ edit ] Traditional Arabic names are patronymics ( nasab ), where the full name of the person is followed by the name of his father, usually linked by ibn or bin ('son').  Patronymics may be long as they may include all known forefathers.  When a name is simplified to one or two ancestors, it may become confusing to distinguish from other similar names; in such cases, the nisba may be added as an additional specifier.

A nisba is usually prefixed by the definite article ' al-' and can take a number of forms: Places [ edit ] Al-Afghani , related to or from Afghanistan Al-Albani , related to or from Albania e.g.

Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani .

Al-Almani , related to or from Germany Al-Amriki , related to or from America Al-Andalusi , related to or from the region of Al-Andalus (modern day Iberia ) e.g.

Said al-Andalusi , Abū ʿAbdallāh Yaʿīsh ibn Ibrāhīm ibn Yūsuf ibn Simāk al-Andalusī al-Umawī Al-Armani , related to or from Greater Armenia or Armenians al-Astarabadi – from Astarabad (modern Gorgan), Persia al-Baghdadi , related to or from the city of Baghdad , e.g.

Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi , Junayd al-Baghdadi .

al-Bakkaniy - from the Royal Town of Pekan in the state of Pahang in Malaysia , Mohammad Faeez Harith al-Bakkaniy al-Bangali - from the region of Bengal or a Bengali descent (mainly from Bangladesh ) al-Bantani - from the province of Banten in Indonesia e.g. Syeikh Abdur Rauf al-Bantani al-Basri - from Basra , e.g.

Ibn Sa'd al-Britani , related to or from the United Kingdom al-Busnawi, related to or from Bosnia , e.g.

Matrakçı Nasuh al-Busnawi.

al-Buthuni - from the island of Buton in Indonesia e.g. Haji Abdul Ghaniu al-Buthuni al-Daylami - from Daylam , northern Iran al-Dimashqi , related to or from the city of Damascus e.g.

Al-Dimashqi (geographer) , Abu al-Fadl Ja'far ibn 'Ali al-Dimashqi , Abu al-Fadl Ja'far ibn 'Ali al-Dimashqi .

al-Falembani - from a capital city in the province of South Sumatera in Indonesia, e.g.

Abdul Samad Al-Falimbani al-Fansuri - from the town of Pancur in the Central Tapanuli Regency in North Sumatera Indonesia e.g. Hamzah al-Fansuri al-Farsi, related to or from the region of Pars (Fars) or the country of Persia ; e.g.

Salman al-Farsi , Saud Al-Farsi al-Fatani - from the province of Pattani in Thailand e.g.

Syeikh Daud al-Fatani al-Filfulani - from the state of Penang in Malaysia e.g. Syeikh Zubeir al-Filfulani al-Filisṭīnī, related to or from the region of Palestine e.g.

Abu Qatada al-Filistini .

al-Ghari - Literally means cave in Arabic. From the district of Gua Musang (literally meaning Fox Cave in Malay ) in the state of Kelantan in Malaysia , e.g.

Zamihan al-Ghari al-Hadrami, related to or from the region of Hadhramaut e.g.

Al-Ala al-Hadhrami , Ahmed Al-Hadrami , Imam al-Hadrami .

al-Hamadani , from Hamadan , Persia al-Hijazi, related to or from the region of Hijaz e.g.

Amal Hijazi , Farouk Hijazi , Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi al-Himsi, related to or from the city of Homs e.g.

Qustaki al-Himsi , Ibn Na'ima al-Himsi .

al-Harari related to or from the city of Harar al-Iraqi, related to or from the country of Iraq e.g.

Fakhr-al-Din Iraqi , Abdul Hadi al Iraqi , Abu Ayoub al-Iraqi al-Isfahani – from Isfahan , Persia al-Jaza'iri - related to or from the country of Algeria e.g.

Emir Abdelkader al-Jaza'iri , Abu Bakr al-Jaza'iri al-Jannabi - from Jannaba port city, Arrajan province of Persia al-Johori - from the state of Johor in Malaysia e.g. Ahmad bin Ya'kob al-Johori al-Jurjani – from Jurjan al-Juzjani – from Juzjan al-Kairouani, related to or from the city of Kairouan in Tunisia .

al-Kalantani - from the state of Kelantan in Malaysia e.g. Syeikh Ismail bin Abdul Majid al-Kalantani, Syeikh Wan Ali bin Abdul Rahman al-Kalantani al-Kedahi - from the state of Kedah in Malaysia e.g. Syeikh Mahmud al-Kedahi al-Khwarizmi, related to or from the region of Khwarazm , e.g.

Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi .

al-Kuwaiti, related to or from the country of Kuwait e.g.

Abu Omar al-Kuwaiti , Abu Ahmed al-Kuwaiti , Jandal al-Kuwaiti.

Lahori, related to or from the city of Lahore, in Punjab, Pakistan e.g.

Ustad Ahmad Lahori al-Lubnani, related to or from the country of Lebanon e.g.

Bilal al-Berjawi al-Lubnani.

al-Lusunji - from Losong, in Kuala Terengganu , Malaysia , e.g. Afif al-Lusunji al-Maghrebi, related to or from the region of Maghreb e.g.

Ibn Yaḥyā al-Maghribī al-Samawʾal , Mahmud Sulayman al-Maghribi , Yusuf al-Maghribi .

al-Maqassari from the city of Makassar in Indonesia e.g.

Muhammad Yusuf al-Maqassari al-Masri , related to or from Egypt . e.g.

Taher al-Masri , Abu Hamza al-Masri .

al-Nahawandi, al-Nihawandi - from Nahavand , Iran al-Najdi, related to or from the region of Najd in Saudi Arabia e.g. Qutaybah al-Najdi al-Nisaburi, al-Naysaburi - from Nishapur , Iran al-Qazwini – from Qazvin al-Quhistani - from Quhistan al-Qumisi, al-Kumisi - from Qumis , Iran al-Razi – from Ray , Iran al-Rûmani, from Rome al-Shami, related to or from the region of Levant or from the country of Syria e.g.

Nasser al-Shami , Husayn al-Shami , Abu Anas al-Shami , Abu Humam al-Shami .

al-Shinqiti, related to or from the city of Chinguetti or Bilād Šinqīṭ ( Bilad Chinguetti , modern-day Mauritania ) e.g.

Ahmad ibn al-Amin al-Shinqiti al-Shirazi – from Shiraz , Fars, Persia al-Sindhi, related to or from the region of Sindh e.g.

Mohammad Hayyat al-Sindhi al-Sinkili - from the town of Singkel in the province of Aceh in Indonesia Abd al-Rauf ibn Ali al-Fansuri al-Sinkili al-Sistani , al-Sijistani , al-Sajistani , al-Sijzi – from Sistan , Persia or Greater Iran al-Tabari – from Tabaristan , Persia al-Tantawi - from Tanta , Egypt, e.g.

Nasrudin Hasan Tantawi al-Tiflisi , from Tiflis (Tbilisi), Georgia al-Tihami, related to or from the region of Tihamah in Saudi Arabia .

al-Tikriti , related to or from the city of Tikrit , e.g.

Saddam Hussein Abd al-Majid al-Tikriti, Abu Raita al-Takriti , Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti al-Tunisi , related to or from the country of Tunisia e.g.

Abu Nasr al-Tunisi , Abu Osama al-Tunisi , Ali ibn Ziyad at-Tarabulsi al-Tunisi al-'Absi , Nabilah al-Tunisi al-Turki, related to or from the country of Turkey e.g.

Abu Yusuf Al-Turki , Azjur al-Turki , Hassan Abdullah Hersi al-Turki , Hussain Al-Turki al-Tusi – from Tus , Khurasan, Persia al-Yemeni , related to or from the country of Yemen al-Yrifani, related to or from Yerevan al-Zayla'i, related to or from Zeila region and Zeila town in Horn of Africa e.g.

Abd Al-Rahman al-Zayla'i ar-Raniri - from the town of Rander , in Surat district in the state of Gujarat , India. e.g.

Nuruddin ar-Raniri as-Sambasi - from the regency of Sambas in Indonesia e.g. Muhammad Jabir as-Sambasi as-Sarawaki - from the state of Sarawak in Malaysia , e.g. Muhtar Suhaili As-Sarawaki as-Sembilani - from the state of Negeri Sembilan in Malaysia , e.g. Muhammad Musa al-Hafiz as-Sembilani as-Subanji - from the city of Subang Jaya in the state of Selangor in Malaysia e.g. Kamarul Afiq as-Subanji as-Sumatrani - from the island of Sumatera in Indonesia e.g.

Syeikh Syamsuddin as-Sumatrani as-Sumbawi - from the island of Sumbawa in Indonesia Syeikh Muhammad Zainuddin as-Sumbawi at-Tranjanuwi - from the state of Terengganu in Malaysia e.g. Iskandar at-Tranjanuwi al Bukhari - from Bukhara , Uzbekistan al-Darbandi , Darbandi - from Derbent , Persia El Djezairi, related to or from Algeria e.g.

Abdelkader El Djezairi .

Faridi, related to or from the region of Greater Faridpur in Bangladesh e.g.

Abdul Haque Faridi al-Khurasani – from Khurasan e.g.

Abu Muslim , Abdallah ibn Tahir al-Khurasani Islamabadi, related to or from the city of Chittagong (previously known as Islamabad) e.g.

Maniruzzaman Islamabadi Maneri - from Maner Sharif , India, e.g.

Makhdoom Yahya Maneri .

al-Marwazi , from Marw , Khurasan al-Rûmi – from Rûm ( The Balkans and Asia Minor ) Siraji, related to or from the district of Sirajganj in Bangladesh e.g.

Ismail Hossain Siraji Tribes, clans or families [ edit ] al-Tamimi , from the tribe or clan of Bani Tamim . e.g. Modher Sadeq-Saba al-Tamimi, Talib al-Suhail al-Tamimi, Alaa al-Tamimi .

al-Qurashi, from the tribe or clan of Quraish . e.g.

ibn Kathir al-Qurashi , Abû 'Uthmân Sa'îd ibn Hakam al Qurashi .

Al-Hashemi, from the clan of Banu Hashim . Members of the Hashemite dynasty are referred to with the nisba "Al-Hashemi".

at-Ta'i, from the tribe of Tai'. e.g.

Hatem at-Ta'i .

al-Ishaaqi, from the tribe or clan of Ishaaq in Somaliland al-Banjari, from the people of Banjar ethnicity in Indonesia e.g.

Muhammad Arsyad bin Abdullah al-Banjari al-Minankabawi - from the people of Minangkabau ethnicity in Indonesia e.g.

Syeikh Ahmad Khatib al-Minankabawi , Syeikh Ismail Khalidi al-Minankabawi al-Mandaili - from the people of Mandailing ethnicity in Indonesia e.g. Haji Abdur Rahman al-Mandaili People [ edit ] al-Maliki, related to Malik al-Ashtar . e.g.

Nouri al-Maliki .

al-Faruqi, related to Faruq the Great . e.g.

Ismail al-Faruqi .

Faith [ edit ] al-Nasiri , with nasiri meaning " Christian ", more literally: "Nazarene" al-Majusi , with majus meaning " Zoroastrian " al-Falaki, with falak meaning "astronomy" e.g.

Syeikh Tahir Jalaluddin al-Falaki Multiples [ edit ] One can have more than one nisba , one can be related to a city, a clan, a profession and a person at the same time. Examples include: Ali ibn Abi Hazm al-Qarshi al-Dimashqi , from the tribe of Quraish and from Damascus (Dimashq).

Abd al-Qahir ibn Tahir al-Tamimi al-Shafi`i al-Baghdadi , from the tribe of Bani Tamim, from the city of Baghdad and a follower of Muhammad ibn Idris ash-Shafi`i .

Makhdoom Yahya Maneri al-Suharwardi al- Hashimi al-Muttalabi, from the town of Maner Sharif , of the Sufi order Suhrawardiyya , of the tribe Banu Hashim and clan of Abd al-Muttalib .

The nisba is optional but is quite widespread.

Examples [ edit ] Ansari — from Ansar , the people of Medina who helped Muhammad Tabataba'i — someone who has two Seyyed as parents Hanbali — someone following Ahmad ibn Hanbal 's school of Islamic jurisprudence See also [ edit ] Arabic name Kunya (Arabic) Patrial name – Variety of surname Ó and Mac References [ edit ] ^ Sublet, Jacqueline (1995).

"Nisba" . In Bosworth, C. E.

; van Donzel, E.

; Heinrichs, W. P.

& Lecomte, G.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume VIII: Ned–Sam . Leiden: E. J. Brill.

doi : 10.1163/1573-3912_islam_COM_0866 .

ISBN 978-90-04-09834-3 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nisba_(onomastics)&oldid=1304482842 " Categories : Arabic-language given names Nisbas Surnames of Arabic origin Persian given names Urdu given names Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Persian-language text This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 08:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nisba (onomastics) 14 languages Add topic

