Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Uses 3 Smaller-scale devices 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Solar furnace 22 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Focal point for concentrated sunlight; contains working fluid to be heated For the cooking apparatus, see Solar cooker . For electricity generation, see Solar power tower .

The solar furnace at Odeillo in the Pyrénées-Orientales in France can reach temperatures of 3,500 °C (6,330 °F).

A solar furnace is a structure that uses concentrated solar power to produce high temperatures, usually for industry.

Parabolic mirrors or heliostats concentrate light ( Insolation ) onto a focal point .  The temperature at the focal point may reach 3,500 °C (6,330 °F), and this heat can be used to generate electricity , melt steel , make hydrogen fuel or nanomaterials .

The largest solar furnace is at Odeillo in the Pyrénées-Orientales in France , opened in 1970.  It employs an array of plane mirrors to gather sunlight, reflecting it onto a larger curved mirror.

History [ edit ] The ancient Greek / Latin term heliocaminus means "solar furnace" and refers to a glass -enclosed sunroom intentionally designed to become hotter than the outside air temperature.

[ 1 ] Legendary accounts of the Siege of Syracuse (213–212 BC) tell of Archimedes' heat ray , a set of burnished brass mirrors or burning glasses supposedly used to ignite attacking ships, though modern historians doubt its veracity.

On 24 September 1901, Knut C. Wideen was granted a patent for a "System for collecting and utilizing solar heat", which included a solar furnace.

[ 2 ] The first modern solar furnace is believed to have been built in France in 1949 by Professor Félix Trombe. The device, the Mont-Louis Solar Furnace is still in place at Mont-Louis. The Pyrenees were chosen as the site because the area experiences clear skies up to 300 days a year.

[ 3 ] The Odeillo Solar Furnace is a larger and more powerful solar furnace. It was built between 1962 and 1968, and started operating in 1969. It's currently the most powerful, based on an achievable temperature of 3500 °C.

The Solar Furnace of Uzbekistan was built in Uzbekistan and opened in 1981 as a part of a Soviet Union "Sun" Complex Research Facility, being the world largest concentrator.

[ 4 ] Uses [ edit ] The rays are focused onto an area the size of a cooking pot and can reach 4,000 °C (7,230 °F), depending on the process installed; for example: about 1,000 °C (1,830 °F) for metallic receivers producing hot air for the next-generation solar towers as it will be tested at the Themis plant with the Pegase project [ 5 ] about 1,400 °C (2,550 °F) to produce hydrogen by cracking methane molecules [ 6 ] up to 2,500 °C (4,530 °F) to test materials for extreme environment such as nuclear reactors or space vehicle atmospheric reentry up to 3,500 °C (6,330 °F) to produce nanomaterials by solar induced sublimation and controlled cooling, such as carbon nanotubes [ 7 ] or zinc nanoparticles [ 8 ] It has been suggested that solar furnaces could be used in space to provide energy for manufacturing purposes.

Their reliance on sunny weather is a limiting factor as a source of renewable energy on Earth but could be tied to thermal energy storage systems for energy production through these periods and into the night.

Smaller-scale devices [ edit ] Paella being cooked with a solar cooker The solar furnace principle is being used to make inexpensive solar cookers and solar-powered barbecues , and for solar water pasteurization .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] A prototype Scheffler reflector is being constructed in India for use in a solar crematorium . This 50 m 2 reflector will generate temperatures of 700 °C (1,292 °F) and   save   200–300 kg of firewood used per cremation.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Solar power tower Solar thermal energy Solar thermal collector Solar furnace of Uzbekistan References [ edit ] ^ "MEEF Roman Architectural Glossary" . Archived from the original on 2017-06-12 . Retrieved 2009-12-05 .

^ U.S. Patent 683,088 ^ Odeillo Solar Furnace official website , retrieved 12 July 2007 ^ English Russia's post about the Uzbekistan Soviet Solar Furnace ^ "PEGASE project home page" . Archived from the original on 2017-12-01 . Retrieved 2010-01-24 .

^ SOLHYCARB, EU funded project, ETHZ official page Archived 2009-03-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ Flamant G., Luxembourg D., Robert J.F., Laplaze D., Optimizing fullerene synthesis in a 50 kW solar reactor, (2004) Solar Energy, 77 (1), pp. 73-80.

^ T. Ait Ahcene, C. Monty, J. Kouam, A. Thorel, G. Petot-Ervas, A. Djemel, Preparation by solar physical vapor deposition (SPVD) and nanostructural study of pure and Bi doped ZnO nanopowders, Journal of the European Ceramic Society, Volume 27, Issue 12, 2007, Pages 3413-342 ^ "SOLAR COOKERS How to make, use, and enjoy" (PDF) . Solar Cookers International. 2004.

^ US patent for solar barbecue granted in 1992 Archived 2017-12-01 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Development Of A Solar Crematorium" (PDF) . Solare Brüecke . Retrieved 2008-05-20 .

External links [ edit ] Article about the Odeillo and Mont Louis solar furnaces Hochflussdichte Sonnenofen des DLR, Köln Page including an animation of a solar furnace BBC News article about the solar power station serving Seville, Spain Build a solar furnace v t e Solar energy Index Outline Timeline Concepts The Sun Solar irradiance Solar power Thermal Passive solar building design Solar air conditioning Solar chimney Solar pond Solar water heating Thermal mass Photovoltaics and related topics Concentrator photovoltaics Floating solar Nanocrystal solar cell Organic solar cell Photovoltaic array (and systems) Photovoltaic effect Photovoltaic module (solar panel) Photovoltaic power station Solar cell Concentrated Concentrator photovoltaics Heliostat Parabolic trough Solar power tower Solar tracker Experimental and proposed Solar chemical and artificial photosynthesis Solar-pumped laser Solar updraft tower Thermoelectric generator Space-related Magnetic sail Solar sail Solar thermal rocket Space-based solar power By country Albania Armenia Australia Austria Belgium Brazil Canada China Czech Republic Denmark Georgia Germany Greece India Israel Italy Japan Kosovo Lithuania Mexico Morocco Myanmar Netherlands New Zealand Pakistan Portugal Romania Saudi Arabia Somalia South Africa Spain Thailand Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States Yemen Legal Solar Shade Control Act Distribution and uses Storage Grid energy storage Phase-change material Thermal energy storage seasonal Adoption Cost by source Feed-in tariff Financial incentives for photovoltaics Net metering Applications Electric aircraft Electric boat Solar balloon Solar vehicle Solar water heating Applications Agriculture and horticulture Agrivoltaic Greenhouse Polytunnel Row cover Solar-powered pump Building Building-integrated photovoltaics Passive solar building design Urban heat island Lighting Daylighting Hybrid solar lighting Light tube Solar lamp Solar Tuki Process heat Salt evaporation pond Solar furnace Solar pond Cooking Solar cooker Disinfection Soil solarization Solar water disinfection Desalination Desalination Solar still Water heating Solar combisystem Solar controller Solar water heating See also Photovoltaics Solar power by country Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Solar_furnace&oldid=1289578124 " Categories : Industrial furnaces Solar thermal energy Heaters Industrial processes Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 May 2025, at 13:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Solar furnace 22 languages Add topic

