Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Artivists 3 Collectives and organizations 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Artivism 13 languages Català Español Français Hrvatski Italiano Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art activism Giving to the Poor , a stencil by American street artist Above addressing the issue of homelessness. Lisbon, Portugal, 2008.

Artivism is a portmanteau word combining "art" and "activism", and is sometimes also referred to as " social artivism ".

History [ edit ] You Cut Art, You Cut Culture by Artica Concepts Bomb-hugger by Banksy Greece Next Economic Model by Bleepsgr in Athens , Greece The term artivism in US English has its roots in a 1997 gathering of Chicano artists from East Los Angeles and the Zapatistas in Chiapas , Mexico. The words "Artivist" and "Artivism" were then popularized through a variety of events, actions and artworks via artists and musicians such as Quetzal , Ozomatli , and Mujeres de Maiz, among other East Los Angeles artists, and at spaces such as Self Help Graphics & Art .

[ citation needed ] Artivism further developed as antiwar and anti-globalization protests emerged and proliferated. In many cases artivists attempt to push political agendas by the means of art, but a focus on raising awareness of social, environmental , and technological problems is also common.

[ citation needed ] Besides using traditional mediums like film and music to raise awareness or push for change, an artivist can also be involved in culture jamming , subvertising , street art , spoken word , protesting , and activism .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Since 2013, Cromoactivismo, a Brazilian group of women artists, works with collectives, groups and schools in direct actions using color for social change.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Artivist Eve Ensler stated: ... This passion has all the ingredients of activism, but is charged with the wild creations of art. Artivism—where edges are pushed, imagination is freed, and a new language emerges altogether." Bruce Lyons has written: "... artivism ... promotes the essential understanding that ... [humans] ... can, through courageous creative expression, experience the unifying power of love when courage harnesses itself to the task of art + social responsibility.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] By 2005, the term had made its way into academic writing when Slovenian theatre scholar Aldo Milohnic used the term to discuss "autonomous ('alter-globalist', social) movements in Slovenia that attracted wide attention. In carrying out their political activity they made use of protests and direct actions, thereby introducing the 'aesthetic', willingly or not".

[ 6 ] In 2008, Chela Sandoval and Guisela Latorre published a piece on Chicano/a artivism and M. K. Asante using the term in reference to Black artists.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] There is a chapter on artivism in the book It's Bigger Than Hip Hop by M. K. Asante. Asante writes of the artivist: The artivist (artist + activist) uses their artistic talents to fight and struggle against injustice and oppression—by any medium necessary. The artivist merges commitment to freedom and justice with the pen, the lens, the brush, the voice, the body, and the imagination. The artivist knows that to make an observation is to have an obligation.

The impact of artivism vs. conventional activism was tested in a public scientific experiment in Copenhagen , Denmark, in 2018. The results, reported in the journal of Social Movement Studies , suggest that artivism may be more effective than conventional activism.

[ 9 ] The Inaugural Global Artivism Conference took place in Tshwane, South Africa, from September 5-8, 2024.

Artivists [ edit ] Notable artivists and self-identified artist-activists include: Above Ai Weiwei Aja Monet Alfredo Meschi Aloe Blacc Annie Sprinkle Anomie Belle Banksy Bleepsgr Bordalo II Daniel Arzola David Wojnarowicz Deborah De Robertis Deeyah Khan Donald "C-Note" Hooker Ernest Zacharevic Favianna Rodriguez Fredericka Foster Gianluca Costantini Guillermo Gómez-Peña JoFF Rae JR Jeanmarie Simpson Judy Baca Julio Salgado Kwame Akoto-Bamfo Las Cafeteras Lila Downs Lost Children of Babylon Lynnette Haozous Martha Gonzalez Marina DeBris Martin Aveling Maya Jupiter Michel Platnic Milo Moiré Norm Magnusson Pavel 183 Peter Joseph Quetzal (band) Qween Jean Reverend Billy and the Church of Stop Shopping Rap Against Dictatorship Sabo Saul Williams Self Help Graphics & Art Tania Bruguera Tinkebell Valie Export Walela Nehanda Parimah Avani Weapons of Mass Creation Will St Leger Chaiamorn Kaewwiboonpan Collectives and organizations [ edit ] Artivists often work in interdisciplinary collectives that are stand-alone' or operate as a creative part of the greater activist groups, such as Gran Fury of AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP) .

[ citation needed ] Other groups include: Artivist Film Festival Crass Da! collective The Fearless Collective Gran Fury Guerrilla Girls Riky Rick Foundation for the Promotion of Artivism Sol Collective The Yes Men See also [ edit ] The arts and politics Graffiti Hacktivism Invisible theater Satire Social center Timeline of Extinction Rebellion actions Whirl-Mart Brooklyn Immersionists References [ edit ] ^ a b Politics, Power and Passion , The New York Times , December 2, 2011. Please see the fifth segment by Eve Ensler .

^ a b Jeanmarie Simpson -- Artivist in the Modern Landscape (Part 1) , Dylan Brody , The Huffington Post , 2011.10.03 ^ a b Jeanmarie Simpson -- Artivist in the Modern Landscape (Part 2) , Dylan Brody , The Huffington Post, 2011.10.05 ^ "Graphic Outbreak 5. The Poetic Activism of Colour" .

museoreinasofia.es/en . Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofía . Retrieved 5 February 2024 .

^ Bell, Vanessa.

"Color commentary: How Cromoactivismo uses the power of hue to challenge invisible systems" . Art Basel . Retrieved 5 February 2024 .

^ "ARTIVISM" .

transversal texts . Retrieved 2022-11-20 .

^ Chela Sandoval and Guisela Latorre, ""Chicana/o Artivism: Judy Baca's Digital Work with Youth of Color," in Learning Race and Ethnicity , MIT Press, 2007.

^ M.K. Asante, Jr.

It's Bigger Than Hip Hop , St. Martin's Press, 2009.

^ Duncombe, Stephen; Harrebye, Silas (2021-09-08).

"The Copenhagen Experiment: testing the effectiveness of creative vs. conventional forms of activism" .

Social Movement Studies .

21 (6): 741– 765.

doi : 10.1080/14742837.2021.1967125 .

ISSN 1474-2837 .

S2CID 239223880 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Artivism&oldid=1291947843 " Categories : Contemporary art Cultural activism Culture jamming Political art DIY culture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 10:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Artivism 13 languages Add topic

