Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concept 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Fictionalism 13 languages Català Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano Latina 日本語 Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pretending to treat something as literally true (a "useful fiction") Fictionalism is a view in philosophy that posits that statements appearing to be descriptions of the world should not be construed as such, but should instead be understood as cases of "make believe", thus allowing individuals to treat something as literally true (a "useful fiction").

Concept [ edit ] Fictionalism consists in at least the following three theses: Claims made within the domain of discourse are taken to be truth-apt; that is, true or false.

The domain of discourse is to be interpreted at face value—not reduced to meaning something else.

The aim of discourse in any given domain is not truth, but some other virtue(s) (e.g., simplicity, explanatory scope).

Two important strands of fictionalism are: modal fictionalism developed by Gideon Rosen , which states that possible worlds , regardless of whether they exist or not, may be a part of a useful discourse, and mathematical fictionalism advocated by Hartry Field .

[ 1 ] Modal fictionalism is recognized as further refinement to the basic fictionalism as it holds that representations of possible worlds in texts are useful fictions.

[ 2 ] Conceptualization explains that it is a descriptive theorizing of what a text, such as the Bible , amounts to.

[ 2 ] It is also associated with linguistic ersatzism in the sense that both are views possible worlds.

[ 3 ] Fictionalism, on the other hand, in the philosophy of mathematics states that talk of numbers and other mathematical objects is nothing more than a convenience for computation. According to Field, there is no reason to treat parts of mathematics that involve reference to or quantification as true.

[ 4 ] In this discourse, mathematical objects are accorded the same metaphysical status as literary figures such as Macbeth .

[ 4 ] Also in meta-ethics , there is an equivalent position called moral fictionalism (championed by Richard Joyce ). Many modern versions of fictionalism are influenced by the work of Kendall Walton in aesthetics.

See also [ edit ] Color fictionalism Hans Vaihinger Noble lie Philosophy of color Pragmatism Quietism (philosophy) References [ edit ] ^ Field, Hartry , Science Without Numbers , Blackwell, 1980.

^ a b Gericke, Jaco (2012).

The Hebrew Bible and Philosophy of Religion . Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature. p. 366.

ISBN 9781589837072 .

^ Nolan, Daniel (2002).

Topics in the Philosophy of Possible Worlds . New York: Routledge. pp.

95 .

ISBN 9780815340515 .

^ a b Irvine, Andrew, ed. (2009).

Philosophy of Mathematics . Burlington, MA: Elsevier. pp.

345 .

ISBN 9780444515551 .

Further reading [ edit ] Balaguer, Mark (1998).

Platonism and Anti-Platonism in Mathematics . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-514398-0 .

Kalderon, Mark (2005).

Moral Fictionalism . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-927597-7 .

External links [ edit ] Balaguer, Mark (2011-10-16).

"Mathematical fictionalism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Eklund, Matti (2015-10-19).

"Fictionalism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Leng, Mary.

"Fictionalism in the Philosophy of Mathematics" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Nolan, Daniel (2016-02-13).

"Modal Fictionalism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Philosophical logic Critical thinking and informal logic Analysis Ambiguity Argument Belief Bias Credibility Dialectic Antithesis , Socratic method , Unity of opposites Evidence Explanation Explanatory power Fact Fallacy List of fallacies Hypothesis Inquiry Opinion Parsimony (Occam's razor) Premise Propaganda Prudence Razor Reasoning Relevance Rhetoric Rigor Theory Vagueness Theories of deduction Constructivism Dialetheism Fictionalism Finitism Formalism Intuitionism Logical atomism Logicism Nominalism Platonic realism Pragmatism Realism Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fictionalism&oldid=1295930909 " Categories : Philosophical methodology Theories of deduction Theories of truth Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 18:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fictionalism 13 languages Add topic

