Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Shura in Islam Toggle Shura in Islam subsection 1.1 Shura in the Qur'an 1.2 Shura and the caliphate 1.3 Dispute over importance 2 Shura and contemporary Muslim-majority states Toggle Shura and contemporary Muslim-majority states subsection 2.1 Resemblance between majlis al-shura and a parliament 3 Soviet etymology 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Shura 22 languages العربية বাংলা Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский کوردی Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arabic word for "consultation" For other uses, see Shura (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Shura" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Shura ( Arabic : شُورَىٰ , romanized : shūrā , lit.

'consultation') is the term for collective decision-making in Islam.  It can, for example, take the form of a council or a referendum. The Quran encourages Muslims to decide their affairs in consultation with each other.

Shura is mentioned as a praiseworthy activity often used in organizing the affairs of a mosque , Islamic organizations, and is a common term involved in naming parliaments.

Shura in Islam [ edit ] See also: Islamic democracy Sunni Muslims believe that Islam requires decisions made by the Muslim societies to be made by shura of the Muslim community.

[ 1 ] Traditionally however, the amir , sultan or caliph would consult with his wazirs (ministers) and make a decision, after taking into consideration their opinions.

[ citation needed ] Shia Muslims say that Islam requires submission to existing rulers if they are correctly appointed, so long as they govern according to Sharia or Islamic law. This is a more traditional approach, characteristic of many centuries of Islamic history .

[ citation needed ] The difference between the two appears more semantic than actual—the latter accept that the rulers must be accounted in all aspects of ruling, to ensure affairs are managed in the best possible way whether decisions were taken through consultation or not.

[ citation needed ] Shura in the Qur'an [ edit ] The 42nd Sura of the Qur'an is named “Shura”.

[ 2 ] The 38th verse of that Sura declares shura to be the praiseworthy lifestyle of a successful believer. It states that Muslims should decide on their matters by consulting with each other.

"Those who hearken to their Lord, and establish regular Prayer; who (conduct) their affairs by mutual consultation among themselves; who spend out of what We bestow on them for Sustenance" [are praised] (Q.42:38) [ 3 ] The 159th verse of 3rd Sura advises Muhammad to consult with believers regarding a matter.

Thus it is due to mercy from God that you deal with them gently, and had you been rough, hard hearted, they would certainly have dispersed from around you; pardon them therefore and ask pardon for them, and take counsel with them in the affair; so when you have decided, then place your trust in God; surely God loves those who trust. (Q.3:159) [ 4 ] Shura is also mentioned in ayah 233 of the 2nd Sura of Qur'an , but in a very specific context of how a mother and father who have a young child but are divorced should consult each other concerning the weaning of their child.

...But if both sides decide—after mutual consultation and consent—to wean a child, then there is no blame on them.... (Q.2:233) [ 5 ] Muhammad made some of his decisions in consultation with his followers unless it was a matter in which he said Allah had ordained something. It was common among Muhammad's companions to ask him if a certain advice was from God or from him. If it was from Muhammad, they felt free to give their opinion. Some times Muhammad changed his opinion on the advice of his followers like his decision to defend the city of Madinah by going out of the city in Uhad instead of from within the city.

[ citation needed ] Arguments over shura began with the debate over the ruler in the Islamic world. When Muhammad died in 632 CE, a tumultuous meeting at Saqifah selected Abu Bakr as his successor. This meeting did not include some of those with a strong interest in the matter—especially Ali ibn Abi Talib , Muhammad's cousin and son-in-law; people who wanted Ali to be the caliph (ruler) (later known as Shia ) still consider Abu Bakr an illegitimate leader of the caliphate.

[ citation needed ] In later years, the followers of Ali as the ruler of Muslims became one school of thought (Shi'atu Ali or Shia ), while the followers of Abu Bakr became the Sunni school of thought.

[ citation needed ] The Sunni school of thought believe that shura is recommended in the Qur'an (though some classical jurists maintained it is obligatory), The Qur'an, and by numerous hadith, or oral traditions of the sayings and doings of Muhammad and his companions . They say that the first four caliphs , or rulers of Islam, whom they call the Four Rightly-guided Caliphs, were chosen by shura. (See Succession to Muhammad , Umar ibn al-Khattab , The election of Uthman , and Ali Ibn Abi Talib .) [ citation needed ] The Shi'a school of thought believe that Muhammad had clearly indicated that Ali was his appointed infallible ruler of Muslim nation regardless of shura, a recommendation that was ignored by the first three caliphs. Shi'a do not stress the role of shura in choosing leaders, but believe that the divine vice-regent is chosen by God, or Allah, from the lineage of Muhammad ( Ahl al-Bayt ). The largest Shi'a sect believes that the current imam is in "occultation", hidden away until the last days, but there are minority Shi'a who follow leaders believed to be infallible imams.

[ citation needed ] Shura and the caliphate [ edit ] During and after Ali's tenure as caliph, the Muslim community fell into civil war. Power was eventually grasped by the Umayyad caliphs and then by the Abbasid caliphs. There were also rival caliphates in Egypt and Al-Andalus (today's Spain and Portugal), and in the Indian subcontinent . The Ottoman Caliphate was officially dissolved by the newly founded Grand National Assembly of Turkey in 1924.

Few of the later caliphs had anything but nominal control over the many Islamic states, and none were chosen by shura; all reached power by inheritance.

Dispute over importance [ edit ] The Muslim clergy counseled submission to rulers but also stressed the duty of the ruler to rule by shura. They based this recommendation on the passages from the Qur'an mentioned above.

Author Jebran Chamieh notes that while some Muslims consider Shurah a "pillar" of Islam, a number of factors indicate it may not be.

The two Quranic verses mention shura only briefly, [ 6 ] and while the verses indicate that shura is praiseworthy they do not indicate who should be consulted, what they should be consulted about, or whether the ruler or the shura should prevail in the event the two do not agree.

[ 6 ] While the Quran mentions briefly that consultation is worthwhile, in the corpus of Hadith there are few or no elaborations of who should be consulted, when, and about what; hadith being the usual place to expand on brief mentions in the Quran if those have any importance.

[ 6 ] Some Muslims argue Muhammad sought the advice of the Companions occasionally, but he "never felt  the advice was binding on him", nor did he follow the "pre-Islamic practice of holding regular meetings in the assemblies of Mecca and Medina".

[ 6 ] Contrary to the insistence of some Muslim authors, Muhammad's successors, the Rashidun Caliphs , did not seek consultation on decisions they had to make in governing nor in the choosing of the next Caliph.

[ 6 ] Shura and contemporary Muslim-majority states [ edit ] Part of a series on Islamism Fundamentals Islam History Culture Economics Politics Secularism Ideologies Salafi movement Salafi jihadism International propagation By region Deobandi movement Deobandi jihadism Qutbism Khomeinism Shia Islamism Islamic fundamentalism Islamic nationalism Concepts Apostasy in Islam Takfir Islamic governance Caliphate Islamic democracy Islamic feminism Islamic liberalism Islamic socialism Islamic extremism Islamic state Islamic republic Spread of Islam ( of knowledge ) Jihad Islamic terrorism Jihadism Pan-Islamism Political Islam aspects Post-Islamism Sharia Shura Two-nation theory Ummah Influences Anti-communism Anti-imperialism Anti-Zionism Decolonization Islamic Golden Age Islamic revival Movements Scholastic Barelvi Dawat-e-Islami Deobandi Nurcu Salafism Madkhalism Ahl-i Hadith Sahwa movement Wahhabism International propagation by country/region Political Salafist Front Salafist Call Movement of Society for Peace Hamas Party of Democratic Action Jamaat-e-Islami Millî Görüş Muslim Brotherhood List of Islamic political parties Militant Militant Islamism based in MENA region South Asia Southeast Asia Sub-Saharan Africa Key texts The Caliphate or the Grand Imamate ( Rashīd Rīďha 1922 ) Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam ( Iqbal 1930s ) Principles of State and Government ( Asad 1961 ) Ma'alim fi al-Tariq ("Milestones") ( Qutb 1965 ) Islamic Government: Governance of the Jurist ("Velayat-e faqih") ( Khomeini 1970 ) Heads of state Ahmed al-Sharaa Recep Tayyip Erdoğan Ruhollah Khomeini Mohamed Morsi Muammar Gaddafi Alija Izetbegović Ismail Haniyeh Zia ul-Haq Ali Khamenei Omar al-Bashir Mohammed Omar House of Saud House of Thani Hibatullah Akhundzada Sadiq al-Mahdi Key ideologues Abu Hamza al-Masri Rabee al-Madkhali Muhammad Abduh Jamāl al-Dīn al-Afghānī Qazi Hussain Ahmad Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani Muhammad Asad Hassan al-Banna Rached Ghannouchi Safwat Hegazi Muhammad Iqbal Ali Khamenei Ruhollah Khomeini Necip Fazıl Kısakürek Abul A'la Maududi Abul Hasan Nadwi Taqi al-Din al-Nabhani Yusuf al-Qaradawi Sayyid Qutb Tariq Ramadan Ata Abu Rashta Rashid Rida Navvab Safavi Ali Shariati Haji Shariatullah Hassan Al-Turabi Ahmed Yassin Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Criticism Liberal and reform movements within Islam in Europe in North America Khaled Abu al-Fadl Farag Foda Abdelwahab Meddeb Maryam Namazie Maajid Nawaaz Sam Harris Olivier Roy Bassam Tibi Muhammad Sa'id al-Ashmawi Gilles Kepel Shiraz Maher Magnus Ranstorp Related topics Islam and modernity Modernism Islam and other religions Islamophobia Islam portal Politics portal v t e In some Muslim nations, shuras play a role in the constitution or governance. Some Muslim nations, such as Turkey , are secular republics, and Morocco is a constitutional monarchy. They could thus be said to be ruled by one version of shura. For instance, the bicameral Parliament of Pakistan is officially called the Majlis-i-Shura , although the Constitution uses various spellings of the term. In Egypt , the Upper House of Parliament was known as the Shura Council . The People's Consultative Assembly in Indonesia is called Majlis Permusyawaratan Rakyat in Indonesian language . The word musyawarat is derived from shura/syawara.

In some monarchies and clerical regimes, there is a shura with an advisory or consultative role.

Saudi Arabia , a monarchy, was given a shura council, the Consultative Assembly of Saudi Arabia , in 1993; there are now 150 members. All real power is held by the King, who is elected by family members.

Oman , also a monarchy, has a shura council; all members are elected except the president, who is appointed by the sultan . The council can only offer advice, which may be refused by the sultan.

In Iran , a council called the assembly of experts has the ability to impeach the supreme leader. In addition to that, a general shura wields legislative powers, equivalent to a modern-day Western parliament.

Shuras have also been a feature of revolutions in Islamic societies, such as in the Iranian revolution of 1979, where they were formed by workers and held considerable power over parts of the economy for a year before being dismantled. Shuras were similarly a feature of the uprisings in Iraq [ 7 ] [ 8 ] in 1991, where they functioned as a form of participatory democracy .

In the 21st century, some emerging scholars [ citation needed ] are now advocating the infusion of Shura with digital technology as a means to enhance participatory governance or E-Governance among Muslims for state- and community-building purposes.

Resemblance between majlis al-shura and a parliament [ edit ] Many traditional Sunni Islamic lawyers agree that to be in keeping with Islam, a government should have some form of council of consultation or majlis al-shura , although it must recognize that God and not the people are sovereign.

Al-Mawardi has written that members of the majlis should satisfy three conditions: they must be just, have enough knowledge to distinguish a good caliph from a bad one, and have sufficient wisdom and judgment to select the best caliph. Al-Mawardi also said that in emergencies when there is no caliphate and no majlis, the people themselves should create a majlis, select a list of candidates for caliph, and then the majlis should select a caliph from the list of candidates.

[ 9 ] Many contemporary Muslims have compared the concept of Shura to the principles of western parliamentary democracy. For example: What is the shura principle in Islam? ... It is predicated on three basic precepts. First, that all persons in any given society are equal in human and civil rights. Second, that public issues are best decided by majority view. And third, that the three other principles of justice, equality and human dignity, which constitute Islam's moral core, ... are best realized, in personal as well as public life, under shura governance.

[ 10 ] Other modern Muslim thinkers distance themselves from democracy.

Taqiuddin al-Nabhani , the founder of the modern transnational Islamist party Hizb ut-Tahrir , writes that shura is important and part of "the ruling structure" of the Islamic caliphate, "but not one of its pillars." If the caliph "neglects it," by not paying much or any attention, as happened after the first four caliphs, "he would be negligent, but the ruling system would remain Islamic." This is because the shura (consultation) in Islam is for seeking the opinion and not for ruling. This is contrary to the parliamentary system in democracy.

[ 11 ] The democratic parliamentary system being distinct from and inferior to the true Islamic caliphate system according to Taqiuddin an-Nabhani.

[ 12 ] Under the Hizb ut-Tahrir constitution, non-Muslims may not serve a caliph or any other ruling official, nor vote for these officials, but may be part of the majlis and voice "complaints in respect to unjust acts performed by the rulers or the misapplication of Islam upon them." Still others, such as the Muslim author Sayyid Qutb , go further, arguing that an Islamic shura should advise the caliph but not elect or supervise him. In an analysis of the shura chapter of the Qur'an , Qutb noted that Islam requires only that the ruler consult with at least some of the ruled (usually the elite), within the general context of God-made laws that the ruler must execute. In 1950 Qutb denounced democracy in favor of dictatorship , saying it was already bankrupt in the West and asking why it should be imported to the Middle East.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The practice of a consultative, but not bill-passing, caliph-electing or popularly elected shura, was adopted by the self-described strict Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan . While the Kandahar Shura of the Taliban debated issues, in the end its spokesman declared, "we abide by the Amir's view even if he alone takes this view." [ 15 ] Soviet etymology [ edit ] In Persian language and Dari in Afghanistan, the term شوروی , shuravi is used for ' Soviet ' (the etymology being related to council ). In Tajik language it is written Шӯравӣ .

See also [ edit ] Islamic democracy Moderation in Islam Salat al-Istikharah References [ edit ] ^ Esposito, John L., Oxford Dictionary of Islam, OUP, (2003) ^ Online Qur'an Project Chapter 42 ^ Online Qur'an Project 42.39 ^ فبما رحمة من الله لنت لهم و لو کنت فظا غلیظ القلب لانفضوا من حولك فاعف عنهم و استغفر لهم و شاورهم فی الأمر فإذا عزمت فتوکل علی الله إن الله یحب المتوکلین Online Qur'an Project 3.159 ^ "al-Baqarah 2:233" .

quran.com . Retrieved 18 March 2025 .

^ a b c d e Chamieh, Jebran (1979).

Traditionalists, Militants, Liberals in Present Islam . The Research and Publishing House. pp.

82– 3.

^ The Kurdish Uprising & Kurdistan's Nationalist Shopfront and its Negotiations with the Baathist/Fascist Regime , BM Blob and BM Combustion, London, July 14, 1991.

^ A Comrade's Testimony: A Journey to Irak , Communism No. 7, International Communist Group, April 1992 ^ Process of Choosing the Leader (Caliph) of the Muslims ^ "The Shura principle in Islam" by Sadek Jawad Sulaiman ^ The System of Islam, (Nidham ul Islam) by Taqiuddin an-Nabhani , Al-Khilafa Publications, 1423 AH - 2002 CE, p.61 ^ The System of Islam, by Taqiuddin an-Nabhani , p.39 ^ Qutb, Sayyid, Tafsir Surat al-Shura (Beirut, 1973), pp.83-85; Ma'alim fi al-Tariq , p.3 ^ Source: letter in al-Akhbar , August 8, 1952 ^ Interview with Taliban spokesman Mullah Wakil in Arabic magazine Al-Majallah, 23 October 1996 External links [ edit ] Liberal Democracy and Political Islam: The Search for Common Ground Ijtihad.org Alhewar.com Shura.org Shura. Mutual Consultation by Adam Hani Walker, UK v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Authority control databases International FAST National Germany Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐fbctf
Cached time: 20250816160006
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.509 seconds
Real time usage: 0.641 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3073/1000000
Revision size: 16662/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 97188/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6641/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 39855/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.337/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16957553/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  542.705      1 -total
 16.14%   87.614      1 Template:Islamism_sidebar
 15.74%   85.431      1 Template:Reflist
 15.58%   84.533      1 Template:Langx
 12.36%   67.094      1 Template:Cite_web
 11.79%   63.965      8 Template:Citation_Needed
 10.07%   54.666      1 Template:Short_description
 10.04%   54.506      9 Template:Fix
  8.66%   46.977      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  7.96%   43.196      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:192176:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816160006 and revision id 1302037601. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shura&oldid=1302037601 " Categories : Arabic words and phrases Arabic words and phrases in Sharia Sharia legal terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Tajik-language text This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 01:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shura 22 languages Add topic

