Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 12th–13th centuries 1.2 16th–18th centuries 1.3 19th–21st centuries 2 Gallery 3 Notes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye 32 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 48°53′53″N 2°05′47″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.89806°N 2.09639°E ﻿ / 48.89806; 2.09639 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Former royal palace in Île-de-France, France Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye General information Location Saint-Germain-en-Laye , France Construction started 1124 ; 901 years ago ( 1124 ) Design and construction Architect(s) Pierre Chambiges The Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye ( French pronunciation: [ʃɑto d(ə) sɛ̃ ʒɛʁmɛ̃ ɑ̃ lɛ] ) is a former royal palace in the commune of Saint-Germain-en-Laye , in the department of Yvelines , about 19 km west of Paris , France. Today, it houses the Musée d'Archéologie nationale (National Museum of Archaeology).

History [ edit ] 12th–13th centuries [ edit ] Sainte-Chapelle The first castle , named the Grand Châtelet , was built on the site by Louis VI in 1124. The castle was expanded by Louis IX in the 1230s.

The Saint Louis chapel at the castle belongs to the Rayonnant phase of French Gothic architecture . A 1238 charter of Louis IX instituting a regular religious service at the chapel is the first mention of a chapel having been built at the royal castle. This was a Sainte Chapelle , to house a relic of the Crown of Thorns or the True Cross . Its plan and architecture prefigure the major Sainte-Chapelle which Louis built within the Palais de la Cité at Paris between 1240 and 1248. Both buildings were built by Louis's favourite architect Pierre de Montreuil , who adapted the architectural formulae invented at Saint Germain for use in Paris. A single nave ends in a chevet , with almost all the wall areas filled by tall narrow glass windows, between which are large exterior buttresses . The ogives of the vault rest on columns between the bays and the column bases are placed behind a low isolated arcade. The building can thus be open and empty of all internal supports. This large number of windows is also enabled by the pierre armée technique, with metal elements built into the structure of the walls to ensure the stones' stability. The west wall is adorned by a large Gothic rose window in the Rayonnant Gothic style. It was in this chapel in 1238 that Baldwin II of Constantinople presented Louis with the relic of the crown of thorns and, though they were intended for the Sainte-Chapelle in Paris, they were housed here until the Paris chapel was consecrated in April 1248.

The castle was burned by Edward the Black Prince in 1346; of it, only the Gothic chapel remains from the site's medieval phase. This Château Vieux was rebuilt by Charles V in the 1360s on the old foundations.

16th–18th centuries [ edit ] Château-Neuf de Saint-Germain-en-Laye , a new addition to the palace that was later demolished The oldest parts of the current château were reconstructed by Francis I in 1539, and have subsequently been expanded several times. On 10 July 1547 a political rivalry came to a head in a legal duel here. Against the odds, Guy I de Chabot , 7th baron de Jarnac triumphed over François de Vivonne , seigneur de la Chasteigneraie, who died the next day after what was called "coup de Jarnac".

[ 1 ] In September 1548, rooms above the royal suite were refurbished for Mary, Queen of Scots and the children of Henry II of France .

[ 2 ] Staircase tower in the corner of the court Henry II built a separate new château nearby, to designs by Philibert de l'Orme . It stood at the crest of a slope, which was shaped, under the direction of Étienne du Pérac [ 3 ] into three massive descending terraces and narrower subsidiary mediating terraces, which were linked by divided symmetrical stairs and ramps and extended a single axis that finished at the edge of the Seine ; the design took many cues from the Villa Lante at Bagnaia .

[ 4 ] "Étienne du Pérac had spent a long time in Italy, and one manifestation of his interest in gardens of this type is his well-known view of the Villa d'Este , engraved in 1573." [ 5 ] The gardens laid out at Saint-Germain-en-Laye were among a half-dozen gardens introducing the Italian garden style to France that laid the groundwork for the French formal garden . Unlike the parterres that were laid out in casual relation to existing châteaux, often on difficult sites originally selected for defensive reasons, [ 6 ] these new gardens extended the central axis of a symmetrical building façade in rigorously symmetrical axial designs of patterned parterres, gravel walks, fountains and basins, and formally planted bosquets ; they began the tradition that reached its apex after 1650 in the gardens of André Le Nôtre .

[ 7 ] According to Claude Mollet 's Théâtre des plans et jardinage [ 8 ] the parterres were laid out in 1595 for Henry IV by Claude Mollet , trained at Anet and the progenitor of a dynasty of royal gardeners. One of the parterre designs by Mollet at Saint-Germain-en-Laye was illustrated in Olivier de Serres ' Le théâtre d'agriculture et mesnage des champs (1600), but the Château Neuf and the whole of its spectacular series of terraces can be fully seen in an engraving after Alexandre Francini , 1614.

[ 9 ] Silvestre's view of the uppermost terrace of the Château Neuf, shows (with artistic license) its neglected state.

Louis XIV was born at the Château Neuf in 1638.  One of du Pérac's retaining walls collapsed in 1660, and Louis undertook a renovation of the gardens in 1662. At his majority he established his court here in 1666, but he preferred the Château Vieux : the Château Neuf was abandoned in the 1660s and demolished. From 1663 until 1682, when the King removed definitively to Versailles , the team that he inherited from the unfortunate Nicolas Fouquet — Louis Le Vau , Jules Hardouin-Mansart and André Le Nôtre laboured to give the ancient pile a more suitable aspect.

The gardens were remade by André Le Nôtre from 1669 to 1673, and include a 2.4 kilometre long stone terrace which provides a view over the valley of the Seine and, in the distance, Paris.

The Château is at the centre of the town of Saint-Germain-en-Laye , close by its RER A railway station .

Louis XIV turned the château over to King James II of England after his exile from Britain in the Glorious Revolution of 1688. King James lived in the château for thirteen years, and his daughter Louise-Marie Stuart was born in exile here in 1692. King James lies buried in the nearby Church of Saint-Germain ; his wife Mary of Modena remained at the château until her death in 1718.  Their son James left the château in 1716, ultimately settling in Rome.  Many Jacobites —supporters of the exiled Stuarts—remained at the château until the French Revolution , leaving in 1793. The Jacobites often consisted of former members of the Jacobite court, and the apartments left empty in the château by the Jacobite court pensioners upon their death, were often passed down to their widows and children by the caretaker of the château, Adrien Maurice de Noailles, 3rd Duke of Noailles .

[ 10 ] The Jacobite colony at Saint-Germain was still dominant in the 1750s, when they were however treated with increasing hostility. After the death of the Duke of Noailles in 1766, who had been responsible for the continuing Jacobite dominance because of his preference to give rooms to Jacobites, the British dominance quickly decreased and more French inhabitants were given lodgings in the château: the last member of the Stuart court was Theresa O'Connel, who died in 1778.

[ 10 ] The last descendants of the British Jacobites, by then mostly bearing French names, were evicted when the building was confiscated by the government during the French revolution in 1793.

[ 10 ] 19th–21st centuries [ edit ] In the 19th century, Napoleon I established his cavalry officers' training school here.

Napoleon III initiated restoration of the castle by Eugène Millet , starting in 1862. It became the Musée des Antiquités Nationales (National Museum of Antiquities) in 1867, displaying the archeological objects of France.

[ citation needed ] Auguste Lafollye took over responsibility for the restoration on Millet's death in 1879, continuing until 1889. His goal, and that of his successor Honoré Daumet , was to restore the French Renaissance style of Francis I .

[ 11 ] On September 10, 1919 the Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye , ending hostilities between the Allies of World War I and Austria , was signed at the château.

[ 12 ] During the German occupation (1940–44) , the château served as the headquarters of the German Army in France.

The museum was renamed the Musée d'Archéologie Nationale in 2005.

[ 13 ] Its collections include finds from Paleolithic to Merovingian times.

Gallery [ edit ] The palace as seen from the gardens Angle view of the palace Details of the palace's façade The entrance of the palace The entrance of the museum The inner courtyard One of the staircases The inner ceilings Notes [ edit ] ^ Baumgartner, Frederic (1988).

Henry II: King of France 1547-1559 . Duke University Press. p. 60.

^ Jane T. Stoddart , The girlhood of Mary Queen of Scots (London, 1908), pp. 8, 419–420 ^ Karling 1974, p 10 ^ F. Hamilton Hazlehurst, Jacques Boyceau , pp. 20, 77–79, 100, noted by Karling.

^ Karling 1974, p. 11 ^ Even the parterres at Fontainebleau bear no direct relation to the façades of the château.

^ Sten Karling, in "The importance of André Mollet and his family for the development of the French formal garden," in The French Formal Garden , Elizabeth MacDougall and F. Hamilton Hazlehurst, editors, (Dumbarton Oaks, 1974), in making this point, notes Ancy-le-Franc , Anet , Maune , Charleval , Verneuil and Saint-Germain-en-Laye.

^ The book was not published until 1652, but it had long been in preparation (Karling 1974).

^ Francini's engraving is illustrated by Karling, fig. 8.

^ a b c Corp, Edward (2004).

A Court in Exile: The Stuarts in France, 1689-1718 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-58462-3 .

^ Boulet, François (2006).

Leçon d'histoire de France Saint-Germain-en-Laye: Des antiquités nationales à une ville internationale . DISLAB. p. 189.

ISBN 978-2-9520091-8-8 . Retrieved 2013-06-12 .

^ "Austrian treaty signed in amity," The New York Times , Sept. 11, 1919, p. 12.

^ Ministerial decree no. 2005-698 of June 22, 2005 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye .

Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye at Structurae ( French version of page also includes the history of the Château) The Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye, National Museum of Archaeology - The official website of France (in English) "St-Germain-en-Laye: un haut lieu de la royauté (in French) Discover the Castle of Saint-Germain-en-Laye on Eurochannel v t e Saint-Germain-en-Laye Schools CY Tech École Saint-Érembert [ fr ] Collège et Lycée Notre-Dame Lycée agricole et horticole de Saint-Germain-Chambourcy Lycée International de Saint-Germain-en-Laye Lycée Jeanne-d'Albret [ fr ] Lycée technologique Jean-Baptiste-Poquelin Lycée technologique Léonard-de-Vinci Landmarks Camp des Loges Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye Forest of Saint-Germain-en-Laye Stade Georges Lefèvre Paris RER and Transilien stations Saint-Germain-en-Laye–Grande-Ceinture station Saint-Germain-en-Laye station Achères–Grand-Cormier station Saint-Germain – Bel-Air – Fourqueux (SNCF) [ fr ] Culture Paris Saint-Germain FC Stade Saint-Germain v t e French royal residences Château d'Amboise Château of Blois Château de Chambord Château de Choisy Palais de la Cité Château de Compiègne Palace of Fontainebleau Louvre Palace Luxembourg Palace Château de Marly Château de Meudon Château de la Muette Château de Rambouillet Palais-Royal Château de Saint-Cloud Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye Tuileries Palace Palace of Versailles (including the Grand Trianon and Petit Trianon ) v t e Tourism in Paris Landmarks Arc de Triomphe Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel Arènes de Lutèce Bourse Catacombs Conciergerie Eiffel Tower Gare d'Austerlitz Gare de l'Est Gare de Lyon Gare du Nord Gare Montparnasse Gare Saint-Lazare Grand Palais and Petit Palais Institut de France Jeanne d'Arc Les Invalides Napoleon's tomb Louvre Pyramid Luxor Obelisk Odéon Opéra Bastille Opéra Garnier Panthéon Philharmonie de Paris Place Diana Flame of Liberty Porte Saint-Denis Porte Saint-Martin Sorbonne Tour Montparnasse Museums ( list ) Army Museum Bibliothèque nationale Carnavalet Centre Pompidou Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume Louis Vuitton Foundation Musée des Arts décoratifs Musée des Arts et Métiers Musée d'Art et d'Histoire du Judaïsme Musée d'Art Moderne de Paris Maison de Balzac Musée Bourdelle Musée de la Cinémathèque Musée Cognacq-Jay Musée Grévin Musée Guimet Maison de Victor Hugo Musée Jacquemart-André Musée du Louvre Musée Marmottan Monet Musée de la Vie romantique Musée de Montmartre Musée National d'Art Moderne Musée national Eugène Delacroix Musée national Gustave Moreau Musée national des Monuments Français Muséum national d'histoire naturelle Musée de Cluny – Musée national du Moyen Âge Musée de l'Orangerie Musée d'Orsay Musée Pasteur Musée Picasso Musée du Quai Branly Musée Rodin Palais de la Légion d'Honneur Musée de la Légion d'honneur Palais de Tokyo Religious buildings Alexander Nevsky Cathedral American Cathedral American Church Armenian Cathedral of St. John the Baptist Chapelle expiatoire Grand Mosque Grand Synagogue Synagogue de Nazareth La Madeleine Notre-Dame de Paris Notre-Dame-de-Bonne-Nouvelle Notre-Dame-de-Lorette Notre-Dame-des-Victoires Sacré-Cœur Saint Ambroise Saint-Augustin Saint-Étienne-du-Mont Saint-Eustache Saint-François-Xavier Saint-Germain-des-Prés Saint-Germain l'Auxerrois Saint-Gervais-Saint-Protais Tour Saint-Jacques Saint-Jean de Montmartre Saint-Paul-Saint-Louis Saint-Pierre de Montmartre Saint-Roch Saint-Sulpice Saint-Vincent-de-Paul Sainte-Chapelle Sainte-Clotilde Sainte-Trinité Temple du Marais Val-de-Grâce Hôtels particuliers and palaces Élysée Palace Hôtel de Beauvais Hôtel de Charost Hôtel de Crillon Hôtel d'Estrées Hôtel de la Païva Hôtel de Pontalba Hôtel de Sens Hôtel de Soubise Hôtel de Sully Hôtel de Ville Hôtel Lambert Hôtel Matignon Luxembourg Palace Petit Luxembourg Palais Bourbon Palais de Justice Palais de la Cité Palais-Royal Bridges, streets, areas, squares and waterways Avenue de l'Opéra Avenue Foch Avenue George V Boulevard de la Madeleine Boulevard de Sébastopol Canal de l'Ourcq Canal Saint-Martin Champ de Mars Champs-Élysées Covered passages Galerie Véro-Dodat Choiseul Panoramas Galerie Vivienne Havre Jouffroy Brady Latin Quarter Le Marais Montmartre Montparnasse Place Diana Place Dauphine Place de la Bastille Place de la Concorde Place de la Nation Place de la République Place des Émeutes-de-Stonewall Place des États-Unis Place des Pyramides Place des Victoires Place des Vosges Place du Carrousel Place du Châtelet Place du Tertre Place Saint-Michel Place Vendôme Pont Alexandre III Pont d'Iéna Pont de Bir-Hakeim Pont des Arts Pont Neuf Port du Louvre Rive Gauche Rue Basse Rue Bonaparte Rue Charlemagne Rue d'Argenteuil Rue de la Ferronnerie Rue de la Paix Rue de la Sourdière Rue de Montmorency Rue de Richelieu Rue de Rivoli Rue de Vaugirard Rue des Francs-Bourgeois Rue des Lombards Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré Rue Elzévir Rue Foyatier Rue Molière Rue Montorgueil Rue Radziwill Rue Rambuteau Rue Mondétour Rue Pastourelle Rue des Rosiers Rue Saint-Honoré Rue Saint-Denis Rue Sainte-Anne Saint-Germain-des-Prés Trocadéro Viaduc d'Austerlitz Parks and gardens ( list ) Bois de Boulogne Jardin d'Acclimatation Bois de Vincennes Parc floral Jardin du Luxembourg Parc André-Citroën Parc Clichy-Batignolles Parc de Belleville Parc de Bercy Parc de la Butte-du-Chapeau-Rouge Parc des Buttes Chaumont Parc Georges-Brassens Parc Monceau Parc Montsouris Tuileries Garden Coulée verte René-Dumont Sport venues Accor Arena Auteuil Hippodrome Halle Georges Carpentier Longchamp Hippodrome Parc des Princes Piscine Molitor Porte de La Chapelle Arena Stade Jean Bouin Stade Pershing Stade Pierre de Coubertin Stade Roland Garros Stade Sébastien Charléty Vélodrome de Vincennes Vincennes Hippodrome Cemeteries Montmartre Cemetery Montparnasse Cemetery Passy Cemetery Père Lachaise Cemetery Oscar Wilde's tomb Picpus Cemetery Région parisienne Basilica of Saint-Denis Château d'Écouen Château de Chantilly Château de Fontainebleau Château de Malmaison Château de Rambouillet Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye Château de Sceaux Château and Gardens of Versailles ( Grand Trianon and Petit Trianon , including the Fresh pavilion ) Château de Vincennes La Défense Grande Arche Paris La Défense Arena Disneyland Paris Disneyland Park Walt Disney Studios Park Exploradôme Fort Mont-Valérien Mémorial de la France combattante Suresnes American Cemetery and Memorial France Miniature Musée de l'air et de l'espace Musée Fragonard d'Alfort Parc Astérix Parc de Saint-Cloud Provins La Roche-Guyon Sèvres – Cité de la céramique Stade de France Vaux-le-Vicomte Culture and events Bastille Day military parade Dîner en Blanc Fête de la Musique Nuit Blanche Paris Air Show Paris Fashion Week Paris-Plages Republican Guard Solidays Other Axe historique Bateau-Lavoir Bateaux Mouches Café des 2 Moulins Café Procope Folies Bergère Fountains in Paris La Ruche Les Deux Magots Maxim's Moulin de la Galette Moulin Rouge Paris Métro entrances Montmartre Funicular Paris Musées Paris syndrome Paris Zoological Park Pyramide inversée World Heritage Centre Related List of tourist attractions in Paris Art in Paris Paris syndrome Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Israel Geographic Mérimée Structurae MusicBrainz place Other Yale LUX 48°53′53″N 2°05′47″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.89806°N 2.09639°E ﻿ / 48.89806; 2.09639 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Château_de_Saint-Germain-en-Laye&oldid=1284503181 " Categories : Buildings and structures completed in 1124 12th-century fortifications Houses completed in 1539 Châteaux in Yvelines Royal residences in France Ancien Régime French architecture Châteaux with Renaissance gardens in France Châteaux with formal gardens in France Renaissance architecture in France Museums in Yvelines 1539 establishments in France Réunion des Musées Nationaux Tourist attractions in Yvelines Francis I of France James II of England Mary of Modena Saint-Germain-en-Laye Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Pages with French IPA Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2013 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with French-language sources (fr) Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 8 April 2025, at 00:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Château de Saint-Germain-en-Laye 32 languages Add topic

