Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aristotle's conception 2 Interpretations 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Active intellect 8 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano עברית Nederlands پښتو Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in classical and Medieval philosophy In medieval philosophy , the active intellect ( Latin : intellectus agens ; also translated as agent intellect , active intelligence , active reason , or productive intellect ) is the formal ( morphe ) aspect of the intellect ( nous ), according to the Aristotelian theory of hylomorphism . The nature of the active intellect was a major theme of late classical and medieval philosophy. Various thinkers sought to reconcile their commitment to Aristotle's account of the body and soul to their own theological commitments. At stake in particular was in what way Aristotle's account of an incorporeal soul might contribute to understanding of deity and creation .

Aristotle's conception [ edit ] The idea is first encountered in two of Aristotle's works.

A passage in De Anima , Book III explains "how the human intellect passes from its original state, in which it does not think, to a subsequent state, in which it does." He inferred that the energeia / dynamis distinction must also exist in the soul itself.

[ 1 ] Aristotle distinguished two separable types of intellect or nous which he believed were both necessary in order to explain human thinking. What modern scholars call the " passive intellect " is material and destructible and it receives the intelligible forms of things. It is acted upon. In contrast, the active intellect is what acts upon the passive intellect. It is required to make potential knowledge into actual knowledge, in the same way that light makes potential colors into actual colors. Aristotle describes this active intellect as something separate, everlasting, unchanging, and immaterial. It is the passive or material intellect where human thinking and remembering happens, because these involve change.

Another passage which is traditionally read together with the De Anima passage is in Metaphysics , Book XII, Ch. 7–10.

[ 2 ] Aristotle again distinguishes between the active and passive intellects, but this time he equates the active intellect with the " unmoved mover " and God . He explains that when people have real knowledge, their thinking is, for a time receiving, or partaking of, this energeia of the nous (active intellect).

[ 3 ] Interpretations [ edit ] Sachs comments that the nature of the active intellect was "the source of a massive amount of commentary and of fierce disagreement"; elsewhere, chapter 5 of De Anima has been referred to as "the most intensely studied sentences in the history of philosophy." [ 2 ] As Davidson remarks: Just what Aristotle meant by potential intellect and active intellect – terms not even explicit in the De Anima and at best implied – and just how he understood the interaction between them remains moot. Students of the history of philosophy continue to debate Aristotle's intent, particularly the question whether he considered the active intellect to be an aspect of the human soul or an entity existing independently of man.

[ 1 ] Alexander of Aphrodisias regarded the active intellect as a power external to the human mind, going so far as to identify it with God.

[ 4 ] The reason for positing a single external Agent Intellect is that all (rational) human beings are considered by Aristotelians to possess or have access to a fixed and stable set of concepts, a unified correct knowledge of the universe. The only way that all human minds could possess the same correct knowledge is if they all had access to some central knowledge store, as terminals might have access to a mainframe computer ( Kraemer 2003 ). This mainframe is the Agent Intellect, the "mind" of the universe, which makes all other cognition possible.

Al-Farabi and Avicenna and Maimonides , agreed with the "external" interpretation of active intellect, and held that the active intellect was the lowest of the ten emanations descending through the celestial spheres . Maimonides cited it in his definition of prophecy where: Prophecy is, in truth and reality, an emanation sent forth by the Divine Being through the medium of the Active Intellect, in the first instance to man's rational faculty , and then to his imaginative faculty .

[ 5 ] The more strict Aristotelians, Avempace and Averroes , wrote about how one could conjoin oneself with the active intellect, thus attaining a kind of philosophical enlightenment. In Medieval and Renaissance Europe some thinkers, such as Siger of Brabant , adopted the interpretation of Averroes on every point, as did the later school of "Paduan Averroists".

Thomas Aquinas elaborated on Aristotle's distinction between the active intellect and passive intellect in his Disputed Questions on the Soul and his commentary on Aristotle's De Anima , arguing, against Averroes, that the active intellect is part of the individual human personality. In his Summa Theologica , Aquinas states that "according to the teaching of our Faith, this separated intellect is God Himself, who is the creator of the soul and in whom alone the soul is beatified." [ 6 ] Citing Gregory of Nyssa , he said "man has intellective understanding along with the angels" which are called 'minds' and 'intellects' because they have no other power than the intellective power and the will (Question 79, Article 1). A third school, of "Alexandrists", rejected the argument linking the active intellect to the immortality of the soul, while hastening to add that they still believed in immortality as a matter of religious faith. (See Pietro Pomponazzi ; Cesare Cremonini .) See also [ edit ] Aristotelianism John Philoponus References [ edit ] ^ a b Davidson, Herbert (1992), Alfarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes, on Intellect , Oxford University Press , p. 3.

^ a b Sachs, Joe (2001), Aristotle's On the Soul and On Memory and Recollection , Green Lion Press .

^ See Metaphysics 1072b .

^ Davidson, Herbert (1992), Alfarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes, on Intellect , Oxford University Press .

^ Maimonides, Guide for the Perplexed (translator: Michael Friedländer ), Dover: New York, 1904, p. 225 .

^ Summa Theologiae, part I, question 79, article 4 – Is the active intellect something that belongs to our soul?

(PDF) . Translated by Alfred J. Freddoso. p. 600.

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) Sources [ edit ] Kraemer, Joel L. (2003), "The Islamic context of medieval Jewish philosophy", in Frank, Daniel H.; Leaman, Oliver (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Medieval Jewish Philosophy , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

38– 68, ISBN 978-0-521-65207-0 Commentarium magnum in Aristotelis De anima libros , ed. Crawford, Cambridge (Mass.) 1953: Latin translation of Averroes' long commentary on the De Anima Walter Burley, Commentarium in Aristotelis De Anima L.III Critical Edition and Palaeography transcription by Mario Tonelotto Averroes (tr. Alain de Libera), L'intelligence et la pensée , Paris 1998: French translation of Averroes' long commentary on book 3 of the De Anima Essays on Aristotle's De Anima , ed.

Nussbaum and Rorty: Oxford 1992 Juan Fernando Sellés (2012), El intelecto agente y los filósofos. Venturas y desventuras del supremo hallazgo aristotélico sobre el hombre , Tomo I (Siglos IV a.C. – XV), EUNSA, Pamplona, p. 650.

External links [ edit ] Catholic Encyclopedia article v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Active_intellect&oldid=1259205531 " Categories : Aristotelianism Concepts in metaphysics Medieval philosophy Theories in ancient Greek philosophy Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 November 2024, at 23:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Active intellect 8 languages Add topic

