Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 2019 revision of the SI 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents SI base unit 53 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano Къарачай-малкъар Latviešu Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська اردو West-Vlams 粵語 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from SI base units ) One of the seven units of measurement that define the metric system The seven SI base units Symbol Name Base quantity s second time m metre length kg kilogram mass A ampere electric current K kelvin thermodynamic temperature mol mole amount of substance cd candela luminous intensity The SI base units are the standard units of measurement defined by the International System of Units (SI) for the seven base quantities of what is now known as the International System of Quantities : they are notably a basic set from which all other SI units can be derived . The units and their physical quantities are the second for time , the metre (sometimes spelled meter) for length or distance , the kilogram for mass , the ampere for electric current , the kelvin for thermodynamic temperature , the mole for amount of substance , and the candela for luminous intensity . The SI base units are a fundamental part of modern metrology , and thus part of the foundation of modern science and technology.

The SI base units form a set of mutually independent dimensions as required by dimensional analysis commonly employed in science and technology.

[ citation needed ] The names and symbols of SI base units are written in lowercase, except the symbols of those named after a person, which are written with an initial capital letter.  For example, the metre has the symbol m, but the kelvin has symbol K, because it is named after Lord Kelvin and the ampere with symbol A is named after André-Marie Ampère .

Definitions [ edit ] On 20 May 2019, as the final act of the 2019 revision of the SI , the BIPM officially introduced the following new definitions, replacing the preceding definitions of the SI base units .

SI base units Name Symbol Measure Post-2019 formal definition [ 1 ] Historical origin / justification Dimension symbol second s time "The second, symbol s, is the SI unit of time . It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the caesium frequency, ∆ ν Cs , the unperturbed ground-state hyperfine transition frequency of the caesium 133 atom , to be 9 192 631 770 when expressed in the unit Hz, which is equal to s −1 ." [ 1 ] The day is divided into 24 hours, each hour divided into 60 minutes, each minute divided into 60 seconds.

A second is 1 / (24 × 60 × 60) of the day . Historically, a day was defined as the mean solar day ; i.e., the average time between two successive occurrences of local apparent solar noon .

T metre m length "The metre, symbol m, is the SI unit of length . It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the speed of light in vacuum c to be 299 792 458 when expressed in the unit m s −1 , where the second is defined in terms of ∆ ν Cs ." [ 1 ] 1 / 10 000 000 of the distance from the Earth 's equator to the North Pole measured on the meridian arc through Paris .

L kilogram kg mass "The kilogram, symbol kg, is the SI unit of mass . It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the Planck constant h to be 6.626 070 15 × 10 −34 when expressed in the unit J s , which is equal to kg m 2 s −1 , where the metre and the second are defined in terms of c and ∆ ν Cs ." [ 1 ] The mass of one litre of water at the temperature of melting ice. A litre is one thousandth of a cubic metre.

M ampere A electric current "The ampere, symbol A, is the SI unit of electric current . It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the elementary charge e to be 1.602 176 634 × 10 −19 when expressed in the unit C, which is equal to A s , where the second is defined in terms of ∆ ν Cs ." [ 1 ] The original "International Ampere" was defined electrochemically as the current required to deposit 1.118 milligrams of silver per second from a solution of silver nitrate .

I kelvin K thermodynamic temperature "The kelvin, symbol K, is the SI unit of thermodynamic temperature . It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the Boltzmann constant k to be 1.380 649 × 10 −23 when expressed in the unit J K −1 , which is equal to kg m 2 s −2 K −1 , where the kilogram, metre and second are defined in terms of h , c and ∆ ν Cs ." [ 1 ] The Celsius scale : the Kelvin scale uses the degree Celsius for its unit increment, but is a thermodynamic scale (0 K is absolute zero ).

Θ mole mol amount of substance "The mole, symbol mol, is the SI unit of amount of substance . One mole contains exactly 6.022 140 76 × 10 23 elementary entities. This number is the fixed numerical value of the Avogadro constant , N A , when expressed in the unit mol −1 and is called the Avogadro number .

The amount of substance, symbol n , of a system is a measure of the number of specified elementary entities. An elementary entity may be an atom, a molecule, an ion, an electron, any other particle or specified group of particles." [ 1 ] Atomic weight or molecular weight divided by the molar mass constant , 1 g/mol.

N candela cd luminous intensity "The candela, symbol cd, is the SI unit of luminous intensity in a given direction. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the luminous efficacy of monochromatic radiation of frequency 540 × 10 12 Hz , K cd , to be 683 when expressed in the unit lm W −1 , which is equal to cd sr W −1 , or cd sr kg −1 m −2 s 3 , where the kilogram, metre and second are defined in terms of h , c and ∆ ν Cs ." [ 1 ] The candlepower , which is based on the light emitted from a burning candle of standard properties.

J 2019 revision of the SI [ edit ] Main article: 2019 revision of the SI The SI system after 1983, but before the 2019 revision: Dependence of base unit definitions on other base units (for example, the metre is defined as the distance travelled by light in a specific fraction of a second ), with the constants of nature and artefacts used to define them (such as the mass of the IPK for the kilogram).

New SI: Dependence of base unit definitions on physical constants with fixed numerical values and on other base units that are derived from the same set of constants. Arrows are shown in the opposite direction compared to typical dependency graphs , i.e.

a → → b {\displaystyle a\rightarrow b} in this chart means b {\displaystyle b} depends on a {\displaystyle a} .

New base unit definitions were adopted on 16 November 2018, and they became effective on 20 May 2019. The definitions of the base units have been modified several times since the Metre Convention in 1875, and new additions of base units have occurred. Since the redefinition of the metre in 1960, the kilogram had been the only base unit still defined directly in terms of a physical artefact, rather than a property of nature. This led to a number of the other SI base units being defined indirectly in terms of the mass of the same artefact; the mole , the ampere , and the candela were linked through their definitions to the mass of the International Prototype of the Kilogram , a roughly golfball-sized platinum – iridium cylinder stored in a vault near Paris.

It has long been an objective in metrology to define the kilogram in terms of a fundamental constant , in the same way that the metre is now defined in terms of the speed of light . The 21st General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM, 1999) placed these efforts on an official footing, and recommended "that national laboratories continue their efforts to refine experiments that link the unit of mass to fundamental or atomic constants with a view to a future redefinition of the kilogram". Two possibilities attracted particular attention: the Planck constant and the Avogadro constant .

In 2005, the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM) approved preparation of new definitions for the kilogram, the ampere, and the kelvin and it noted the possibility of a new definition of the mole based on the Avogadro constant.

[ 2 ] The 23rd CGPM (2007) decided to postpone any formal change until the next General Conference in 2011.

[ 3 ] In a note to the CIPM in October 2009, [ 4 ] Ian Mills, the President of the CIPM Consultative Committee – Units (CCU) catalogued the uncertainties of the fundamental constants of physics according to the current definitions and their values under the proposed new definition .  He urged the CIPM to accept the proposed changes in the definition of the kilogram , ampere , kelvin , and mole so that they are referenced to the values of the fundamental constants, namely the Planck constant ( h ), the elementary charge ( e ), the Boltzmann constant ( k ), and the Avogadro constant ( N A ).

[ 5 ] This approach was approved in 2018, only after measurements of these constants were achieved with sufficient accuracy.

See also [ edit ] International vocabulary of metrology International System of Quantities Non-SI units mentioned in the SI Metric prefix Physical constant References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h "The International System of Units (SI), 9th Edition" (PDF) . Bureau International des Poids et Mesures. 2019.

^ 94th Meeting of the International Committee for Weights and Measures (2005).

"Recommendation 1: Preparative steps towards new definitions of the kilogram, the ampere, the kelvin and the mole in terms of fundamental constants" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 August 2011.

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ 23rd General Conference on Weights and Measures (2007).

Resolution 12: On the possible redefinition of certain base units of the International System of Units (SI) .

^ Ian Mills, President of the CCU (October 2009).

"Thoughts about the timing of the change from the Current SI to the New SI" (PDF) . CIPM . Retrieved 23 February 2010 .

^ Ian Mills (29 September 2010).

"Draft Chapter 2 for SI Brochure, following redefinitions of the base units" (PDF) . CCU . Retrieved 1 January 2011 .

External links [ edit ] International Bureau of Weights and Measures National Physical Laboratory NIST – SI v t e SI units Base units ampere candela kelvin kilogram metre mole second Derived units with special names becquerel coulomb degree Celsius farad gray henry hertz joule katal lumen lux newton ohm pascal radian siemens sievert steradian tesla volt watt weber Other accepted units astronomical unit dalton day decibel degree of arc electronvolt hectare hour litre minute minute and second of arc neper tonne See also Conversion of units Metric prefixes Historical definitions of the SI base units 2019 revision of the SI System of units of measurement Category v t e SI base quantities Base quantities Quantity SI unit Name Symbol Dimension symbol Unit name Unit symbol time, duration t T second s length l , x , r , etc.

L metre m mass m M kilogram kg electric current I , i I ampere A thermodynamic temperature T Θ kelvin K amount of substance n N mole mol luminous intensity I v J candela cd See also History of the metric system International System of Quantities 2019 revision Systems of measurement Category Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=SI_base_unit&oldid=1246061009 " Categories : SI units SI base units SI base quantities Dimensional analysis Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 This page was last edited on 16 September 2024, at 17:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents SI base unit 53 languages Add topic

