Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Gameplay 2 Hyperbolic geometry 3 Release 4 Reception 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents HyperRogue Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Independent video game 2011 video game HyperRogue Developer(s) Zeno Rogue Composer(s) Shawn Parrotte Will Savino Lincoln Domina Platform(s) Microsoft Windows , OS X , Linux , iOS , Android , OpenPandora Release WW : November, 2011 Genre(s) Roguelike Mode(s) Single-player HyperRogue is a free and open-source [ 1 ] independent video game developed by Zeno Rogue. It is a roguelike inspired by the puzzle game Deadly Rooms of Death and the art of M. C. Escher , taking place in the hyperbolic plane .

Gameplay [ edit ] Screenshot of HyperRogue on mobile. The player is in the Temple of Cthulhu , a land featuring an infinite series of nested horocycles . The game is using the alternate binary tiling of the hyperbolic plane.

HyperRogue is a turn-based game in which the player controls one character exploring a world based on hyperbolic geometry , with cells arranged as a truncated order-7 triangular tiling by default (with a few exceptions). The player can also choose to play on some other tilings and honeycombs in two and three dimensions, in all eight Thurston geometries , along with a variety of quotient spaces .

[ 2 ] It borrows procedural generation and permadeath from the roguelike genre, and puzzle-based combat of Deadly Rooms of Death .

The world consists of 72 lands, [ 3 ] each of which has a different theme, treasure, enemies, mechanics, and a magical power; the lands are usually separated by hyperbolic straight lines ("Great Walls") and change as one travels, thus allowing monsters and magical powers to interact between the different lands. The world is procedurally generated on the fly; some of the lands must be unlocked by fulfilling a prerequisite in the given play (e.g., collecting a certain number of treasures).

The main goal of the game is to collect treasures while avoiding entrapment by enemies. Other than simply collecting the treasures, there are several major quests to undertake (Yendor quest, Prince(ss) quest, Hyperstone Quest and the Holy Grail ).

The gameplay is inspired by Deadly Rooms of Death . The basic enemies alternate their turns with the player; in their turn, the player or an enemy can stay in place, move or attack an adjacent cell. The player and basic enemies can be killed with a single hit. Similar to the check rule in chess , the game does not allow the player to make moves which would lead them to be immediately killed. While defeating a single enemy is not a problem, tactical planning is essential for winning fights with multiple enemies at once.

[ 4 ] This basic formula is altered in many ways: there are monsters of varying speeds, multi-tile monsters such as Ivies, sandworms , snakes and dragons, and monsters which have to be attacked in a specific way.

The game has many special modes, allowing the player to take on a specific challenge (Pure Tactics Mode, Yendor Challenge), or changing a crucial aspect of the game (Chaos Mode where lands change very quickly as you travel, Shoot'em Up Mode which is continuous rather than turn-based and grid-based, and Orb Strategy Mode where orbs can be used at any time instead of being picked up in the world). The source code also contains a visualization engine, called RogueViz.

[ 5 ] Hyperbolic geometry [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to HyperRogue .

The world of HyperRogue is characterized by its non-Euclidean geometry , precisely hyperbolic geometry ; [ 6 ] this affects many aspects of the game.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Basic gameplay.

The player can take advantage of the negatively curved space to escape situations which would be impossible to escape in a similar game in a Euclidean grid. Specifically, any monster following the player will get further and further behind unless directly behind the player; this is because following an equidistant to a specific path takes longer than following the original path.

Art.

The game is displayed in the Poincaré disk model by default; it is also possible to select other projections from the special modes menu. The graphics are inspired by the art of M. C. Escher , particularly the Circle Limit series using hyperbolic geometry.

Balance.

One property of hyperbolic geometry is that the amount of cells in distance at most d from the starting point is exponential in d ; there are centillions of cells in distance 1000 from the starting point. This makes the world of HyperRogue substantially bigger than Euclidean space. The traditional RPG formula of getting stronger by collecting equipment had to be changed, in order to prevent grinding strategies from being effective. New lands and magical powers are unlocked by collecting treasures, but on the other hand, the amount of monsters spawning depends on the number of treasures collected in the given land, thus making it impossible to grind indefinitely.

Quest design.

Many challenges in the game would be trivial in a Euclidean world, but are made harder by the exponential expansion of the hyperbolic plane. At the same time, other challenges would be practically impossible in Euclidean, but are relatively easy in the hyperbolic world. Getting to the center of a moderately sized circle and returning to where you were prior are two examples of tasks that are almost impossible in hyperbolic geometry, while both are much easier in Euclidean geometry.

Level design.

Obstacles and other objects in the game world use shapes that are impossible in Euclidean geometry, like infinite trees, equidistants and horocycles , and straight lines which never cross. There is also one land that relies on the holonomy of hyperbolic geometry: when the player returns to a tile after making a few steps in a closed loop, the world has rotated around the player.

The in-game tutorial allows the player to learn about hyperbolic geometry and the game's basic mechanics.

Release [ edit ] The first version of HyperRogue , then named Hyperbolic Rogue , was created in November 2011, [ 9 ] and contained only a single land and very simple monsters. A new version was made in March 2012 for the Seven Day Roguelike Challenge , with more lands and the introduction of magical orbs. In January 2015, HyperRogue was released on Steam .

[ 10 ] Version 12.0, released in June 2021, added support for virtual reality through SteamVR .

[ 11 ] Reception [ edit ] HyperRogue was called "one of the most interesting roguelikes to come around lately" in the book Exploring Roguelike Games .

[ 12 ] Pocket Tactics stated that it was reminiscent of Roger Zelazny 's Chronicles of Amber series.

[ 13 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Hyperrogue COPYING" .

GitHub .

Archived from the original on 4 May 2024 . Retrieved 4 May 2024 .

^ "HyperRogue - Experiments with geometry" .

^ "HyperRogue About Page" . Retrieved Apr 7, 2020 .

^ Valentin, Christian (23 June 2016).

"Don't lose your way in non-Euclidean roguelike HyperRogue" .

www.pocketgamer.com .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-03 . Retrieved 2021-06-03 .

^ Zeno and Tehora Rogue, RogueViz , archived from the original on January 18, 2022 , retrieved Apr 27, 2017 ^ Zeno Rogue (18 March 2012).

"hyperbolic geometry in HyperRogue" .

Eye of Hydra . Retrieved Apr 27, 2017 .

^ Kopczyński, Eryk; Celińska, Dorota; Čtrnáct, Marek.

"HyperRogue: playing with hyperbolic geometry" (PDF) .

Proceedings of Bridges 2017: Mathematics, Music, Art, Architecture, Culture (2017) .

Bridges Conference . Waterloo, Canada.

^ Smith, Adam (28 September 2017).

"HyperRogue, the non-Euclidean roguelike, is a mind-melting masterpiece" .

Rock, Paper, Shotgun . Retrieved 29 September 2017 .

^ Rogue, Zeno.

"History of HyperRogue" .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2017 . Retrieved Apr 27, 2017 .

^ "HyperRogue in Steam store" .

^ Liam Dawe (4 June 2021).

"HyperRogue turns the non-Euclidean roguelike into a VR experience and it's wild" .

GamingOnLinux . Retrieved 2021-06-04 .

^ Harris, John (2020).

Exploring Roguelike Games . Milton: Taylor & Francis Group.

ISBN 978-1-000-16949-2 .

OCLC 1164495662 .

^ Eklund, Tof (2 March 2016).

"A gaggle of games with an LGBTQ+ perspective" .

Pocket Tactics . Archived from the original on June 20, 2017 . Retrieved 29 September 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Official wiki Online demo using WebGL Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=HyperRogue&oldid=1299366236 " Categories : 2011 video games Mathematical education video games Linux games MacOS games Turn-based tactics video games Roguelike video games Video games developed in Poland Video games using procedural generation Windows games Open-source video games Video games with gender-selectable protagonists Free software that uses SDL Multiplayer and single-player video games Free software programmed in C++ Free and open-source Android software Video games inspired by M. C. Escher Hyperbolic geometry Commercial video games with freely available source code Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles using Infobox video game using locally defined parameters Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 00:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents HyperRogue Add languages Add topic

