Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usage 2 Primitiveness of characters is determined by context Toggle Primitiveness of characters is determined by context subsection 2.1 Examples 3 References Toggle the table of contents Primitive (phylogenetics) 7 languages Azərbaycanca Bosanski فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Feature inherited from common ancestor In phylogenetics , a primitive (or ancestral ) character, trait, or feature of a lineage or taxon is one  that is inherited from the common ancestor of a clade (or clade group) and has undergone little change since. Conversely, a trait that appears within the clade group (that is, is present in any subgroup within the clade but not all) is called advanced or derived . A clade is a group of organisms that consists of a common ancestor and all its lineal descendants.

A primitive trait is the original condition of that trait  in the common ancestor; advanced indicates a notable change from the original condition.  These terms in biology contain no judgement about the sophistication, superiority, value or adaptiveness of the named trait. "Primitive" in biology means only that the character appeared first in the common ancestor of a clade group and has been passed on largely intact to more recent members of the clade. "Advanced" means the character has evolved  within a later subgroup of  the clade.

Phylogenetics is utilized to determine evolutionary relationships and relatedness, to ultimately depict accurate evolutionary lineages. Evolutionary relatedness between living species can be connected by descent from common ancestry.

[ 1 ] These evolutionary lineages can thereby be portrayed through a phylogenetic tree, or cladogram, where varying relatedness amongst species is evidently depicted. Through this tree, organisms can be categorized by divergence from the common ancestor, and primitive characters, to clades of organisms with shared derived character states. Furthermore, cladograms allow researchers to view the changes and evolutionary alterations occurring in a species over time as they move from primitive characters to varying derived character states.

[ 2 ] Cladograms are important for scientists as they allow them to classify and hypothesize the origin and future of organisms. Cladograms allow scientists to propose their evolutionary scenarios about the lineage from a primitive trait to a derived one. By understanding how the trait came to be, scientists can hypothesize the environment that specific organism was in and how that affected the evolutionary adaptations of the trait that came to be.

[ 3 ] Other, more technical, terms for these two conditions—for example, "plesiomorphic" and "synapomorphic"—are frequently encountered; see the table below.

Usage [ edit ] At least three other sets of terms are synonymous with the terms "primitive" and "advanced". The technical terms are considered preferable because they are less likely to convey the sense that the trait mentioned is inferior, simpler, or less adaptive (e.g., as in non-vascular ("lower") and vascular ("higher") plants ).

[ 4 ] The terms "plesiomorphy" and "apomorphy" are typically used in the technical literature: for example, when a plesiomorphic trait is shared by more than one member of a clade, the trait is called a symplesiomorphy , that is, a shared primitive trait; a shared derived trait is a synapomorphy .

Primitive Advanced Ancestral Derived Plesiomorphic Apomorphic Symplesiomorphic Synapomorphic The amount of variation of characters can assist in depicting greater relatedness amongst species, and conversely show the lack of relatedness between species. Analysis of character variation also aids in distinguishing primitive characters from derived characters.

[ 5 ] The term derived and primitive, or ancestral, is used in reference to characters and character state. In doing so, a derived character is depicted as a character procured through evolution from the previous ancestral state, and persisting due to fixation of derived alleles. Whereas, a primitive character is one that is originally present in the ancestral population.

[ 5 ] Primitive characters are avoided as they depict the ancestral character state. Conversely, derived characters depict the alteration of characters from the ancestral state because selection favored organisms with that derived trait.

[ 6 ] Primitiveness of characters is determined by context [ edit ] "Primitive" and "advanced" are relative terms. When a trait is called primitive, the determination is based on the perspective from which the trait is viewed. Any trait can be both primitive (ancestral) and advanced (derived) depending on the context.

Examples [ edit ] In the clade of vertebrates, legs are an advanced trait since it is a feature that appears in the clade. However, in the clade of tetrapods, legs are primitive since they were inherited from a common ancestor.

[ 7 ] The terms "primitive" and "advanced", etc., are not properly used in referring to a species or an organism as any species or organism is a mosaic of primitive and derived traits. Using "primitive" and "advanced" may lead to "ladder thinking" (compare the Latin term scala naturae 'ladder of nature'), [ 8 ] which is the thought that all species are evolving because they are striving toward supremacy.  When this form of thinking is used, humans are typically considered perfect and all other organisms are of less quality than them.

[ 9 ] This can cause the misconception of one species being an ancestor to another species, when in fact both species are extant.

[ 8 ] Homo sapiens , for example have large brains (a derived trait) and five fingers (a primitive trait) in their lineage.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Species are constantly evolving, so a frog is not biologically more primitive than a human as each has been evolving continuously since each lineage split from their common ancestor.

References [ edit ] ^ Baum, David A.; Stacey D. Smith (2012).

Tree thinking: an introduction to phylogenetic biology . Greenwood Village, CO: Roberts.

ISBN 978-1-936221-16-5 .

OCLC 767565978 .

^ E. O. Wiley; Bruce S. Lieberman (2011).

Phylogenetics: theory and practice of phylogenetic systematics (2nd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-118-01786-9 .

OCLC 715182861 .

^ V., Kardong, Kenneth. Vertebrates : comparative anatomy, function, evolution (Seventh edition ed.). New York, NY.

ISBN 9780078023026 . OCLC 862149184 ^ "Reconstructing Trees: Cladistics" .

Understanding Evolution . University of California Museum of Paleontology . Retrieved 6 November 2015 .

^ a b E. O. Wiley; Bruce S. Lieberman (2011).

Phylogenetics: theory and practice of phylogenetic systematics (2nd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-118-01786-9 .

OCLC 715182861 .

^ Baum, David A.; Stacey D. Smith (2012).

Tree thinking: an introduction to phylogenetic biology . Greenwood Village, CO: Roberts.

ISBN 978-1-936221-16-5 .

OCLC 767565978 .

^ "University of California Museum of Paleontology Glossary: Phylogenetics" .

UCMP Glossary . University of California . Retrieved 7 October 2015 .

^ a b Baum, David.

"Trait Evolution on a Phylogenetic Tree | Learn Science at Scitable" .

www.nature.com . Retrieved 2018-02-22 .

^ V., Kardong, Kenneth (14 February 2014).

Vertebrates : comparative anatomy, function, evolution (7th ed.). New York, NY.

ISBN 9780078023026 .

OCLC 862149184 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Futuyma, Douglas (1998).

Evolutionary Biology . Sunderland: Sinauer Associates.

ISBN 978-0-87893-189-7 .

^ Daniel R. Brooks; Deborah A. McLennan (2 May 2002).

The Nature of Diversity: An Evolutionary Voyage of Discovery . University of Chicago Press. pp. 33–.

ISBN 978-0-226-07590-7 .

v t e Phylogenetics Relevant fields Computational phylogenetics Molecular phylogenetics Cladistics Taxonomy Evolutionary taxonomy Systematics Evolutionary biology portal Basic concepts Phylogenesis Cladogenesis Phylogenetic tree Cladogram Phylogenetic network Long branch attraction Clade vs Grade Lineage Ghost lineage Ghost population Inference methods Maximum parsimony Phylogenetic reconciliation Probabilistic methods Maximum likelihood Bayesian inference Distance-matrix methods Neighbor-joining UPGMA Least squares Three-taxon analysis Current topics PhyloCode DNA barcoding Molecular phylogenetics Phylogenetic comparative methods Phylogenetic niche conservatism Phylogenetic signal Phylogenetics software Phylogenomics Phylogeography Group traits Primitive Plesiomorphy Symplesiomorphy Derived Apomorphy Synapomorphy Autapomorphy Group types Monophyly Paraphyly Polyphyly Nomenclature Phylogenetic nomenclature Crown group Sister group Basal Supertree Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Primitive_(phylogenetics)&oldid=1137113791 " Category : Evolutionary biology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 February 2023, at 21:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Primitive (phylogenetics) 7 languages Add topic

