Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin and early history Toggle Origin and early history subsection 1.1 Initial opposition 2 Contrast with other economic philosophies Toggle Contrast with other economic philosophies subsection 2.1 Contrast between British and American views 2.2 Limits of influence and influence on other perspectives 2.3 Economic liberalism and fiscal liberalism (conservatism) 2.4 Position on state interventionism 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Economic liberalism 49 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית ქართული Latviešu Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Liberal capitalism ) Political and economic ideology Adam Smith was an early advocate for economic liberalism.

Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Economic liberalism is a political and economic ideology that supports a market economy based on individualism and private property in the means of production .

[ 1 ] Adam Smith is considered one of the primary initial writers on economic liberalism, and his writing is generally regarded as representing the economic expression of 19th-century liberalism up until the Great Depression and rise of Keynesianism in the 20th century. Historically, economic liberalism arose in response to feudalism and mercantilism .

Economic liberalism is associated with markets and private ownership of capital assets . Economic liberals tend to oppose government intervention and protectionism in the market economy when it inhibits free trade and competition , but tend to support government intervention where it protects property rights , opens new markets or funds market growth, and resolves market failures .

[ 2 ] An economy that is managed according to these precepts may be described as a liberal economy or operating under liberal capitalism . Economic liberals commonly adhere to a political and economic philosophy that advocates a restrained fiscal policy and a balanced budget through measures such as low taxes, reduced government spending, and minimized government debt.

[ 3 ] Free trade, deregulation , tax cuts , privatization , labour market flexibility , and opposition to trade unions are also common positions.

[ 4 ] Economic liberalism can be contrasted with protectionism because of its support for free trade and an open economy , and is considered opposed to planned economies and non-capitalist economic orders, such as socialism .

[ 5 ] As such, economic liberalism today is associated with classical liberalism , neoliberalism , right-libertarianism , and some schools of conservatism like liberal conservatism and fiscal conservatism . Economic liberalism follows the same philosophical approach as classical liberalism and fiscal conservatism.

[ 6 ] Origin and early history [ edit ] Developed during the Age of Enlightenment , particularly by Adam Smith , economic liberalism was born as the theory of economics of liberalism, which advocates minimal interference by government in the economy. Arguments in favor of economic liberalism were advanced by Smith and others during the age of enlightenment, opposing feudalism and mercantilism .

[ 2 ] It was first proposed by Adam Smith in An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776), which advocated minimal interference of government in a market economy , although it did not necessarily oppose the state's provision of basic public goods .

[ 7 ] In Smith's view, if everyone is left to his own economic devices instead of being controlled by the state, the result would be a harmonious and more equal society of ever-increasing prosperity.

[ 1 ] This underpinned the move towards a capitalist economic system in the late 18th century and the subsequent demise of the mercantilist system. Private property and individual contracts form the basis of economic liberalism.

[ 8 ] The early theory of economic liberalism was based on the assumption that the economic actions of individuals are largely based on self-interest ( invisible hand ) and that allowing them to act without any restrictions will produce the best results for everyone ( spontaneous order ), provided that at least minimum standards of public information and justice exist, so that no one is allowed to coerce, steal, or commit fraud, and there should be freedom of speech and press. This ideology was well reflected in English law; Lord Ackner , denying the existence of a duty of good faith in English contract law, emphasised the "adversarial position of the parties when involved in negotiations".

[ 9 ] Initial opposition [ edit ] Initially, the economic liberals had to contend with arguments from the supporters of feudal privileges for the wealthy, traditions of the aristocracy and the rights of monarchs to run national economies in their own personal interests. By the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century, this opposition was largely defeated in the primary capital markets of Western countries.

The Ottoman Empire had liberal free trade policies by the 18th century, with origins in capitulations of the Ottoman Empire , dating back to the first commercial treaties signed with France in 1536 and taken further with capitulations in 1673, in 1740 which lowered duties to only 3% for imports and exports and in 1790. Ottoman free trade policies were praised by British economists advocating free trade such as J. R. McCulloch in his Dictionary of Commerce (1834), but criticized by British politicians opposing free trade such as Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli , who cited the Ottoman Empire as "an instance of the injury done by unrestrained competition" in the 1846 Corn Laws debate, arguing that it destroyed what had been "some of the finest manufactures of the world" in 1812.

[ 10 ] Contrast with other economic philosophies [ edit ] Contrast between British and American views [ edit ] Historian Kathleen G. Donohue argues that classical liberalism in the United States during the 19th century had distinctive characteristics as opposed to Britain: "[A]t the center of classical liberal theory [in Europe] was the idea of laissez-faire . To the vast majority of American classical liberals, however, laissez-faire did not mean no government intervention at all. On the contrary, they were more than willing to see government provide tariffs, railroad subsidies, and internal improvements, all of which benefited producers. What they condemned was intervention in behalf of consumers." [ 11 ] Limits of influence and influence on other perspectives [ edit ] In its initial formation, economic liberalism was focused on promoting the idea of private ownership and trade; however, due to a growing awareness of concerns regarding policy, the rise of economic liberalism paved the way for a new form of liberalism, known as social liberalism . This promoted an accommodation for government intervention in order to help the poor. As subsequent authors picked up and promoted widespread appeal of a subset of Smith's economic theories to support their own work—of free trade, the division of labour , and the principle of individual initiative—this contributed to obscuring other aspects of the rich body of political liberalism to be found in Smith's work. For example, his work promoted the ideal that the everyday man could hold ownership of his own property and trade, which Smith felt would slowly allow for individuals to take control of their places within society.

Economic liberalism and fiscal liberalism (conservatism) [ edit ] Economic liberalism is a much broader concept than fiscal liberalism, which is called fiscal conservatism or economic libertarianism in the United States.

[ 12 ] The ideology that highlighted the financial aspect of economic liberalism is called fiscal liberalism, which is defined as support for free trade .

[ 13 ] Position on state interventionism [ edit ] Economic liberals oppose government intervention in the economy when it leads to outcomes they consider to be inefficient.

[ 14 ] They are supportive of a strong state that protects the right to property and enforces contracts.

[ 2 ] They may also support government interventions to resolve market failures.

[ 2 ] Ordoliberalism and various schools of social liberalism based on classical liberalism include a broader role for the state but do not seek to replace private enterprise and the free market with public enterprise and economic planning .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] A social market economy is a largely free-market economy based on a free price system and private property that is supportive of government activity to promote competition in markets and social welfare programs to address social inequalities that result from market outcomes.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Liberalism portal Economy portal Conservatism in the United States Constitutional economics Doux commerce Economic freedom Economic liberalization Economic progressivism Georgism Laissez-faire Libertarianism in the United States References [ edit ] ^ a b Adams 2001 , p. 20.

^ a b c d Oatley, Thomas (2019).

International Political Economy: Sixth Edition . Routledge. pp. 25, 34– 35.

ISBN 978-1351034647 .

Archived from the original on 2021-07-21 . Retrieved 2021-07-21 .

^ Simmons, Beth A.; Dobbin, Frank; Garrett, Geoffrey (2006).

"Introduction: The International Diffusion of Liberalism" .

International Organization .

60 (4): 781– 810.

doi : 10.1017/S0020818306060267 .

ISSN 1531-5088 .

S2CID 146351369 .

^ Boudreaux, Don (2015-03-31).

"Milton Friedman on the Real World Effects of Labor Unions" .

Cafe Hayek .

Archived from the original on 2020-11-25 . Retrieved 2020-10-13 .

^ Brown, Wendy (2005).

Edgework: Critical Essays on Knowledge And Politics . Princeton University Press. p. 39.

.

^ Gamble, Andrew (2013).

"Neo-Liberalism and Fiscal Conservatism" . In Thatcher, Mark; Schmidt, Vivien A. (eds.).

Resilient Liberalism in Europe's Political Economy . Cambridge University Press. pp.

53– 77.

ISBN 978-1107041530 .

Archived from the original on 2021-07-26 . Retrieved 2021-07-26 .

^ Aaron, Eric (2003).

What's Right?

. Dural, Australia: Rosenberg Publishing. p. 75.

^ Butler 2015 , p. 10.

^ Walford v Miles [1992] 2 A.C. 128 ^ Paul Bairoch (1995).

Economics and World History: Myths and Paradoxes .

University of Chicago Press . pp.

31– 32. Archived from the original on 2017-10-12 . Retrieved 2017-08-16 .

^ Donohue, Kathleen G. (2005).

Freedom from Want: American Liberalism and the Idea of the Consumer . Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 2.

ISBN 978-0801883910 .

Archived from the original on 2021-02-01 . Retrieved 2016-12-03 .

^ Fujii, George (2013). "Liberalism". Encyclopedia of the Cold War. Routledge.

ISBN 978-1135923112 .

^ Peter Ghosh, Lawrence Goldman, ed. (2006).

Politics and Culture in Victorian Britain: Essays in Memory of Colin Matthew . OUP Oxford. p. 56.

ISBN 978-0191514449 .

Hence the emphasis today on the study of political economy, and the identification of Gladstone with 'fiscal liberalism', defined above all as the liberalism of free trade.

^ Turner 2008 , pp. 60–61.

^ a b Turner 2008 , pp. 83–84.

^ a b Balaam & Dillman 2015 , p. 48.

Bibliography [ edit ] Adams, Ian (2001).

Political Ideology Today . Manchester University Press.

ISBN 978-0719060205 .

Balaam, David N; Dillman, Bradford (2015).

Introduction to International Political Economy . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1317347309 .

Butler, Eamonn (2015).

Classical Liberalism – A Primer . Do Sustainability.

ISBN 978-0255367080 .

Turner, Rachel S. (2008).

Neo-Liberal Ideology: History, Concepts and Policies . Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 978-0748688685 .

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Economic liberalism at Wikiquote Media related to Economic liberalism at Wikimedia Commons v t e Capitalism Aspects and perspectives General Anarchy of production Business cycle Centralization Competition Competition law Depression definitions of capitalism Deregulation Economic bubble Economic development Economic liberalism Economic planning Entrepreneurship Ecopreneurship Externality Financial crisis Financial Revolution Globalization Global labor arbitrage History of capitalist theory Industrial Revolution Invention Market economy Market failure Merchantilism Meritocracy Multinational corporation Nationalization Oligopoly Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Privatization Profit Property rights Recession Regulation Wage labour Wealth Ideology Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Conservative Corporate Democratic Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neo Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social State State-sponsored Welfare Cultural aspects Advertising American Dream Black Friday Consumerism Decentralization Economic freedom Economic mobility Individualism Liberalism Liberty Mainstream Philanthropy Private foundation Private property Rule of law Social alienation Spontaneous order Social aspects Corporatism Economic inequality Employment Freedom of association Labour market flexibility Labour supply Productivity Prosperity Syndicate Social venture capital Unemployment Criticism Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Critique of political economy Critique of work Market fundamentalism Marxism Wage slavery Antithesis Anarchism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-syndicalism Collectivist anarchism Communalism Communism Economic democracy Eco-socialism Free-market socialism Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Libertarian socialism Market anarchism Market socialism Mutualism Post-capitalism Post-scarcity economy Sharing economy Social anarchism Socialism Syndicalism v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal v t e Neoliberalism Ideas Austerity Balanced budget Denationalization Deregulation Economic integration Economic interdependence Economic liberalization Foreign direct investment Free markets Free trade ( area ) Globalization Intellectual property Laffer curve Marketization Mundell–Fleming model Privatization Public–private partnership Single market Supranationalism Tax cuts Economics Neoclassical Monetarism Reaganomics Rogernomics Trickle-down Supply-side Movements Fiscal conservatism Thatcherism Third Way New Democrats Governance Association of Southeast Asian Nations Bank for International Settlements European Central Bank European Union Federal Reserve Greater Arab Free Trade Area International Monetary Fund MERCOSUR North American Free Trade Agreement Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership World Bank World Economic Forum World Trade Organization Organizations Third Way People Augusto Pinochet Margaret Thatcher Ronald Reagan Alan Greenspan Bill Clinton Related topics Anti-capitalism Anti-globalization Alter-globalization Authoritarian capitalism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of intellectual property Market fundamentalism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Economic_liberalism&oldid=1302703499 " Categories : Economic liberalism Classical liberalism Conservative liberalism Economic globalization Economic ideologies Free market Ideologies of capitalism Liberalism Neoliberalism Political ideologies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 02:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Economic liberalism 49 languages Add topic

