Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Netherlands 2 Danube school 3 Influence on later landscape painting 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents World landscape 7 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Galego Italiano עברית Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of composition in Western painting Pieter Bruegel the Elder , Landscape with the Flight into Egypt , 1563, 37.1 × 55.6 cm (14.6 × 21.9 in) The world landscape , a translation of the German Weltlandschaft , is a type of composition in Western painting showing an imaginary panoramic landscape seen from an elevated viewpoint that includes mountains and lowlands, water, and buildings.  The subject of each painting is usually a Biblical or historical narrative, but the figures comprising this narrative element are dwarfed by their surroundings.

The world landscape first appeared in painting in the work of the Early Netherlandish painter Joachim Patinir (c. 1480–1524), most of whose few surviving paintings are of this type, usually showing religious subjects, but commissioned by secular patrons. "They were imaginary compilations of the most appealing and spectacular aspects of European geography, assembled for the delight of the wealthy armchair traveler", [ 1 ] giving "an idealized composite of the world taken in at a single Olympian glance".

[ 2 ] The compositional type was taken up by a number of other Netherlandish artists, most famously Pieter Bruegel the Elder . There was a parallel development by Patinir's contemporary Albrecht Altdorfer and other artists of the Danube school .  Although compositions of this broad type continued to be common until the 18th century and beyond, the term is usually only used to describe works from the Low Countries and Germany produced in the 16th century.  The German term Weltlandschaft was first used by Eberhard Freiherr von Bodenhausen in 1905 with reference to Gerard David , [ 3 ] and then in 1918 applied to Patinir's work by Ludwig von Baldass , defined as the depiction of "all that which seemed beautiful to the eye; the sea and the earth, mountains and plains, forests and fields, the castle and the hut".

[ 4 ] Netherlands [ edit ] Detail from Patinir's St Jerome ( National Gallery ), between formations in the vicinity of Dinant .

The treatment of landscape backgrounds in Early Netherlandish painting was greatly admired in Italy, and Flemish specialists were employed in some Italian workshops, including that of Titian .  The backgrounds to many of Albrecht Dürer 's early prints were appropriated by a number of Italian artists. Patinir, "emboldened by the Italian taste for Northern rusticity, began as early as the 1510s to expand the backgrounds of his paintings out of all proportion" in a way that "violently reversed the ordinary hierarchy of subject and setting".

[ 5 ] By 1520 he was well known for these subjects, and when Dürer visited him in Antwerp he described him in his diary as "the good painter of landscapes" ( gut landschaftsmaler ) in the first use of Landschaft in an artistic context.

[ 6 ] The paintings are relatively small and use a horizontal format; this was to become so standard for landscapes in art that it is now called "landscape" format in ordinary contexts, but at the time it was a considerable novelty, as "portable panel paintings were almost always vertical in format before 1520" and "Patinir's landscapes were among the first small horizontal panels of any sort".

[ 7 ] He typically uses three base colours to articulate his compositions, with a brownish foreground, a blue-green middle zone, and blues in the distance.  The horizon-line is relatively high on the picture plane.

[ 8 ] Patinir (and Herri met de Bles ) came from Dinant on the Meuse (in modern Belgium ) where, in "a startlingly un-Netherlandish landscape", there are dramatic rock cliffs and free-standing crags along the river. These are frequently recalled in his paintings, and came to form a common feature of works by other artists.

Landscape with Charon Crossing the Styx , Joachim Patinir , c. 1515–1524, Prado With other vertical features, these are painted as though seen straight on even when in the lower parts of the landscape, and thus "reassert the integrity of the picture plane" in his works, against the sprawling horizontal impetus of the main landscape.

[ 9 ] Both Kenneth Clark and Simon Schama see these as "the last survivors of the landscape of symbols", relating them to medieval and even earlier "corkscrew" representations of mountains.

[ 10 ] The style is related to the landscape backgrounds of Hieronymous Bosch , although in his main works these function as a backdrop to his crowds of figures and are not as concerned to include a variety of landscape elements; but those of smaller works such as his St. Jerome at Prayer anticipate the new style.

[ 11 ] In most respects the paintings retain the same elements as many 15th-century treatments of the same subjects but show, in modern cinematic terms, a long shot rather than a medium shot .

Most art historians regard the figure subject as continuing to be important in the works of Patinir and his followers, rather than mere staffage for a landscape, and most are of subjects where a wide landscape had relevance.  Among the most popular were the Flight to Egypt , and the Netherlandish 15th-century innovation of the Rest on the Flight to Egypt , and subjects showing hermits such as Saints Jerome and Anthony with the world from which they had withdrawn laid out beneath them.  As well as connecting the style to the Age of Discovery , the role of Antwerp as a booming centre both of world trade and cartography , and the wealthy town-dweller's view of the countryside, art historians have explored the paintings as religious metaphors for the pilgrimage of life.

[ 12 ] Rest on the Flight into Egypt , Cornelis Massys , c. 1540 The style is also an early example of the 16th-century artistic trend to "Mannerist inversion" (the term devised by Max Dvořák ) or the "inverted composition", where previously minor or background elements come to dominate the picture space. In the 1550s Pieter Aertsen began a style of large canvasses dominated by great spreads of food still life and large genre figures of cooks or market-sellers, while in the background small biblical scenes can be glimpsed. Some paintings by Jan Sanders van Hemessen place genre figures in the foreground of paintings on religious or moral subjects.

[ 13 ] In the 17th century all these subject areas became established as independent genres in Dutch and Flemish painting, and later throughout Western painting.

Patinir's invention was developed by Herri met de Bles (1510 – c.1555–1560), who was probably his nephew. He took the type into the new style of Northern Mannerism .

[ 14 ] Other artists were Lucas Gassel , the Brunswick Monogrammist , and Cornelis Massys .

[ 15 ] Landscape with the Fall of Icarus , Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium , now seen as a good early copy of Bruegel's original Massys was the son of Quentin Massys , a friend of Patinir, who had added the figures to at least one Patinir landscape, the Temptation of St Anthony ( Prado ), [ 16 ] and who had used the style in some of his own works, such as a Madonna and Child (1513) in Poznań . Patinir increasingly left the larger figures in his works to other masters, and also seems to have had a large workshop or circle of followers in Antwerp.

[ 17 ] The style was adopted and made more natural in the landscapes of Pieter Brueghel the Elder , who had travelled to Italy via the Alps.  Back in Antwerp he was commissioned in the 1550s by the publisher Hieronymus Cock to make drawings for a series of engravings , the Large Landscapes , to meet what was now a growing demand for landscape images.  Some of his earlier paintings, such as his Landscape with the Flight into Egypt ( Courtauld , 1563, illustrated at top), are fully within the Patinir conventions, but his Landscape with the Fall of Icarus (known from two copies) had a Patinir-style landscape, but already the largest figure was a genre figure and not part of the supposed narrative subject.

Other works explored variations on the theme, with his famous set of landscapes with genre figures depicting the seasons being the culmination of his style; the five surviving paintings use the basic elements of the world landscape (only one lacks craggy mountains) but transform them into his own style.  They are larger than most previous works, with a genre scene with several figures in the foreground, and the panoramic view seen past or through trees.

[ 18 ] Bruegel was also aware of the Danube landscape style through prints .

[ 19 ] Danube school [ edit ] Albrecht Altdorfer , The Battle of Alexander at Issus , 1529, 158.4 cm × 120.3 cm (62.4 in × 47.4 in) The Danube school was a contemporary group of German and Austrian artists who were also pioneers of landscape painting, and the first to regularly paint pure landscapes without figures.  Their landscapes revel in the forests of the Upper Danube, and the place of a foreground figure is often taken by a single tree, a formula invented by Albrecht Altdorfer , the most significant artist of the group, and used, mostly in drawings and prints, by Wolf Huber and Augustin Hirschvogel . Other innovative works showed close-up views of dense forest with hardly any distant view or even sky.  But many of their landscapes are panoramic in a version of the Netherlandish style, although the river winding out of sight normally replaces the sea that occupies the horizon of many Netherlandish works.

[ 20 ] It is probable that at least Altdorfer had seen a Patinir by about 1531; one was in Augsburg from 1517 (an Assumption now in Philadelphia ).

[ 21 ] Altdorfer's painted landscapes are usually vertical, [ 22 ] and, if only because it was commissioned for a vertical space, this is the case for the most extreme of all large world landscapes, his The Battle of Alexander at Issus (1529, Munich). This extraordinary painting shows a view right across the Mediterranean , with a mass of tiny figures fighting a great battle in the foreground. They are in modern Turkey , and the view extends beyond the island of Cyprus to the coast of Egypt and the Sinai Peninsula and the Red Sea .

[ 23 ] The painting originally formed one part of a set of historical paintings in the same format.

Influence on later landscape painting [ edit ] Both the Netherlandish and Danubian approaches to landscape painting were greatly influential for later artists.

[ 24 ] Later generations of Flemish artists such as Jan Brueghel the Elder , Anton Mirou , Lucas van Valkenborch and Gillis van Coninxloo continued to produce late Mannerist versions of the full formula, as developed by Pieter Bruegel the Elder, before in the 1590s van Coninxloo let the trees move in like curtains from the sides to restrict and then eliminate a distant view, pioneering the Flemish development of the dense forest views of the Danube school.

[ 25 ] Rubens had studied in the 1590s with his relative Tobias Verhaecht , an especially conservative artist who continued to use world landscape styles derived from Pieter Bruegel the Elder until the 1620s.

[ 26 ] Though Rubens rapidly outgrew his influence, in some of his later landscapes, such as the Summer, Peasants going to Market (c. 1618, Royal Collection ), "the tradition of the old 'world landscape' plainly lives on".

[ 27 ] Summer, Peasants going to Market , Peter Paul Rubens , c. 1618 Aspects of the particular formula of the world landscape, though no longer usually described by that term, continue to reappear in different versions until the 19th century.  In Dutch Golden Age painting the idiosyncratic paintings and prints of Hercules Seghers (c. 1589 – c. 1638), as rare as Patinirs, were great panoramic views, very often with mountains.

[ 28 ] In contrast, Philips Koninck (1619–1688) used the panoramic elevated view, and often included water, but showed vistas of flat farmland or town roofs with a low horizon.

The Italian Niccolò dell'Abbate , part of the School of Fontainebleau , introduced the Flemish world landscape into French art in works such as the Orpheus and Euridice in the National Gallery, London and the Rape of Proserpine in the Louvre , both large paintings.

[ 29 ] In French Baroque or classical painting many artists including both Claude Lorrain and Nicolas Poussin painted "Landscape with ..." subjects, and for Claude wide panoramic views with mixed elements of mountains, water and small figures formed the bulk of his work, although both the viewpoint and horizon are generally much lower than in 16th-century works. Claude in turn became enormously influential, and until the early 19th century his style continued to have the advantage of giving a painting of a "landscape with" a higher place in the hierarchy of genres , and consequently a higher price, than a mere pure landscape.

[ 30 ] With Romanticism this changed, but panoramic views continued to be painted in the 19th century, and artists such as those in the Hudson River School , Edward Lear and Russian landscape painters took the compositional style to new landscapes around the world in works such as The Heart of the Andes (1859, Frederic Edwin Church ), though often excluding all people and buildings. These still featured in the huge apocalyptic religious paintings of the English painter John Martin , which are often literally "end of the world landscapes", taking the history of the genre back to its origins with Bosch.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Harris, Ann Sutherland, Seventeenth-century Art and Architecture , 378, 2005, Laurence King Publishing, ISBN 1856694151 , 9781856694155, Google Books ^ Schama, 431 ^ In his monograph on Gerard David and his School (Munich, F. Bruckmann), Weemans, 263 ^ Weemans, 263, quoting von Baldass ^ Wood, 42–45, 43 and 45 quoted in turn ^ Harbison, 138; Wood, 45 (dating the visit to 1521) ^ Wood, 47, quoted ^ Harbison, 139; Jenson, 280 ^ Snyder, 410; Harbison, 139, quoted ("reassert"); Silver, 30; Schama, 416–417, 416 quoted ("startlingly un-Netherlandish") ^ Clark, 25–27, 27 quoted; Schama, 415–417 ^ Silver, 27 ^ Silver, 26–36; Wood, 274–275 ^ Harbison, 152–153; Falkenberg, throughout ^ Snyder, 432, 441–2 ^ Silver, 35–39; Baldwin, 362 ^ Wood, 45; Snyder, 409 ^ Snyder, 410; Silver, 35–36 ^ Silver, 39–52; Snyder, 502–510; Harbison, 140–142; Schama, 431–433 ^ Wood, Chapter 5, especially 275–278 ^ Wood, throughout, especially 160–168; Snyder, 357–359, 362–364; Harbison, 142–143 ^ Wood, 267 ^ Wood, 49 ^ Wood, 22–23, 201–202, 266–267; Snyder, 362–363; Harbison, ^ On Danubian influence: Wood, 165–171, 234–235, 267–275 ^ Vlieghe, 175–176, 179–180 ^ Vlieghe, 182–183 ^ Vlieghe, 189–192, 191 quoted ^ Silvers, 162–163 ^ Blunt, Anthony , Art and Architecture in France, 1500–1700 , p. 61, 2nd edn 1957, Penguin ^ Reitlinger, 74 References [ edit ] Baldwin, Robert, Review of "Mirror of the Earth": The World Landscape in Sixteenth-Century Flemish Painting by Walter Gibson, The Sixteenth Century Journal , Vol. 23, No. 2 (Summer, 1992), pp. 362–363, JSTOR Clark, Kenneth , Landscape into Art , 1949, page refs to Penguin edn of 1961 Falkenberg, R. L. (1988), Iconographical connections between Antwerp landscapes, market scenes and kitchen pieces, 1500–1580 , Oud Holland , 102, 1988 Harbison, Craig.

The Art of the Northern Renaissance , 1995, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, ISBN 0297835122 Jenson, Susan H., "Patinir..." in Renaissance and Reformation, 1500–1620: A Biographical Dictionary , ed. by	Jo Eldridge Carney, 2001, Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 0313305749 , 9780313305740, Google Books Reitlinger, Gerald ; The Economics of Taste, Vol I: The Rise and Fall of Picture Prices 1760–1960 , 1961, Barrie and Rockliffe, London Simon Schama , Landscape and Memory , 1995, HarperCollins (2004 HarperPerennial edn used), ISBN 0006863485 Silver, Larry, Peasant Scenes and Landscapes: The Rise of Pictorial Genres in the Antwerp Art Market , 2006, University of Pennsylvania Press, ISBN 0812222113 , 9780812222111, Google Books , (see also his review of Gibson , JSTOR) Snyder, James .

Northern Renaissance Art , 1985, Harry N. Abrams, ISBN 0136235964 Vlieghe, H. (1998).

Flemish Art and Architecture, 1585–1700 . Yale University Press Pelican history of art. New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 0300070381 Weemans, David, " The Earthly Paradise , Herri Met de Bles's Visual Exegesis of Genesis 1–3", in The Authority of the Word: Reflecting on Image and Text in Northern Europe, 1400–1700 , 2011, BRILL, ISBN 9004215158 , 9789004215153, Google Books Wood, Christopher S.

, Albrecht Altdorfer and the Origins of Landscape , 1993, Reaktion Books, London, ISBN 0948462469 Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to World landscape .

Gibson, Walter S., Mirror of the Earth: The World Landscape in Sixteenth-Century Flemish Painting , 1989, Princeton University Press (two reviews in References) Falkenburg, Reindert, Joachim Patinir: Landscape as an Image of the Pilgrimage of Life , 1988, Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company Buijsen, Joachim, review (long, rather critical) of Joachim Patinir: Landscape as an Image of the Pilgrimage of Life by R. L. Falkenburg, Simiolus, Netherlands Quarterly for the History of Art , Vol. 19, No. 3 (1989), pp. 209–215, JSTOR v t e Early Netherlandish art (c. 1420s–1530s) Early Netherlandish artists Active mainly in the Southern Netherlands (mostly present-day Belgium ) Luís Alimbrot Alexander Bening Simon Bening Ambrosius Benson Lancelot Blondeel Aelbert Bouts Dieric Bouts Melchior Broederlam Robert Campin Petrus Christus Pierre Coustain Jacques Daret Gerard David Jean Delemer Jan de Beer Colijn de Coter Jan Gossaert Gerard Horenbout Lucas Horenbout Adriaen Isenbrandt Cornelis Liefrinck Lambert Lombard Simon Marmion Quentin Matsys Hans Memling Jan de Molder Joachim Patinir Jan Provoost Aert van den Bossche Hugo van der Goes Vrancke van der Stockt Goswin van der Weyden Rogier van der Weyden Jan van Dornicke Hubert van Eyck Jan van Eyck Justus van Gent Lieven van Lathem Bernard van Orley Jacob van Utrecht Master of Affligem Master of the Antwerp Adoration Master of the Embroidered Foliage Master of the Legend of St. Barbara Master of the Legend of Saint Lucy Master of the Legend of St. Ursula (Bruges) Master of the Legend of the Magdalen Master of the Lille Adoration Master of the Lübeck Bible Master of the Mansi Magdalen Master of the Morrison Triptych Master of the Prodigal Son Master of the View of Ste-Gudule Active mainly in the Northern Netherlands (mostly present-day Netherlands ) Hieronymus Bosch Geertgen tot Sint Jans Jan Joest van Calcar Lucas van Leyden Jacob Cornelisz van Oostsanen Master of Alkmaar Master of the Amsterdam Death of the Virgin Master of the Figdor Deposition Main centres Antwerp Bruges Brussels Ghent Tournai The Hague General Early Netherlandish painting Works by Early Netherlandish masters Flemish Primitives Arts in the court of Philip the Good Guild of Saint Luke Netherlandish art International Gothic Northern Renaissance Netherlandish Renaissance Northern Mannerism Antwerp Mannerism Antwerp school Ghent–Bruges school Adoration of the Magi Nativity of Jesus in art v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_landscape&oldid=1289961505 " Categories : Iconography Landscape art by type Early Netherlandish painting Flemish art Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 May 2025, at 23:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents World landscape 7 languages Add topic

