Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Gallery 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Caspar Netscher 16 languages Беларуская Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français Italiano Lietuvių مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch painter (1639–1684) Caspar Netscher Self-portrait of Caspar Netscher Born 1639 Heidelberg or Prague Died January 15, 1684 (Age 45) The Hague , Netherlands Nationality Dutch Style Genre work Caspar (or Gaspar ) Netscher (1639 –  January 15, 1684) was a Dutch portrait and genre painter . He was a master in depicting oriental rugs , silk and brocade and introduced an international style to the Northern Netherlands.

Life [ edit ] According to Arnold Houbraken 's 17th-century biographical study of Dutch painters he was born in Heidelberg or Prague .

[ 1 ] His father Johann Netscher was a sculptor from Stuttgart .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The elder Netscher married Elizabet Vetter, the daughter of a mayor in Heidelberg, against her father's wishes.

[ 1 ] He died in Poland [ 3 ] when Caspar was two years of age. It has been suggested that Caspar may have been the son of a Rotterdam painter.

[ 4 ] When Heidelberg was attacked during the civil war, Caspar's mother fled with four children to an estate outside the city.

[ 1 ] When the castle was laid under siege, the people there suffered from hunger and Caspar's two older brothers died.

[ 1 ] Caspar's mother fled in the night, carrying the young Caspar in her arms and with her young daughter on foot, staying at almshouses for widows and orphans.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] They travelled in this way to Arnhem , where they finally found safe quarter.

[ 1 ] In Arnhem Caspar was adopted by a rich physician named A. Tullekens.

[ 1 ] At first he was destined for the profession of his patron, but owing to his great aptitude for painting he was placed under a local artist named Hendrick Coster, and through the acquaintance of Wynant Everwyn in 1654, who had family connections to Tullekens, he became a student of Ter Borch in Deventer .

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] He was Ter Borch's most gifted pupil, probably worked as an assistant as well and he appears several times as a model on Ter Borch's paintings.

[ citation needed ] The Lace Maker by Caspar Netscher (1662), oil on canvas, 33 x 27 cm. Wallace Collection, London When he came of age, he first worked for the Dutch "keelbeulen" (Houbraken called art dealers "cutthroats") until he had enough money to make a grand tour .

[ 1 ] In 1658 he set out for Italy to complete his education, booking passage on a ship to Bordeaux with letters of introduction from Tullekens for his cousin Neny there.

[ 1 ] From Bordeaux he planned to proceed overland to Italy. However, while in Bordeaux he met the mathematician and fountain designer Godijn, and married his daughter Margaretha Godijn on 25 November 1659, which halted his progress to Rome.

[ 1 ] In Bordeaux he toiled hard to earn a livelihood by painting small cabinet pictures which are now highly valued on account of their exquisite finish. Fearing the persecutions of Protestants, after his son was born he moved back North to The Hague in 1662, and turned his attention to portrait-painting.

[ 1 ] In this branch of his art, he was more successful.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In 1668 he joined the Schutterij and Cosimo III de' Medici , traveling through the Netherlands bought four paintings.

[ 7 ] It is likely that Netscher knew the painters Frans van Mieris, Sr.

(1635?–1681) and Gerard Dou , but it is certain that he knew the painter Gerrit de Hooch from The Hague as his wife gave her name to Gerrit's new born daughter Margarita in 1676, the event being witnessed by Caspar as well as his wife.

[ 8 ] He was patronized by William III , and his earnings soon enabled him to gratify his own taste by depicting musical and conversational pieces.

[ 5 ] It was in these that Netscher's genius was fully displayed. The choice of these subjects, and the habit of introducing female figures, dressed in glossy satins, were imitated from Ter Borch; they possess easy yet delicate pencilling, brilliant and correct colouring, and pleasing light and shade; but frequently their refinement passes into weakness. The painter was gaining both fame and wealth when he began to suffer from gout and took to his bed, where he continued to paint lying down and died prematurely in 1684, in The Hague.

[ 1 ] His sons Constantyn (1668–1722), and Theodorus (1661–1732), were also painters after their father's style, who Houbraken meant to include in his 4th volume of painters.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] He was also the father of Anthonie Netscher who emigrated to Batavia. According to the RKD , his registered pupils in the Confrerie Pictura besides his three sons were Johannes van den Brande, Otto Brandt, Olivier van Deuren , Jacob van der Does the younger, Van Hardenbroeck, Daniël Haringh , Mouritz van der Linden, J. Spick, Jan Tilius and Aleida Wolfsen .

[ 9 ] Gallery [ edit ] Presentation of The Medallion Singing lesson Coenraad van Beuningen Pieter de Graeff Christiaan Huygens Mary II of England François-Anne David after Caspar Netscher, Caspar Netscher with His Family , 1772, engraving Woman with a Parrot at a Window Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Gasper Netscher biography in De groote schouburgh der Nederlantsche konstschilders en schilderessen (1718) by Arnold Houbraken , courtesy of the Digital library for Dutch literature ^ Liedtke, W. (2007) Dutch Painting in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, p. 517.

^ "Humrichfineart.com" .

www.humrichfineart.com .

^ Wayne E. Franits, p. 107.

Dutch Seventeenth-Century Genre Painting: Its Stylistic and Thematic Evolution , Yale University Press, 2004 ^ a b c d e Chisholm 1911 , p. 421.

^ "Caspar Netscher - Rijksmuseum Amsterdam - Museum for Art and History" . Archived from the original on 2011-06-09 . Retrieved 2009-04-01 .

^ Liedtke, W. (2007) Dutch Painting in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, p. 518.

^ Hoogsteder & Hoogsteder, Haagse Schilders in de Gouden Eeuw, 1998, p. 316 ^ "Discover print artist, painter, draftsman Caspar Netscher" .

rkd.nl .

References [ edit ] Attribution: This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Netscher, Gaspar ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 19 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 421.

Caspar Netscher in the RKD External links [ edit ] Media related to Caspar Netscher at Wikimedia Commons 46 artworks by or after Caspar Netscher at the Art UK site Netscher Art Gallery Vermeer and The Delft School , a full text exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art, which contains material on Caspar Netscher ‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav Victoria Auckland Städel Prado People Netherlands Deutsche Biographie Other SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Caspar_Netscher&oldid=1298806479 " Categories : 1639 births 1684 deaths Immigrants to the Dutch Republic Dutch Golden Age painters Dutch male painters 17th-century German painters German male painters German portrait painters Artists from Arnhem Painters from The Hague Artists from Heidelberg Painters from Baden-Württemberg Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 20:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Caspar Netscher 16 languages Add topic

