Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Functions 2 Overview of shock measurement 3 Monitoring of goods in transit 4 Other applications 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Books and general references Toggle the table of contents Shock and vibration data logger Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Shock and vibration logger with integrated 3-axis digital accelerometer and lithium-polymer battery A shock data logger or vibration data logger is a measurement instrument that is capable of autonomously recording shocks or vibrations over a defined period of time. Digital data is  usually in the form of acceleration and time.  The shock and vibration data can be retrieved (or transmitted), viewed and evaluated after it has been recorded.

In contrast with a shock data logger, a shock detector is used to indicate whether or not the threshold of specified shock has occurred.

Functions [ edit ] A logger comprises sensors such as accelerometers , storage media, a processor and power supply. The sensors measure and store shocks either as the entire waveform, summary data, or an indication of whether a threshold value was observed . Some devices have accelerometers built into the unit while others can use external accelerometers.  The processor processes the measured data and saves it on the storage media together with the associated measurement times. This allows the measurement data to be retrieved after the measurements have been completed, either directly on the logger or via an interface to a computer. Some have an RFID interface.

[ 1 ] Software is used to present the measured data in the form of tables or graphs and provides functions for the evaluation of the measurement data.
The shock and vibration data is either recorded continuously over a defined time period or on an event-driven basis where the recording of data is determined by certain criteria. Employing such an event-based measurement method allows the recording of specific shocks that exceed a critical length of time or strength. Some have wireless capability such as Bluetooth transmissions to smartphones.

[ 2 ] Acceleration loggers usually use non-volatile storage media for recording the measurement data. These may be hard disc drives or EEPROMs for instance. Such devices will not lose the data when the device is powered down. This also means that the measured data will remain stored in the event of a power failure.

Overview of shock measurement [ edit ] Shocks and impacts are often described by the peak acceleration expressed in g-s (sometimes called g-forces ).  The form of the shock pulse and particularly the pulse duration are equally important.  For example, a short 1 ms 300 g shock has little damage potential and is not usually of interest but a 20 ms 300 g shock might be critical.  Use of shock response spectrum analysis is also useful.

The mounting location also affects the response of most shock detectors.  A shock on a rigid item such as a sports helmet or a rigid package might respond to a field shock with a jagged shock pulse which, without proper filtering is difficult to characterize.  A shock on a cushioned item usually has a smoother shock pulse., and thus more consistent responses from shock detector.

Shocks are vector quantities with the direction of the shock often being important to the item of interest.

A shock data logger can be evaluated:
separately  in a laboratory physical test , perhaps on an instrumented shock machine;
or mounted to its intended item in a testing laboratory with controlled fixturing and controlled input shocks;
or in the field with uncontrolled and more highly variable input shocks.

Use of proper test methods , calibration , and Verification and validation protocols are important for all phases of evaluation.

Monitoring of goods in transit [ edit ] Shock loggers can be used to monitor fragile and valuable goods during transit and to measure the transportation shock and vibration environment.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The loggers can be rigidly attached to the goods, packaging, or transport vehicles so that they can record the shocks and vibrations acting upon them. Some large items may have several shock sensors to measure different locations.  The measured data reveals whether the goods in transit have been subjected to potentially damaging conditions.  Based on this data, the options may be: If there have not been unusual shock or vibration continue to use the shipment as is, without special inspection If  potentially damaging hazards have occurred, thoroughly inspect the shipment for damage or conduct extra calibration prior to use The consignee may choose to reject a shipment where sensors indicate severe handling The time of the damage, or GPS tracking , may be able to determine the location  of the damaging shock or vibration to  direct appropriate corrective action.

Shock and vibration data from multiple replicate shipments can be used to: 
compare the shipment severity of different routings or of logistics providers; [ 5 ] or develop composite data to be used in package testing protocols.  The shock handling data is often most useful converted from accelerations to drop heights or other means of quantifying the severity of impacts.  Several means of statistical analysis of drops and impacts are available.

[ 6 ] Vibration data is often most useful in power spectral density format which can be used in to control random vibration testing in a laboratory.

Other applications [ edit ] Acceleration logger measuring vibrations on a tool carousel of a CNC lathe Among other applications, acceleration sensors are used to: Measure accelerations in motor vehicles, for example during the reconstruction of road accidents.

Monitor machinery used on production lines that is sensitive to shocks or vibrations.

Monitor and reduce wear in industrial plants and for increasing the performance of machines.

Monitor and record earthquakes.

Monitor trucks for excessive jolts [ 7 ] Measure vibrations in wind turbines Record input shocks and vibrations to humans [ 8 ] Record movement data for health management, patient monitoring.

Animal monitoring of breathing, walking, standing, lying and sleeping behaviour.

Measuring acceleration for avalanche emergency systems.

Measure impacts to sports helmets and biomechanics testing [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Determine the g-forces acting on people when riding rollercoasters.

Establish accelerations for objects on conveyor belts .

See also [ edit ] Data logger Accelerometer Temperature data logger Shock detector References [ edit ] ^ Todd, B; Schltz; Hawkins; Jensen (2009). "Low Cost RFID Threshold Shock Sensors".

IEEE Sensors Journal .

9 (4): 464– 469.

Bibcode : 2009ISenJ...9..464T .

doi : 10.1109/jsen.2009.2014410 .

S2CID 36057599 .

^ Duffy, A (November 26, 2011), "Ottawa entrepreneur's Shockbox helmet sensor acts to mitigate concussion damage" , Ottawa Citizen , archived from the original on 28 November 2011 , retrieved 16 Mar 2012 ^ Kipp, W (1998), "Understanding Today's Transport Environment Measuring Devices", ISA 44th International Instrumentation Symposium (PDF) , ISA , retrieved 8 Mar 2012 ^ "Shipping Monitor" (PDF) , Spinoff 2000 , NASA, January 2000 , retrieved 30 Oct 2014 ^ Singh, J; Singh, Burgess (July 2007), "Measurement, Analysis, and Comparison of the Parcel Shipping Shock and Drop Environment of the United States Postal Service with Commercial Carriers" , Journal of Testing and Evaluation , 35 (3): 100787, doi : 10.1520/jte100787 ^ Sheehan, R (August 1997), Analysis Techniques for Package Distribution Environment Data , Test Engineering &Management, pp.

18– 20 ^ Miller, R. E.; Walden, J; Rhoades, S; Gibbs, R (2010), "Acceleration and GPS Data Monitor Truck Haulage Jolts", Min Eng 2000 52(8):2010 (PDF) , NIOSH , retrieved 29 Mar 2012 ^ Milosavljevic, Stephen; David I. Mcbride; Nasser Bagheri; Radivoj M. Vasiljev; Ramakrishnan Mani; Allan B. Carman; Borje Rehn (2010), "Exposure to Whole-Body Vibration and Mechanical Shock: A Field Study of Quad Bike Use in Agriculture" , Annals of Occupational Hygiene , 55 (3): 286– 295, doi : 10.1093/annhyg/meq087 , PMID 21220741 , archived from the original on 15 April 2013 , retrieved 29 March 2012 ^ Jones, W D (October 2007). "Helmets Sense the Hard Knocks".

IEEE Spectrum : 10– 12.

doi : 10.1109/MSPEC.2007.4337656 .

S2CID 36488065 .

^ Moore, N C (29 January 2014).

"Understanding concussions: Testing head-impact sensors" .

Michigan News . University of Michigan: 10– 12 . Retrieved 3 Nov 2014 .

^ "Helmet Testing" . 6 March 2018.

Books and general references [ edit ] Gilmore (editor), Measurement and Analysis of the Distribution Environment, Final Report, Protective Packaging Committee IoPP, Hewlett Packard, 1999 Yam, K. L., "Encyclopedia of Packaging Technology", John Wiley & Sons, 2009, ISBN 978-0-470-08704-6 DeSilva, C. W., "Vibration and Shock Handbook", CRC, 2005, ISBN 0-8493-1580-8 Harris, C. M., and Peirsol, A. G. "Shock and Vibration Handbook", 2001, McGraw Hill, ISBN 0-07-137081-1 v t e Packaging General topics Active packaging Child-resistant packaging Contract packager Edible packaging Modified atmosphere/modified humidity packaging Overpackaging Package delivery Package pilferage Package testing Package theft Packaging engineering Resealable packaging Reusable packaging Reuse of bottles Shelf life Shelf-ready packaging Shelf-stable Sustainable packaging Tamper-evident Tamper resistance Wrap rage Product packages Alternative wine closure Ammunition box Banana box Beer bottle Box wine Case-ready meat Coffee bag Cosmetic packaging Currency packaging Disposable food packaging Drink can Egg carton Evidence packaging Field ration Flour sack Foam food container Food packaging Fuel container Gas cylinder Glass milk bottle Growler Juicebox Low plastic water bottle Luxury packaging Milk bag Optical disc packaging Oyster pail Popcorn bag Pharmaceutical packaging Pizza box Plastic milk container Purdue Improved Crop Storage bags Sand bag Seasonal packaging Self-heating food packaging Screw cap (wine) Single-serve coffee container Spray paint Toothpaste pump dispenser Unit dose Water bottle Wine bottle Containers Aerosol spray dispenser Aluminium bottle Aluminum can Ampoule Antistatic bag Bag-in-box Bag Barrel Biodegradable bag Blister pack Boil-in-bag Bottle Box Bulk box Cage Case Carboy Carton Chub Clamshell Corrugated box design Crate Disposable cup Drum Endcap Envelope Euro container Flexible intermediate bulk container Flexible tank Folding carton Glass bottle Gunny sack Inhaler Insulated shipping container Intermediate bulk container Jar Jerrycan Jug Keg Mesh bag Multilayered packaging Multi-pack Packet (container) Padded envelope Pail Paper bag Paper sack Plastic bag Plastic bottle Retort pouch Salvage drum Sachet Water sachet Security bag Shipping container Shipping tube Skin pack Spray bottle Squround Stand-up pouch Steel and tin cans Tetra Brik Thermal bag Tub (container) Tube Unit load Vial Wooden box Materials and components Adhesive Aluminium foil Bail handle Bioplastic Biodegradable plastic BoPET Bubble wrap Bung Cellophane Closure Coated paper Coating Coextrusion Container glass Corrugated fiberboard Corrugated plastic Cushioning Desiccant Double seam Flip-top Foam peanut Gel pack Hot-melt adhesive Humidity indicator card Kraft paper Label Lid Linear low-density polyethylene Liquid packaging board Living hinge Low-density polyethylene Meat absorbent pad Metallised film Modified atmosphere Molded pulp Nonwoven fabric Overwrap Oxygen scavenger Package handle Packaging gas Pallet Paper Paper pallet Paperboard Plastic-coated paper Plastic film Plastic pallet Plastic wrap Polyester Polyethylene Polypropylene Pressure-sensitive tape Pump dispenser Screw cap Screw cap (wine) Security printing Security tape Shock detector Shock and vibration data logger Shrink wrap Slip sheet Staple (fastener) Strapping Stretch wrap Susceptor Tamper-evident band Tear tape Temperature data logger Time temperature indicator Tinplate Velostat Processes Aseptic processing Authentication Automatic identification and data capture Blow fill seal Blow molding Calendering Canning Coating Containerization Converting Corona treatment Curtain coating Die cutting Die forming (plastics) Electronic article surveillance Extrusion Extrusion coating Flame treatment Glass production Graphic design Hazard analysis and critical control points Hermetic seal Induction sealing Injection moulding Lamination Laser cutting Molding Package tracking Papermaking Plastic extrusion Plastic welding Printing Product development Production control Quality assurance Radio-frequency identification Roll slitting Shearing (manufacturing) Thermoforming Track and trace Ultrasonic welding Vacuum forming Vacuum packaging Verification and validation Machinery Barcode printer Barcode reader Bottling line Calender Can seamer Cap torque tester Cartoning machine Case sealer Check weigher Conveyor system Drum pump Extended core stretch wrapper Filler Heat gun Heat sealer Industrial robot Injection molding machine Label printer applicator Lineshaft roller conveyor Logistics automation Material-handling equipment Mechanical brake stretch wrapper Multihead weigher Orbital stretch wrapper Packaging machinery Pallet inverter Palletizer Rotary wheel blow molding systems Seed-counting machine Shrink tunnel Staple gun Tape dispenser Turntable stretch wrapper Vertical form fill sealing machine Environment, post-use Biodegradation Can collecting Closed-loop box reuse Environmental engineering Extended producer responsibility Glass recycling Industrial ecology Life-cycle assessment Litter Packaging waste Paper recycling PET bottle recycling Plastic recycling Recycling Reusable packaging Reverse logistics Source reduction Sustainable packaging Waste management Category: Packaging Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shock_and_vibration_data_logger&oldid=1292698435 " Categories : Recording devices Measuring instruments Packaging This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 09:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shock and vibration data logger Add languages Add topic

