Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life, family, and education 2 Leaving home, World War I, and desertion 3 Kommunistische Partei Deutschlands (KPD) Toggle Kommunistische Partei Deutschlands (KPD) subsection 3.1 KPD vs. SPD 4 Imprisonment and execution 5 Legacy 6 Writings (selection) 7 Films 8 See also 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Ernst Thälmann 50 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German communist politician (1886–1944) This article is about the politician. For the many other uses of his name, see Ernst Thälmann (disambiguation) .

Ernst Thälmann Thälmann in 1932 Chairman of the Communist Party of Germany In office 1 September 1925 – 3 March 1933 Preceded by Ruth Fischer Succeeded by John Schehr Member of the Reichstag for Hamburg In office 27 May 1924 – 28 February 1933 Preceded by Multi-member district Succeeded by Constituency abolished Personal details Born ( 1886-04-16 ) 16 April 1886 Hamburg , German Empire Died 18 August 1944 (1944-08-18) (aged 58) Buchenwald concentration camp , Weimar , Thuringia , Nazi Germany Political party KPD (1920–1944) Other political affiliations USPD (1917–1920) SPD (1903–1917) Children 1 daughter Occupation Dockworker politician Military service Allegiance German Empire Years of service 1915–1918 Battles/wars World War I Awards Iron Cross Second Class Hanseatic Cross Wound Badge Central institution membership 1924–1933: Full member, KPD Politburo 1923–1939: Full member, KPD Central Committee Other offices held 1924–1925: Deputy Chairman, Communist Party of Germany This article is part of a series about Ernst Thälmann Personal Early life, family, and education Imprisonment and execution Reichstag elections May 1924 December 1924 1928 1930 July 1932 November 1932 March 1933 Early political career SPD USPD German Revolution of 1918–1919 3rd World Congress of the Comintern German October Hamburg Uprising 1925 German presidential election Chairman of the Communist Party of Germany Marxism–Leninism Stalinism Social fascism Roter Frontkämpferbund Conciliator faction Wittorf affair Blutmai Antifaschistische Aktion 1932 German presidential election Legacy Thälmann Battalion Ernst Thälmann Company Pioneer Organisation sessions Ernst Thälmann (film) Ernst Thälmann Island v t e Ernst Johannes Fritz Thälmann ( German: [ɛʁnst ˈtɛːlman] ; 16 April 1886 – 18 August 1944) was a German communist politician and leader of the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) from 1925 to 1933.

A committed communist, Thälmann sought to overthrow the liberal democracy of the Weimar Republic , especially during the instability of its final years. Under his leadership, the KPD became intimately associated with the government of the Soviet Union and the policies of Joseph Stalin . The KPD under Thälmann's leadership regarded the Social Democratic Party (SPD) as an adversary and the party adopted the position that the social democrats were " social fascists ".

Thälmann was leader of the paramilitary Roter Frontkämpferbund . He was arrested by the Gestapo in 1933 and held in solitary confinement for eleven years. Stalin and Vyacheslav Molotov originally sought Thälmann’s release; [ 1 ] after the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact , efforts to that end were abandoned, [ 2 ] while Thälmann's party rival Walter Ulbricht ignored requests to plead on his behalf. Thälmann was shot dead on Adolf Hitler 's personal order in Buchenwald in 1944.

Early life, family, and education [ edit ] Thälmann was born in Hamburg on 16 April 1886, [ 3 ] His parents, Johannes "Jan" Thälmann (11 April 1857, Weddern ( Holstein )  – 31 October 1933), a farmworker , and Mary-Magdalene (née Kohpeiss ; 8 November 1857, Kirchwerder – 9 March 1927), [ 4 ] married in 1884 in Hamburg. They had no party affiliation; in contrast to his father, his mother was deeply religious. After his birth, his parents took over a pub near the Port of Hamburg . On 4 April 1887, his sister Frieda was born (died 8 July 1967 in Hamburg). In March 1892, Thälmann's parents were convicted and sentenced to two years in prison because they had fenced stolen goods or had taken them for debt payment.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Thälmann and his sister Frieda were placed in separate foster families. Thälmann's parents were released early, his mother in May, and his father in October 1893. His parents' offense was used 36 years later in the campaign against him. From 1893 to 1900, Thälmann attended elementary school. He later described history , natural history , folklore , mathematics , gymnastics , and sports as his favorite subjects; he did not like religion .

[ 5 ] In the mid-1890s, his parents opened a vegetable, coal and wagon shop in Eilbek , [ 4 ] a suburb of Hamburg. The young Thälmann worked in the business after school and did his schoolwork in the morning before classes started. Despite this burden, Thälmann was a good student who enjoyed learning. He wanted to become a teacher or to learn a trade but his parents refused to lend him financial support. He had to continue working in his parents' business, causing much sorrow and conflict with his parents.

[ 4 ] As a result, he sought a job as an unskilled worker in the port. The ten-year-old Thälmann came in contact with the port workers on strike from November 1896 till February 1897 in the bitter labor dispute known as the Hamburg Docker's Strike 1896–1897.

[ 5 ] Leaving home, World War I, and desertion [ edit ] At the beginning of 1902, Thälmann left home. He first lived in an emergency shelter , later in a basement apartment, and in 1904 he was a fireman on the steam-powered freight ship AMERIKA , which also traveled to the United States. He was a Social Democratic Party (SPD) member during 1903. On 1 February 1904, he joined the Central Union of Trade, Transport and Traffic Workers of Germany and ascended to the chairman of the Department Carters. In 1913, he supported a call of Rosa Luxemburg for a mass strike as a means of action of the SPD to enforce political demands. From 1913 to 1914, he worked for a laundry as a coachman. In January 1915, one day before he was called up for military service in World War I , Thälmann married Rosa Koch. He was posted to the artillery on the western front, where he stayed until the end of the war,  taking part in the Battle of Champagne (1915–1916), the Battle of the Somme (1916), the Battle of Arras (1917) , the Second Battle of the Aisne (1917), the Battle of Cambrai (1917) , and the Battle of Soissons (1918) .

[ 4 ] For his service, Thälmann received the Iron cross Second Class, the Hanseatic Cross and Wound Badge (twice).

[ 4 ] Towards the end of 1917, Thälmann became a member of the Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD). In late October 1918, while on home leave from the front, Thälmann deserted together with four fellow soldiers. On 9 November 1918, he wrote in his diary on the Western Front that he "did a bunk from the Front with 4 comrades at 2 o'clock." [ 7 ] Kommunistische Partei Deutschlands (KPD) [ edit ] Thälmann on the front page of a KPD newspaper, the Saxon Workers' News , during the 1925 presidential election. The caption reads "Ernst Thälmann: the Red President!" After his desertion, Thälmann was active in the German Revolution of 1918–1919 in Hamburg that began on 29 October 1918. From March 1919, he was chairman of the USPD in Hamburg, a member of the Hamburg Parliament , and worked as a relief worker in the Hamburg city park before taking up a well-paying job at the employment office. There, he rose to the rank of Inspector . When the USPD split over the question whether to join the Communist International (Comintern), Thälmann sided with the pro-communist faction which merged with the KPD in November 1920, [ 7 ] and in the following December he was elected to the KPD's Central Committee. In March 1921, he was fired from his job at the employment office due to his political activities. That summer Thälmann was a representative of the KPD to the 3rd Congress of the Comintern in Moscow and met Vladimir Lenin personally.

[ 8 ] In June 1922, terrorists from the ultranationalist group Organisation Consul threw a hand grenade into his ground floor flat; the assassination attempt failed and he survived.

[ citation needed ] Thälmann helped to organise the Hamburg Uprising of October 1923; [ 9 ] as this failed, Thälmann was forced to go in hiding. After Lenin's death in late January 1924, Thälmann visited Moscow and maintained a guard of honour at his bier . From February 1924, he was deputy chairman of the KPD and from May 1924 he was also a Reichstag member. At the 5th Congress of the Comintern in July 1924, he was elected to the Comintern executive committee and a short time later to its steering committee. In February 1925, he became chairman of the KPD's paramilitary organisation, the Roter Frontkämpferbund (RFB); this organisation was banned by the governing SPD in 1929 after the events of Blutmai ("Bloody May"). In September 1925, Thälmann became chairman of the KPD and thus a candidate for the German Presidency . Thälmann's candidacy in the second round of the presidential election split the centre-left vote, ensuring that the conservative Paul von Hindenburg defeated the Centre Party's Wilhelm Marx .

[ 10 ] In October 1926, Thälmann supported the dockers' strike in his home town of Hamburg. He saw this as an act of solidarity with the British miners' strike which had started on 1 May, although that strike had been profitable for the Hamburg Docks as an alternative supplier of coal.

[ 11 ] KPD vs. SPD [ edit ] Thälmann statue in Weimar After the Revolution of 1918 and during the Spartacist uprising , the government ordered the suppression of the revolt and the extrajudicial murders of KPD leaders Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht by members of the Freikorps .

[ 12 ] That same year, the German Army under orders of the SPD-led republic government used military force against the Bavarian Soviet Republic . In 1920, there was a fierce suppression of the Ruhr uprising . At the 12th party congress of the KPD in June 1929 in Berlin-Wedding , Thälmann adopted a policy of confrontation with the SPD.

[ 11 ] This followed the events of "Bloody May", in which 32 people were killed by the police in an attempt to suppress demonstrations, which had been banned by the Interior Minister and SPD member Carl Severing .

[ 11 ] Thälmann's KPD thus fought the SPD as their main political enemy, acting according to the Comintern policy, which declared social democrats to be " social fascists ". This made it difficult for the two leftist parties to work together against the emergence of Adolf Hitler .

[ 10 ] The KPD under Thälmann declared that "fighting fascism means fighting the SPD just as much as it means fighting Hitler and the parties of Brüning ." [ 13 ] Thälmann declared in December 1931 that "some Nazi trees must not be allowed to overshadow a forest" of social democrats.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Thälmann campaigning for President, 1932 By 1927, Karl Kilbom , the Comintern representative to Germany, had started to combat this ultra-leftist tendency within the KPD but found Stalin machinating against his efforts. In March 1932, Thälmann was once again a candidate for the German Presidency against the incumbent Paul von Hindenburg and Hitler. The KPD's slogan was "A vote for Hindenburg is a vote for Hitler; a vote for Hitler is a vote for war". Thälmann returned as a candidate in the second round of the election, as it was permitted by the German electoral law; his vote count lessened from 4,983,000 (13.2%) in the first round to 3,707,000 (10.2%) in the second.

[ 16 ] After the Nazis came to power in January 1933, Thälmann proposed that the SPD and KPD should organise a general strike to topple Hitler's rule. This was rejected by the SPD, as they did not want to work with the KPD after the long years of Thälmann and the KPD's accusations of "social fascism". In February 1933, a Central Committee meeting of the then already banned KPD took place at the "Sporthaus Ziegenhals" in Königs Wusterhausen , near Berlin , where Thälmann had called for the violent overthrow of Hitler's government. The Comintern's guidelines on social democracy as "social fascism" remained in force until 1935, when the Comintern officially switched to endorsing a " popular front " of socialists, liberals, and even conservatives against the fascist threat—an attempt to win over the leftist elements of the National Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP), especially the Storm Division (SA), who largely came from a working-class background and supported socialist economic policies. By that time, Hitler had risen to power to establish Nazi Germany and the KPD had been largely destroyed.

[ 9 ] Imprisonment and execution [ edit ] After the Reichstag Fire on 27 February 1933, the Nazi regime targeted members of the KPD and other left-wing opponents of it in a new wave of violence and arrests. Although having gone underground yet again, Thälmann was arrested and imprisoned together with his personal secretary Werner Hirsch on the afternoon of 3 March 1933. Eight officers of Police Station 121 arrested Thälmann at his self-appointed safehouse, the home of Hans and Martha Kluczynski in Berlin-Charlottenburg . Although the main police informant was a neighbor of the Kluczynskis, Hermann Hilliges, [ 17 ] at least four other people informed the police of the connection between the Kluczynskis and Thälmann in the days before the latter's arrest.

[ 18 ] Thälmann had used the Kluczynskis' home occasionally for several years, but started fully residing there in January 1933. Although it was not among the six illegal residences that the military-political apparatus of the KPD had prepared for Thälmann, it was not considered known to the police.

[ 19 ] During imprisonment, Thälmann managed to smuggle out detailed descriptions of his treatment in writing. He wrote: "They ordered me to take off my pants and then two men grabbed me by the back of the neck and placed me across a footstool. A uniformed Gestapo officer with a whip of hippopotamus hide in his hand then beat my buttocks with measured strokes. Driven wild with pain I repeatedly screamed at the top of my lungs. Then they held my mouth shut for a while and hit me in the face, and with a whip across the chest and back. I then collapsed, rolled on the floor, always kept my face down and no longer replied to any of their questions." [ 16 ] Fellow German communist Wilhelm Pieck had managed to escape to the Soviet Union and in July 1936 issued a statement calling for the release of Thälmann. He stated: "If we succeeded in raising a tremendous storm of protest throughout the world, it will be possible to break down the prison walls and as in the case of Dimitrov, deliver Thälmann from the clutches of the Fascist hangmen. The fact that Ernst Thälmann has got to spend his fiftieth birthday in the gaols of Hitler-Fascism is an urgent reminder to all the anti-Fascists of the whole world that they must intensify to the utmost their campaign for the release of Thälmann and the many thousands of imprisoned victims of the White Terror." [ 16 ] After the German–Soviet Non-Aggression Pact in 1939 and Germany's and the Soviet Union's joint invasion of Poland — and despite Thälmann's loyalty to Stalin during his time leading the KPD — Moscow pragmatically removed a slogan for the 1939 International Youth Day, which read in part, "Long live Comrade Thälmann!", and replaced it with, "Long live the wise foreign policy of the Soviet Union, guided by Comrade Stalin's instructions." [ 20 ] Thälmann spent over eleven years in solitary confinement. In August 1944, he was transferred from Bautzen prison to Buchenwald concentration camp . That same August, Heinrich Himmler took notes during a conversation with Hitler where he said: "Thälmann must be executed." [ 21 ] A fellow Buchenwald prisoner, Marian Zgoda , recalls hearing the shooting of Thälmann on the 18th—four days after Himmler's curt annotation in his notes.

[ 22 ] After he was shot on Hitler's personal order, [ 23 ] [ 21 ] his body was immediately cremated .

[ 5 ] Shortly after, the Nazis claimed in an announcement that, together with Rudolf Breitscheid , Thälmann had died in an Allied bombing raid on 23 August.

[ 24 ] Legacy [ edit ] The Ernst Thälmann Monument was erected in 1986 in the Ernst-Thälmann-Park , Berlin.

During the Spanish Civil War , several units of German Republican volunteers (most notably the Thälmann Battalion of the International Brigades ) were named in his honour.

[ 11 ] During World War II , Yugoslavia's leader Tito organized a company of Danube Swabians and Wehrmacht defectors as the Ernst Thälmann Company to fight the German enemy.

[ 25 ] Thälmann's symbolic grave at the Memorial to the Socialists in Berlin In 1935, the former town of Ostheim in Ukraine was renamed Telmanove ( Donetsk Oblast ). After 1945, Thälmann and other leading communists who had been murdered, such as Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht , were widely honoured in East Germany , with many schools, streets, factories, and the like named after them. Thälmann, like Luxemburg and Liebknecht, was honoured with a symbolic grave at the Memorial to the Socialists ( German : Gedenkstätte der Sozialisten ) in the Friedrichsfelde Central Cemetery , Berlin . Many of these names were changed after German reunification ; streets and squares named after Thälmann remain in Berlin, Hamburg, Greifswald , and Frankfurt an der Oder . The East German pioneer organisation was named the Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation in his memory.

[ 26 ] Members pledged that "Ernst Thälmann is my role model ... I promise to learn to work and fight [struggle] as Ernst Thälmann teaches." [ 27 ] Trường THPT Ernst Thälmann (Ernst Thälmann High School) in District 1, Ho Chi Minh City In the 1950s, a two-part East German film, Ernst Thälmann , was produced.

[ 26 ] In 1972, Cuba named a small island, Cayo Ernesto Thaelmann , after him.

[ 28 ] One of the main traffic arteries of Soviet Riga was named Ernsta Tēlmaņa iela after him on completion in 1981; however, soon after Latvia had regained independence in 1991 it was renamed Kārļa Ulmaņa gatve , after pre-World War II prime minister Kārlis Ulmanis . In Ho Chi Minh City , a highschool, THPT Ernst Thalmann (Ten-lơ-man) was named after him.

[ 29 ] The VEB Ernst Thälmann Waffenfabrik, an East German weapons factory in Suhl (formerly Simson), was named after Thälmann (until 1990). In Ulaanbaatar , a primary school's namesake was given after Ernst Thälmann, which is still in operation. The British Communist composer and activist Cornelius Cardew named his Thälmann Variations for piano in Thälmann's memory.

[ 30 ] Writings (selection) [ edit ] Ernst Thälmann, Der Kampf um die Gewerkschaftseinheit und die deutsche Arbeiterklasse. Referat und Schlußwort auf dem 10. Parteitag der KPD (in German), Berlin: Vereinigung Internationaler Verlagsanstalten Ernst Thälmann, Wedding gegen Magdeburg (revolutionärer Befreiungskampf oder kapitalistische Sklaverei) (in German), Berlin: Internationaler Arbeiter-Verlag Ernst Thälmann, Katastrophe oder Sozialismus? Ernst Thälmanns Kampfruf gegen die Notverordnungen (in German), Berlin: Internationaler Arbeiter-Verlag Ernst Thälmann, Ernst Thälmann und die Jugendpolitik der KPD (in German), Berlin: Verlag Junge Welt Ernst Thälmann (1996), An Stalin. Briefe aus dem Zuchthaus 1939 bis 1941 (in German), Berlin: Karl Dietz Verlag [ de ] , ISBN 3-320-01927-9 Films [ edit ] Ernst Thälmann – Sohn seiner Klasse , 1954, DDR .

Ernst Thälmann — Führer seiner Klasse , 1955, DDR .

Ernst Thälmann , 1986 DFF TV film, DDR .

See also [ edit ] Ernst Thälmann Island References [ edit ] ^ Lemmons, Russel (1 January 2013).

Hitler's Rival: Ernst Thälmann in Myth and Memory .

University Press of Kentucky . p. 282.

ISBN 978-0-8131-4090-2 .

^ Plum, Catherine (20 February 2015).

Antifascism After Hitler: East German Youth and Socialist Memory, 1949-1989 .

Routledge . p. 143.

ISBN 978-1-317-59928-9 .

^ "Wiedergabe der Nr. 1482 Geburtsurkunde" (PDF) .

thaelmannreport.de (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2014 . Retrieved 22 April 2023 .

^ a b c d e Ernst Thälmann: Gekürzter Lebenslauf, aus dem Stegreif niedergelegt, stilistisch deshalb nicht ganz einwandfrei . 1935, In: Institut für Marxismus-Leninismus beim ZK der SED (Hrsg.): Ernst Thälmann: Briefe – Erinnerungen . Dietz Verlag, Berlin 1986.

^ a b c d Institut für Marxismus-Leninismus beim Zentralkomitee der SED (Autorenkollektiv): Ernst Thälmann. Eine Biographie . Dietz, Berlin 1980.

^ Hamburgischer Correspondent und Hamburgische Börsen-Halle, Morgenausgabe, 5. März 1892.

^ a b Lazitch, Branko; Drachkovitch, Milorad (1986). "Ernst Thälmann".

Biographical Dictionary of the Comintern . Palo Alto: Hoover Institution Press .

^ LaPorte, Norman (2017). "The Rise of Ernst Thälmann and the Hamburg Left 1921-1923". In Hoffrogge, Ralf; LaPorte, Norman (eds.).

Weimar Communism as Mass Movement 1918-1933 . London: Lawrence & Wishart . p. 131.

^ a b Museum, Stiftung Deutsches Historisches.

"Gerade auf LeMO gesehen: LeMO Biografie" .

www.dhm.de . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ a b Priestand, David (2009).

Red Flag: A History of Communism . New York: Grove Press .

^ a b c d Weitz, Eric D.

(1997).

Creating German Communism, 1890–1990: From Popular Protests to Socialist State . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press .

^ Scriba, Arnulf (1 September 2014).

"Der Januaraufstand 1919" [The January Uprising 1919].

Deutsches Historisches Museum (in German) . Retrieved 27 December 2023 .

^ Bois, Marcel (25 November 2015).

"Hitler Wasn't Inevitable" .

Jacobin .

^ Coppi, Hans (1998). "Die nationalsozialistischen Bäume im sozialdemokratischen Wald: Die KPD im antifaschistischen Zweifrontenkrieg (Teil 2)" [The national socialist trees in the social democratic forest: The KPD in the anti-fascist two-front war (Part 2)].

Utopie Kreativ [ de ] (in German).

97– 98: 7– 17.

ISSN 0863-4890 .

^ Thälmann, Ernst (11 December 1931). "Einige Fehler in unserer theoretischen und praktischen Arbeit und der Weg zu ihrer Überwindung".

Die Internationale .

Wie aber steht es hinsichtlich der Beurteilung des Hamburger Wahlergebnisses? Trotz des Wahlerfolges gab es dort erhebliche Mängel und Schwächen, die festgestellt und kritisiert wurden. Aber dort gelang uns immerhin, in die festeste Hochburg der deutschen Sozialdemokratie eine Bresche zu schlagen, wenn auch ein stärkerer Einbruch noch nicht gelang. Dort gelang es uns, aus den Reihen der sozialdemokratischen Arbeiterschaft Zehntausende für den Kommunismus zu gewinnen. Für jeden Kommunisten, der den Grundsatz anerkannte, daß unser Hauptstoß gegen die Sozialdemokratie gerichtet sein muß, mußte deshalb unser Erfolg gegenüber der SPD der entscheidende Gradmesser für die gesamte Beurteilung des Wahlausgangs sein. Wenn es richtig war, daß der Kampf gegen den Faschismus in allererster Linie Kampf gegen die SPD ist und sein muß, dann bedeutele der Erfolg gegenüber der Hamburger Sozialdemokratie eben auch einen Erfolg gegenüber dem Faschismus. Und doch gab es solche Stimmungen, die vor den nationalsozialistischen Bäumen den sozialdemokratischen Wald nicht sehen wollten. Weil die Nationalsozialisten auch in Hamburg einen beträchtlichen Wahlerfolg erzielen konnten, unterschätzten diese Genossen die Bedeutung unseres Kampfes gegen den Sozialfaschismus, die Bedeutung unseres Erfolges gegenüber der SPD. Darin drückten sich unzweifelhaft Merkmale eines Abweichens von der politischen Linie aus, die uns verpflichtet, den Hauptstoß gegen die SPD zu richten.

^ a b c "Ernst Thälmann" .

Spartacus Educational . Retrieved 8 June 2020 .

^ Siehe Eberhard Czichon, Heinz Marohn: Thälmann. Ein Report . Berlin 2010, Band 1, S. 683.

^ Sassning, Ronald [ de ] .

"Thälmann, Wehner, Kattner, Mielke. Schwierige Wahrheiten" [Thälmann, Wehner , Kattner [ de ] , Mielke : Difficult Truths].

Utopie kreativ [ de ] (in German) (114): 362– 375, 364. April 2000.

ISSN 0863-4890 .

^ Siehe Czichon, Marohn: Thälmann . Band 2, S. 717.

^ "Slogans of Youth Show Soviet Shift" .

The New York Times . 5 September 1939.

^ a b Notizzettel von Heinrich Himmler , Reichsführer SS, von einer Besprechung mit Adolf Hitler in der Wolfsschanze , 14. August 1944 im Ausstellungskasten 4/31 in der ehemaligen Effektenkammer des KZ Buchenwald: "12. Thälmann ist zu exekutieren".

^ "Ernst Thälmann: Der Mann, den sie Teddy nannten" .

mdr.de (in German).

Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk . Retrieved 22 April 2023 .

^ Ernst Thälmann biography at Spartacus educational ^ Reiner Orth: Walter Hummelsheim und der Widerstand gegen den Nationalsozialismus . In: Landkreis Bernkastel-Wittlich: Kreisjahrbuch Bernkastel-Wittlich für das Jahr 2011 . 2010, p. 336.

^ Lyon, P.D. (2008).

After Empire: Ethnic Germans and Minority Nationalism in Interwar Yugoslavia (PhD thesis).

University of Maryland .

^ a b Nils Hoffmann.

"Jung Pioniere und FDJ – DDR-Museum-Steinhude" .

ddr-museum-steinhude.de . Archived from the original on 12 August 2015 . Retrieved 10 May 2015 .

^ Monteath, Peter (2000), Ernst Thälmann; Volume 52 of German Monitor , Rodopi , p. 142, ISBN 9789042013131 ^ Sanchez, Juan Reinaldo (10 May 2015).

"Inside Fidel Castro's luxurious life on his secret island getaway" .

New York Post . Retrieved 12 September 2015 .

^ Học tập qua dự án (in Vietnamese). Anh-Duc Hoang. 2019. p. 57.

^ Tilbury, John (2008).

Cornelius Cardew (1936-1981) A Life Unfinished . Copula. p. 719.

Bibliography [ edit ] Biography of Ernst Thälmann Archived 15 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine on the website of the Deutsches Historisches Museum (in German) Lemmons, Russel (2013).

Hitler's Rival: Ernst Thälmann in Myth and Memory .

University Press of Kentucky .

Further reading [ edit ] Bois, Marcel (17 June 2012).

"A Son of His Class" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .

LaPorte, N. (Ed.), & Morgan, K. (2008) ' Kings among their subjects'? Ernst Thälmann, Harry Pollitt and the leadership cult as Stalinization . In N. LaPorte, K. Morgan, & M. Worley (Eds.), Bolshevism, Stalinism and the Comintern: Perspectives on Stalinization , 1917–53 (pp. 124–145). Palgrave Macmillan Ltd.

https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230227583_7 Lemmons, Russel (2009).

" 'Germany's Eternal Son:' The Genesis of the Ernst Thälmann Myth, 1930-1950" .

German Studies Review .

32 (2). German Studies Association, The Johns Hopkins University Press: 343– 356.

ISSN 0149-7952 .

JSTOR 40574804 . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .

Winner, David (3 October 2018).

"How the left enabled fascism" .

New Statesman . Retrieved 4 January 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Ernst Thälmann at Wikiquote Media related to Ernst Thälmann at Wikimedia Commons Discourses and writings by and about Ernst Thälmann , on the Marxists Internet Archive .

(in German) Ernst Thälmann Memorial in Hamburg, Germany (in German) German song about Ernst Thälmann with DDR film footage Newspaper clippings about Ernst Thälmann in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-imperialism Anti-fascism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type economic planning Commanding heights of the economy Developed socialism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Labour aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism Partiinost' People's democracy People's democratic revolution Popular front Proletarian internationalism Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Theory of the productive forces Third Period Wars of national liberation State forms People's democratic state National democratic state Socialist state State of socialist orientation Socialist state of the whole people Class system Dictatorship of the proletariat People's democratic dictatorship Political system Party Central committee General Secretary of the Communist Party Politburo Secretariat Vanguardism State Permanent organ of the supreme state organ of power Special committees of the supreme state organ of power Supreme executive and administrative organ Supreme state organ of power Leading role of the party Transmission belt Unified power Unified state apparatus Hybrid Civilian control of the military Collective leadership Cult of personality Democratic centralism Variants Cuban ( Fidelismo Guevarism ) Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche ( Songun Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism Kimjongunism ) Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism ( Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Naxalism Prachanda Path Mao-spontex Islamic Maoism Pantherism ( Intercommunalism ) New Synthesis Mulelism ) Kaysone Phomvihane Thought National Pol Potism African ( Sankarism Machelism Nkrumaism ) Socialism with Chinese characteristics ( Dengism Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Xi Jinping Thought ) Stalinism ( Neo-Stalinism ) People's Multiparty Democracy American ( Bill of Rights socialism Browderism Marcyism New Communism ) Dubčekism Zachariadism Brezhnevism Taistoism Titoism ( Đilasism Rankovićism ) People Joseph Stalin Mao Zedong John Maclean James Connolly Ernst Thälmann Khorloogiin Choibalsan Ehmetjan Qasim José Díaz Maurice Thorez Palmiro Togliatti Dolores Ibárruri Harry Pollitt Rajani Palme Dutt Ho Chi Minh Võ Nguyên Giáp Earl Browder Nikita Khrushchev Walter Ulbricht Josip Broz Tito Mátyás Rákosi Lazar Kaganovich Georgi Dimitrov Bolesław Bierut Willie Gallacher Valko Chervenkov Klement Gottwald Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Enver Hoxha Kaysone Phomvihane Khalid Bakdash Leonid Brezhnev Deng Xiaoping Pol Pot Nikos Zachariadis Che Guevara Fidel Castro Agostinho Neto Mengistu Haile Mariam Kim Il Sung Chin Peng Sanzō Nosaka Nicolae Ceaușescu Gustáv Husák János Kádár Maurice Bishop Erich Honecker Władysław Gomułka Samora Machel Thomas Sankara Mathieu Kérékou Siad Barre Nur Muhammad Taraki Alfonso Cano Pushpa Kamal Dahal Rohana Wijeweera Abimael Guzmán Gus Hall Gennady Zyuganov Xi Jinping Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism Dialectical and Historical Materialism The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Britain's Road to Socialism Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR A Critique of Soviet Economics Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism Guerrilla Warfare History Soviet Union ( 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 ) Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Communist Revolution China ( 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present ) Tito–Stalin split Korean War De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Albanian–Soviet split Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black Power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency New People's Army rebellion Maoist insurgency in Turkey Sino-Albanian split Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Revolutions of 1989 By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia ( Democratic Kampuchea People's Republic of Kampuchea ) China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia ( Czechia Slovakia ) East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia Soviet Union ( Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan ) Vietnam Yemen Yugoslavia ( Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia ) Organizations Albanian Party of Labour Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Brazil Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of India (Marxist) Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Philippines Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam Communist Party of Malaya Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Shining Path ( Militarized Communist Party of Peru ) Workers' Party of Korea Portuguese Communist Party Related topics Bolshevism Leninism Trotskyism See also All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism ( Mass killings ) Cold War Crimes against humanity under Marxist–Leninist regimes ( Mass killings ) Criticism of Marxist–Leninist party rule MAGA Communism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism New class Post-Marxism–Leninism Red fascism Red Scare ( Second ) Second World State capitalism State socialism State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Socialism portal Communism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Greece Sweden 2 Poland Israel Academics CiNii Artists FID People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ernst_Thälmann&oldid=1300955558 " Categories : 1886 births 1944 deaths Stalinism Anti-revisionists People from Hamburg executed in Nazi concentration camps Social Democratic Party of Germany politicians Independent Social Democratic Party politicians Communist Party of Germany politicians Members of the Politburo of the Communist Party of Germany Members of the Reichstag of the Weimar Republic Members of the Reichstag 1924–1928 Members of the Reichstag 1928–1930 Members of the Reichstag 1930–1932 Members of the Reichstag 1932 Members of the Reichstag 1932–1933 Rotfrontkämpferbund members Executed German revolutionaries German people who died in Buchenwald concentration camp Candidates for President of Germany German communists German Marxists German anti-fascists Politicians who died in Nazi concentration camps German Army personnel of World War I German civilians killed in World War II People executed by Nazi Germany by firearm Communists executed by Nazi Germany Deserters Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1: long volume value CS1 Vietnamese-language sources (vi) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2021 Pages with German IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles containing German-language text Webarchive template wayback links Articles with German-language sources (de) Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 09:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ernst Thälmann 50 languages Add topic

