Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Soil fertilization 2 Light and CO 2 limitations 3 Soil depletion Toggle Soil depletion subsection 3.1 Colonial Impacts on Soil Depletion 3.2 Soil Depletion and Enslavement 3.3 Global Soil Depletion 4 Dark Earths Toggle Dark Earths subsection 4.1 South America 4.2 Africa 5 Humans and Soil 6 Irrigation effects 7 Global distribution 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Soil fertility 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Runa Simi Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Taqbaylit Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Soil depletion ) Ability of a soil to sustain agricultural plant growth Soil scientists use the capital letters O, A, B, C, and E to identify the master horizons, and lowercase letters for distinctions of these horizons. Most soils have three major horizons—the surface horizon (A), the subsoil (B), and the substratum (C). Some soils have an organic horizon (O) on the surface, but this horizon can also be buried. The master horizon, E, is used for subsurface horizons that have a significant loss of minerals (eluviation). Hard bedrock, which is not soil, uses the letter R.

Desert east of Birdsville , Australia . Much of Australia is sparsely populated as its desert soils are mostly infertile; thus unable to support larger scale human habitation.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Soil fertility refers to the ability of soil to sustain agricultural plant growth , i.e. to provide plant habitat and result in sustained and consistent yields of high quality.

[ 3 ] It also refers to the soil's ability to supply plant/crop nutrients in the right quantities and qualities over a sustained period of time. A fertile soil has the following properties: [ 4 ] The ability to supply essential plant nutrients and water in adequate amounts and proportions for plant growth and reproduction; and The absence of toxic substances which may inhibit plant growth e.g. Fe 2+ which leads to nutrient toxicity.

The following properties contribute to soil fertility in most situations: Sufficient soil depth for adequate root growth and water retention; Good internal drainage , allowing sufficient aeration for optimal root growth (although some plants, such as rice, tolerate waterlogging); Topsoil  or horizon O is with sufficient soil organic matter for healthy soil structure and soil moisture retention; Soil pH in the range 5.5 to 7.0 (suitable for most plants but some prefer or tolerate more acid or alkaline conditions); Adequate concentrations of essential plant nutrients in plant-available forms; Presence of a range of microorganisms that support plant growth.

In lands used for agriculture and other human activities, maintenance of soil fertility typically requires the use of soil conservation practices. This is because soil erosion and other forms of soil degradation generally result in a decline in quality with respect to one or more of the aspects indicated above.

Soil fertility and quality of land have been impacted by the effects of colonialism and slavery both in the U.S. and globally. The introduction of harmful land practices such as intensive and non-prescribed burnings and deforestation by colonists created long-lasting negative results to the environment.

Soil fertility and depletion have different origins and consequences in various parts of the world. The intentional creation of dark earth in the Amazon promotes the important relationship between indigenous communities and their land. In African and Middle Eastern regions, humans and the environment are also altered due to soil depletion.

Soil fertilization [ edit ] Main article: Fertilizer Bioavailable phosphorus (available to soil life) is the element in soil that is most often lacking. Nitrogen and potassium are also needed in substantial amounts. For this reason these three elements are always identified on a commercial fertilizer analysis. For example, a 10-10-15 fertilizer has 10 percent nitrogen, 10 percent available phosphorus (P 2 O 5 ) and 15 percent water-soluble potassium (K 2 O). Sulfur is the fourth element that may be identified in a commercial analysis—e.g. 21-0-0-24 which would contain 21% nitrogen and 24% sulfate.

Inorganic fertilizers are generally less expensive and have higher concentrations of nutrients than organic fertilizers. Also, since nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium generally must be in the inorganic forms to be taken up by plants, inorganic fertilizers are generally immediately bioavailable to plants without modification.

[ 5 ] However, studies suggest that chemical fertilizers have adverse health impacts on humans including the development of chronic disease from the toxins.

[ 6 ] As for the environment, over-reliance on inorganic fertilizers disrupts the natural nutrient balance in the soil, resulting in lower soil quality, loss of organic matter, and higher chances for erosion in the soil.

[ 7 ] Additionally, the water-soluble nitrogen in inorganic fertilizers does not provide for the long-term needs of the plant and creates water pollution. Slow-release fertilizers may reduce leaching loss of nutrients and may make the nutrients that they provide available over a longer period of time.

Soil fertility is a complex process that involves the constant cycling of nutrients between organic and inorganic forms. As plant material and animal wastes are decomposed by micro-organisms, they release inorganic nutrients to the soil solution, a process referred to as mineralization . Those nutrients may then undergo further transformations which may be aided or enabled by soil micro-organisms. Like plants, many micro-organisms require or preferentially use inorganic forms of nitrogen, phosphorus or potassium and will compete with plants for these nutrients, tying up the nutrients in microbial biomass , a process often called immobilization . The balance between immobilization and mineralization processes depends on the balance and availability of major nutrients and organic carbon to soil microorganisms.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Natural processes such as lightning strikes may fix atmospheric nitrogen by converting it to (NO 2 ). Denitrification may occur under anaerobic conditions (flooding) in the presence of denitrifying bacteria. Nutrient cations, including potassium and many micronutrients, are held in relatively strong bonds with the negatively charged portions of the soil in a process known as cation exchange .

Phosphorus is a primary factor of soil fertility as it is an element of plant nutrients in the soil. It is essential for cell division and plant development, especially in seedlings and young plants.

[ 10 ] However, phosphorus is becoming increasingly harder to find and its reserves are starting to be depleted due to the excessive use as a fertilizer. The widespread use of phosphorus in fertilizers has led to pollution and eutrophication .

[ 11 ] Recently the term peak phosphorus has been coined, due to the limited occurrence of rock phosphate in the world.

A wide variety of materials have been described as soil conditioners due to their ability to improve soil quality , including biochar , offering multiple soil health benefits.

[ 12 ] Food waste compost was found to have better soil improvement than manure based compost.

[ 13 ] Light and CO 2 limitations [ edit ] Photosynthesis is the process whereby plants use light energy to drive chemical reactions which convert CO 2 into sugars. As such, all plants require access to both light and carbon dioxide to produce energy, grow and reproduce.

While typically limited by nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium, low levels of carbon dioxide can also act as a limiting factor on plant growth. Peer-reviewed and published scientific studies have shown that increasing CO 2 is highly effective at promoting plant growth up to levels over 300 ppm. Further increases in CO 2 can, to a very small degree, continue to increase net photosynthetic output.

[ 14 ] Soil depletion [ edit ] Soil depletion occurs when the components which contribute to fertility are removed and not replaced, and the conditions which support soil's fertility are not maintained. This leads to poor crop yields. In agriculture, depletion can be due to excessively intense cultivation and inadequate soil management . Depletion may occur through a variety of other effects, including overtillage (which damages soil structure), underuse of nutrient inputs which leads to mining of the soil nutrient bank, and salinization of soil.

Colonial Impacts on Soil Depletion [ edit ] Soil fertility can be severely challenged when land-use changes rapidly.  For example, in Colonial New England , colonists made a number of decisions that depleted the soils, including: allowing herd animals to wander freely, not replenishing soils with manure, and a sequence of events that led to erosion.

[ 15 ] William Cronon wrote that "...the long-term effect was to put those soils in jeopardy.  The removal of the forest, the increase in destructive floods, the soil compaction and close-cropping wrought by grazing animals, ploughing—all served to increase erosion." Cronon continues, explaining, “Where mowing was unnecessary and grazing among living trees was possible, settlers saved labor by simply burning the forest undergrowth...and turning loose their cattle...In at least one ill-favored area, the inhabitants of neighboring towns burned so frequently and graze so intensively that…the timber was greatly injured, and the land became hard to subdue...In the long run, cattle tended to encourage the growth of woody, thorn-bearing plants which they could not eat and which, once established, were very difficult to remove”. These practices were methods of simplifying labor for colonial settlers in new lands when they were not familiar with traditional Indigenous agricultural methods. Those Indigenous communities were not consulted but rather forced out of their homelands so European settlers could commodify their resources. The practice of intensive land burning and turning loose cattle ruined soil fertility and prohibited sustainable crop growth.

[ 15 ] While colonists utilized fire to clear land, certain prescribed burning practices are common and valuable to increase biodiversity and in turn, benefit soil fertility. Without consideration of the intensity, seasonality, and frequency of the burns, the conservation of biodiversity and the overall health of the soil can be negatively impacted by fire.

[ 16 ] In addition to soil erosion through using too much or too little fire, colonial agriculture also resulted in topsoil depletion. Topsoil depletion occurs when the nutrient-rich organic topsoil , which takes hundreds to thousands of years to build up under natural conditions, is eroded or depleted of its original organic material.

[ 17 ] The Dust Bowl in the Great Plains of North America is a great example of this with about one-half of the original topsoil of the great plains having disappeared since the beginning of agricultural production there in the 1880s. Outside of the context of colonialism topsoil depletion can historically be attributed to many past civilizations' collapses.

[ 18 ] Soil Depletion and Enslavement [ edit ] As historian David Silkenat explains, the goals of Southern plantation and slave owners, instead of measuring productivity based on outputs per acre, were to maximize the amount of labor that could be extracted from the enslaved workforce. The landscape was seen as disposable, and the African slaves were seen as expendable. Once these Southern farmers forced slaves to leach soils and engage in mass deforestation, they would discard the land and move towards more fertile prospects. The forced slave practices created extensive destruction on the land. The environmental impact included draining swamps, clearing forests for monocropping and fuel steamships, and introducing invasive species, all leading to fragile ecosystems. In the aftermath, these ecosystems left hillsides eroded, rivers clogged with sterile soil, and extinction of native species. Silkenat summarizes this phenomenon of the relationship between enslavement and soil, “Although typically treated separately, slavery and the environment naturally intersect in complex and powerful ways, leaving lasting effects from the period of emancipation through modern-day reckonings with racial justice…the land too fell victim to the slave owner’s lash”.

[ 19 ] Global Soil Depletion [ edit ] One of the most widespread occurrences of soil depletion as of 2008 [update] is in tropical zones where nutrient content of soils is low. The depletion of soil has affected the state of plant life and crops in agriculture in many countries. In the Middle East for example, many countries find it difficult to grow produce because of droughts, lack of soil, and lack of irrigation. The Middle East has three countries that indicate a decline in crop production, the highest rates of productivity decline are found in hilly and dryland areas.

[ 20 ] Many countries in Africa also undergo a depletion of fertile soil. In regions of dry climate like Sudan and the countries that make up the Sahara Desert , droughts and soil degradation is common. Cash crops such as teas, maize, and beans require a variety of nutrients in order to grow healthy. Soil fertility has declined in the farming regions of Africa and the use of artificial and natural fertilizers has been used to regain the nutrients of ground soil.

[ 21 ] Dark Earths [ edit ] South America [ edit ] The details of Indigenous societies prior to European colonization in 1492 within the Amazonian regions of South America, particularly the size of the communities and the depth of interactions with the environment, are continually debated. Central to the debate is the influence of Dark Earth. Dark Earth is a type of soil found in the Amazon that has a darker color, higher organic carbon content, and higher fertility than soil in other regions of South America which makes it highly coveted even today. Dark Earth deposits have been found, through ethnographic and archaeological studies, to have been created through ancient Indigenous practices by intentional soil management.

[ 22 ] Ethnoarchaeologist Morgan Schmidt outlines how this carbon-rich soil was intentionally created by communities in the Amazon. While Dark Earth, and other anthropic soils, can be found all throughout the world, Amazonian Dark Earth is particularly significant because “it contrasts too sharply with the especially poor fertility of typical highly weathered tropical upland soils in the Amazon”. There is much evidence to suggest that the development of ancient agricultural societies in the Amazon was strongly influenced by the formation of Dark Earth. As a result, Amazonian societies benefitted from the dark earth in terms of agricultural success and enhanced food production. Soil analyses have been completed on the modern and ancient Kuikuro Indigenous Territory in the Upper Xingu River basin in southeastern Amazonia through archaeological and ethnographic research to determine the human relation to the soil. The “results demonstrate the intentional creation of dark earth, highlighting how Indigenous knowledge can provide strategies for sustainable rainforest management”.

[ 22 ] Africa [ edit ] In Egypt, earthworms of the Nile River Valley contributed to the significant fertility of the soils. As a result, Cleopatra declared the earthworm a sacred animal to recognize the animal’s positive impact. No one, including farmers, was “allowed to harm or remove an earthworm for fear of offending the deity of fertility”.

[ citation needed ] In Ghana and Liberia, it is a long-withstanding practice to combine different types of waste to create fertile soil that is referred to as African Dark Earths. This soil, contains high concentrations of calcium, phosphorus, and carbon.

[ 23 ] Humans and Soil [ edit ] Albert Howard is credited as the first Westerner to publish Native techniques of sustainable agriculture. As noted by Howard in 1944, “In all future studies of disease we must, therefore, always begin with the soil. This must be gotten into good condition first of all and then the reaction of the soil, the plant, animal, and man observed. Many diseases will then automatically disappear...Soil fertility is the basis of the public health system of the future...”. Howard connects the health crises of crops to the impacts of livestock and human health, ultimately spreading the message that humans must respect and restore the soil for the benefit of the human and non-human world. He continues that industrial agriculture disrupts the delicate balance of nature and irrevocably robs the soil of its fertility.

[ 24 ] Irrigation effects [ edit ] Irrigation is a process by which crops are watered by man-made means, such as bringing in water from pipes, canals, or sprinklers. Irrigation is used when the natural rainfall patterns of a region are not sustainable enough to maintain crops. Ancient civilizations heavily relied on irrigation and today about 18% of the world's cropland is irrigated.

[ 25 ] The quality of irrigation water is very important to maintain soil fertility and tilth , and for using more soil depth by the plants.

[ 26 ] When soil is irrigated with high alkaline water, unwanted sodium salts build up in the soil which would make soil draining capacity very poor. So plant roots can not penetrate deep into the soil for optimum growth in Alkali soils . When soil is irrigated with low pH / acidic water , the useful salts (Ca, Mg, K, P, S, etc.) are removed by draining water from the acidic soil and in addition unwanted aluminium and manganese salts to the plants are dissolved from the soil impeding plant growth.

[ 27 ] When soil is irrigated with high salinity water or sufficient water is not draining out from the irrigated soil, the soil would convert into saline soil or lose its fertility. Saline water enhance the turgor pressure or osmotic pressure requirement which impedes the off take of water and nutrients by the plant roots.

Top soil loss takes place in alkali soils due to erosion by rain water surface flows or drainage as they form colloids (fine mud) in contact with water. Plants absorb water-soluble inorganic salts only from the soil for their growth. Soil as such does not lose fertility just by growing crops but it lose its fertility due to accumulation of unwanted and depletion of wanted inorganic salts from the soil by improper irrigation and acid rain water (quantity and quality of water). The fertility of many soils which are not suitable for plant growth can be enhanced many times gradually by providing adequate irrigation water of suitable quality and good drainage from the soil.

Global distribution [ edit ] Global distribution of soil types of the USDA soil taxonomy system.

Mollisols , shown here in dark green, are a good (though not the only) indicator of high soil fertility. They coincide to a large extent with the world's major grain producing areas like the North American Prairie States, the Pampa and Gran Chaco of South America and the Ukraine -to-Central Asia Black Earth belt.

See also [ edit ] Arable land Plaggen soil Shifting cultivation Soil contamination Soil life Terra preta Cation-exchange capacity References [ edit ] ^ Kelly, Karina (13 September 1995).

"A Chat with Tim Flannery on Population Control" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Archived from the original on 13 January 2010 . Retrieved 23 April 2010 .

"Well, Australia has by far the world's least fertile soils".

^ Grant, Cameron (August 2007).

"Damaged Dirt" (PDF) .

The Advertiser . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011 . Retrieved 23 April 2010 .

Australia has the oldest, most highly weathered soils on the planet.

^ Bodenfruchtbarkeit , Retrieved on 2015-11-09.

^ "Soil Fertility" .

www.fao.org . Archived from the original on 24 November 2017 . Retrieved 18 June 2016 .

^ Brady N., Weil R. 2002 Nitrogen and sulfur economy of soils. pp. 543–571 in Helba (ed.), The Nature and properties of soils.  Pearson Education, NJ.

^ MD, Bashar Khiatah.

"The Health Impacts of Chemical Fertilizers" .

Amos Institute . Retrieved 2024-05-02 .

^ "The Impact of Fertilizers on the Environment: Inorganic vs. Organic – Farmerline" . Retrieved 2024-05-02 .

^ Sims, G. K., and M. M. Wander.  2002.  Proteolytic activity under nitrogen or sulfur limitation.  Appl. Soil Ecol.  568:1–5.

^ Sims, G.K.  2006. Nitrogen Starvation Promotes Biodegradation of N-Heterocyclic Compounds in Soil. Soil Biology & Biochemistry 38:2478–2480.

^ "Why phosphorus is important" .

www.dpi.nsw.gov.au . 2021 . Retrieved 2024-05-02 .

^ "Phosphate: A Critical Resource Misused and Now Running Low" .

Yale E360 . Retrieved 2024-05-02 .

^ Joseph, Stephen; Cowie, Annette L.; Zwieten, Lukas Van; Bolan, Nanthi; Budai, Alice; Buss, Wolfram; Cayuela, Maria Luz; Graber, Ellen R.; Ippolito, James A.; Kuzyakov, Yakov ; Luo, Yu (2021).

"How biochar works, and when it doesn't: A review of mechanisms controlling soil and plant responses to biochar" .

GCB Bioenergy .

13 (11): 1731– 1764.

Bibcode : 2021GCBBi..13.1731J .

doi : 10.1111/gcbb.12885 .

hdl : 10072/407684 .

ISSN 1757-1707 .

S2CID 237725246 .

^ Kelley, Alicia J.; Campbell, David N.; Wilkie, Ann C.; Maltais-Landry, Gabriel (August 2022).

"Compost Composition and Application Rate Have a Greater Impact on Spinach Yield and Soil Fertility Benefits Than Feedstock Origin" .

Horticulturae .

8 (8): 688.

doi : 10.3390/horticulturae8080688 .

ISSN 2311-7524 .

^ F. Stuart Chapin III; Pamela A. Matson; Harold A. Moon (2002).

Principles of Terrestrial Ecosystem Ecology . Springer.

ISBN 0387954392 .

^ a b Cronon, William, Changes in the Land: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of New England, NY: Hill & Wang, 1983, pp. 145–152.

^ Pastro, Louise A.; Dickman, Christopher R.; Letnic, Mike (December 2011).

"Burning for biodiversity or burning biodiversity? Prescribed burn vs. wildfire impacts on plants, lizards, and mammals" .

Ecological Applications .

21 (8): 3238– 3253.

Bibcode : 2011EcoAp..21.3238P .

doi : 10.1890/10-2351.1 .

ISSN 1051-0761 .

^ Bjonnes, R., 1997, Food vs Feed , People's News Agency; Frederiksberg C, Denmark ^ William H., Kötke (1993).

The Final Empire: The Collapse of Civilization and the Seed of the Future . Arrow Point Press.

ISBN 0963378457 .

^ Silkenat, David (2022-05-12).

Scars on the Land: An Environmental History of Slavery in the American South (1 ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-756422-6 .

^ Scherr, Sara (1996).

"Land degradation in the developing world: Implications for food, agriculture, and the environment to 2020" (PDF) .

International Food Policy Research Institute : 7– 8. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 4, 2012.

^ Smaling, Eric (1997).

"Soil Fertility in Africa is at Stake" .

Replenishing Soil Fertility in Africa Replenishingsoi : 49.

^ a b Schmidt, Morgan J.; Goldberg, Samuel L.; Heckenberger, Michael; Fausto, Carlos; Franchetto, Bruna; Watling, Jennifer; Lima, Helena; Moraes, Bruno; Dorshow, Wetherbee B.; Toney, Joshua; Kuikuro, Yamalui; Waura, Kumessi; Kuikuro, Huke; Kuikuro, Taku Wate; Kuikuro, Takumã (2023-09-22).

"Intentional creation of carbon-rich dark earth soils in the Amazon" .

Science Advances .

9 (38): eadh8499.

Bibcode : 2023SciA....9H8499S .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.adh8499 .

ISSN 2375-2548 .

PMC 11320335 .

PMID 37729404 .

^ Solomon, Dawit; Lehmann, Johannes; Fraser, James A; Leach, Melissa; Amanor, Kojo; Frausin, Victoria; Kristiansen, Søren M; Millimouno, Dominique; Fairhead, James (March 2016).

"Indigenous African soil enrichment as a climate-smart sustainable agriculture alternative" .

Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment .

14 (2): 71– 76.

Bibcode : 2016FrEE...14...71S .

doi : 10.1002/fee.1226 .

ISSN 1540-9295 .

^ Howard, Albert (2011).

Farming and Gardening for Health or Disease . Oxford City Press.

ISBN 978-1849025218 .

^ "Irrigation" .

education.nationalgeographic.org . Retrieved 2024-05-03 .

^ Managing Soil Tilth; Colorado state university garden notes , Retrieved on 2014-10-04.

^ Managing irrigation water quality, Oregon State University, US , Retrieved on 2012-10-04.

v t e Soil science History Index Main fields Pedology Edaphology Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil zoology Soil ecology Soil physics Soil mechanics Soil chemistry Environmental soil science Agricultural soil science Soil topics Soil Pedosphere Soil morphology Pedodiversity Soil formation Soil erosion Soil contamination Soil retrogression and degradation Soil compaction Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil sealing Soil salinity Alkali soil Soil pH Soil acidification Soil health Soil life Soil biodiversity Soil quality Soil value Soil fertility Soil resilience Soil color Soil texture Soil structure Pore space in soil Pore water pressure Soil crust Soil horizon Soil biomantle Soil carbon Soil gas Soil respiration Soil organic matter Soil moisture Soil water (retention) Soil type v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Applications Soil conservation Soil management Soil guideline value Soil survey Soil test Soil governance Soil value Soil salinity control Erosion control Agroecology Liming (soil) Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Geomorphology Geotechnical engineering Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Societies, Initiatives Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated Canadian Society of Soil Science Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (India) German Soil Science Society Indian Institute of Soil Science International Union of Soil Sciences International Year of Soil National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (US) OPAL Soil Centre (UK) Soil Science Society of Poland Soil and Water Conservation Society (US) Soil Science Society of America World Congress of Soil Science Scientific journals Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica B Journal of Soil and Water Conservation Plant and Soil Pochvovedenie Soil Research Soil Science Society of America Journal See also Land use Land conversion Land management Vegetation Infiltration (hydrology) Groundwater Crust (geology) Impervious surface / Surface runoff Petrichor Wikipedia:WikiProject Soil Category soil Category soil science List of soil scientists v t e Plant nutrition / Fertilizer Imbalances Boron deficiency Calcium deficiency Iron deficiency Magnesium deficiency#Plants Manganese deficiency Molybdenum deficiency Nitrogen deficiency Phosphorus deficiency Potassium deficiency Zinc deficiency Micronutrient deficiency Chlorosis Fertilizer burn Assimilation Nitrogen assimilation Phosphorus assimilation Sulfur assimilation Microbial assistance Photorespiration Methods Fertigation Fertilizer tree Green manure Hoagland solution Hydroponic dosers Living mulch Nutrient budgeting Nutrient management Organic fertilizer Plant tissue test Variable rate application Controlled-release fertiliser Miscellaneous Soil fertility Nutrient pollution Soil pH Agrobiology Related concepts Algal nutrient solutions Biostimulant v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soil_fertility&oldid=1302559499#Soil_depletion " Categories : Soil Soil improvers Fertilizers Horticulture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 05:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Soil fertility 41 languages Add topic

