Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Comparison with other environmental worldviews 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Planetary management 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Planetary management is intentional global-scale management of Earth 's biological , chemical and physical processes and cycles ( water , carbon , nitrogen , sulfur , phosphorus , and others). Planetary management also includes managing humanity ’s influence on planetary-scale processes.

[ 1 ] Effective planetary management aims to prevent destabilisation of Earth's climate , protect biodiversity and maintain or improve human well-being. More specifically, it aims to benefit society and the global economy , and safeguard the ecosystem services upon which humanity depends – global climate , freshwater supply, food , energy , clean air, fertile soil , pollinators , and so on.

Because of the sheer complexity and enormous scope of the task, it remains to be seen whether planetary management is a feasible paradigm for maintaining global sustainability .  The concept currently has defenders and critics on both sides: environmentalist David W. Orr questions whether such a task can be accomplished with human help and technology or without first examining the underlying human causes, [ 2 ] while geographer Vaclav Smil acknowledges that "the idea of planetary management may seem preposterous to many, but at this time in history there is no rational alternative".

[ 3 ] Background [ edit ] Planetary boundaries according to Rockström et al . 2009 [ 4 ] and Steffen et al . 2015.

[ 5 ] The green areas represent human activities that are within safe margins, the yellow areas represent human activities that may or may not have exceeded safe margins, the red areas represent human activities that have exceeded safe margins, and the gray areas with red question marks represent human activities for which safe margins have not yet been determined.

The term has been around in science fiction novels since the 1970s.

[ citation needed ] In 2004, the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme published “Global Change and the Earth System, a planet under pressure.” [ 6 ] The publication’s executive summary concluded: “An overall, comprehensive, internally consistent strategy for stewardship of the Earth system is required”. It stated that a research goal is to define and maintain a stable equilibrium in the global environment. In 2009, the planetary boundaries concept was published in the science journal Nature . The paper identifies nine boundaries in the Earth system. Remaining within these nine boundaries, the authors suggest, may safeguard the current equilibrium.

In 2007, France called for UNEP to be replaced by a new and more powerful organization, the United Nations Environment Organization . The rationale was that UNEP’s status as a programme, rather than an organization in the tradition of the World Health Organization or the World Meteorological Organization , weakened it to the extent that it was no longer fit for purpose given current knowledge of the state of Earth. The call was backed by 46 countries. Notably, the top five emitters of greenhouse gases failed to support the call.

[ 7 ] Planetary Ecosystems Accounting models supports that quantifying both emissions sequestration potential as well as emissions productions can provide a better overview on how to render better informed decisions regarding natural ecosystems.

[ 8 ] Comparison with other environmental worldviews [ edit ] Together with planetary management, stewardship and environmental wisdom are different ways to manage the Earth [ 9 ] or " environmental worldviews ".

In particular: Planetary management focus its attention on humans needs and wants, while stewardship aim at the benefit of humans, organisms and ecosystems of the Earth: [ 9 ] in other words, planetary management considers humans as the most important species in the Earth, while stewardship and environmental wisdom consider all the species at the same level of importance.

To accomplish its scope, planetary management relies on technology and innovation (as stewardship and spaceship-earth worldview ), while environmental wisdom relies on the lesson learned from nature.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Environment portal Ecology portal World portal 2030 Agenda Brundtland Commission Climate engineering Commission on Sustainable Development Earth systems engineering and management Earth system science Environmental management Geo engineering Global change Global governance Holocene extinction Macro-engineering Megaproject Planetary boundaries Planetary engineering Steady-state economy The Venus Project References [ edit ] ^ "A manual for planetary management" . Retrieved 2010-03-25 .

^ Orr, David W.

(1999).

"The Question of Management" . In W. B. Willers (ed.).

Unmanaged Landscapes: Voices for Untamed Nature .

Island Press .

ISBN 1-55963-694-7 .

^ Smil, Vaclav (2003).

The Earth's Biosphere: Evolution, Dynamics, and Change .

MIT Press . p. 25.

ISBN 0-262-69298-8 .

^ Rockström, Steffen & 26 others 2009 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFRockströmSteffen26_others2009 ( help ) .

^ Steffen, W.; Richardson, K.; Rockstrom, J.; Cornell, S. E.; Fetzer, I.; Bennett, E. M.

; Biggs, R.; Carpenter, S. R.

; De Vries, W.; De Wit, C. A.; Folke, C.; Gerten, D.; Heinke, J.; Mace, G. M.; Persson, L. M.; Ramanathan, V.; Reyers, B.; Sorlin, S. (2015).

"Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet" .

Science .

347 (6223): 1259855.

doi : 10.1126/science.1259855 .

hdl : 1885/13126 .

PMID 25592418 .

^ "Global Change and the Earth System" . Archived from the original on 2010-04-29 . Retrieved 2010-03-25 .

International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme ^ Doyle, Alister (2007-02-03).

"46 nations call for tougher U.N. environment role" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on 2015-12-08.

^ Allam, Zaheer; Jones, David S.; Biyik, Can (2021-10-28).

"Introducing a global planetary ecosystem accounting in the wake of the Amazon Forest fires" .

Humanities and Social Sciences Communications .

8 (1): 1– 8.

doi : 10.1057/s41599-021-00937-0 .

hdl : 10072/410307 .

ISSN 2662-9992 .

S2CID 240076227 .

^ a b c Donna Cosmato, What's Your Environmental Worldview?

Further reading [ edit ] Burrows, Brian C.; Alan J. Mayne; Paul Newbury (1992).

Into the Twenty-First Century: A Handbook for a Sustainable Future . Adamantine Press [ clarification needed ] .

ISBN 0-7449-0031-X .

Clark, W.C. (Sep 1989). "Managing Planet Earth".

Scientific American .

261 (3). New York: W.H. Freeman : 46– 54.

Bibcode : 1989SciAm.261c..46C .

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0989-46 .

External links [ edit ] Timeline of the Human Condition .

v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Planetary_management&oldid=1193247234 " Categories : International sustainable development Environmentalism Natural resource management Earth Hidden categories: Harv and Sfn no-target errors All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2011 This page was last edited on 2 January 2024, at 20:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Planetary management 1 language Add topic

