Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usage 2 Etymology 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Trillion 53 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska తెలుగు Türkçe Українська ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Number, either 1,000,000,000,000 or 1,000,000,000,000,000,000 For other uses, see Trillion (disambiguation) .

Visualization of 1 trillion (short scale) A Rubik's Cube , which has about 43 trillion (long scale) possible positions Trillion is a number with two distinct definitions: 1,000,000,000,000 , i.e. one million million , or 10 12 (ten to the twelfth power ), as defined on the short scale . This is now the meaning in both American and British English.

1,000,000,000,000,000,000 , i.e. 10 18 (ten to the eighteenth power), as defined on the long scale . This is one million times larger than the short scale trillion. This is the historical meaning in English and the current use in many non-English-speaking countries where trillion and billion 10 12 (ten to the twelfth power) maintain their long scale definitions.

Usage [ edit ] Originally, the United Kingdom used the long scale trillion. However, since 1974, official UK statistics have used the short scale. Since the 1950s, the short scale has been increasingly used in technical writing and journalism, although the long scale definition still has some limited usage.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] American English has always used the short scale definition.

Other countries use the word trillion (or words cognate to it) to denote either the long scale or short scale trillion. For details, see current usage .

During the height of hyperinflation in Zimbabwe in 2008, people became accustomed to speaking about their daily expenses in terms of trillions.

[ 2 ] When Italy used the lira as currency, eventually converted at about 2,000 lira to the euro , it was found that Italians were more comfortable with words for large numbers such as trillion than British people.

[ 2 ] Etymology [ edit ] Look up trillion in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Whilst the words billion and trillion , or variations thereof were first used by French mathematicians in the 15th century , [ 2 ] the word trillion was first used in English in the 1680s and comes from the Italian word trilione .

[ 3 ] The word originally meant the third power of one million.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] As a result, it was mainly used to express the concept of an enormous number, similar to the words zillion and gazillion . However, it was more commonly used in the US.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Names of large numbers Billion , another ambiguous numerical word References [ edit ] ^ Cracknell, Richard; Bolton, Paul (January 2009).

"Statistical literacy guide: What is a billion? And other units" (PDF) (Report).

House of Commons Library . Retrieved 10 July 2015 .

^ a b c d e f Geoghegan, Tom (2011-10-28).

"Is trillion the new billion?" .

BBC News . Retrieved 2022-02-17 .

^ a b "trillion | Etymology, origin and meaning of trillion" .

etymonline .

Archived from the original on 1 May 2019 . Retrieved 6 February 2022 .

v t e Large numbers Examples in numerical order Hundred Thousand Ten thousand Hundred thousand Million Billion Trillion Quadrillion Quintillion Sextillion Septillion Octillion Nonillion Decillion Eddington number Googol Shannon number Googolplex Skewes's number Moser's number Graham's number TREE(3) SSCG(3) BH(3) Rayo's number Expression methods Notations Scientific notation Knuth's up-arrow notation Conway chained arrow notation Steinhaus–Moser notation Operators Hyperoperation Tetration Pentation Ackermann function Grzegorczyk hierarchy Fast-growing hierarchy Related articles (alphabetical order) Busy beaver Extended real number line Indefinite and fictitious numbers Infinitesimal Largest known prime number List of numbers Long and short scales Number systems Number names Orders of magnitude Power of two Power of three Power of 10 Sagan Unit Names History Authority control databases : National United States Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trillion&oldid=1306440926 " Categories : Large numbers English words Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 19:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trillion 53 languages Add topic

