Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Tropical plants Toggle Tropical plants subsection 1.1 Hoyas 1.2 Banana plants 1.3 Bird of paradise 1.4 Ferns 1.5 Papaya tree 1.6 Orchids 2 Maintenance 3 Non-tropical climates 4 Gallery 5 Attractions 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Tropical garden 7 languages Català Čeština Español فارسی Français 한국어 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of garden (Top) A tropical garden on the Portuguese island of Madeira and (bottom) the Hawaii Tropical Botanical Garden .

A tropical garden is a type of garden that features tropical plants and requires heavy rainfall or a decent irrigation or sprinkler system for watering. These gardens typically need fertilizer and heavy mulching .

Tropical gardens are no longer exclusive to tropical areas. Many gardeners in cooler climates are adopting the tropical garden design , which is possible through the selection of hardier tropical plants which can survive subtropical or even temperate climates , or through the use of a greenhouse . Main features include plants with very large leaves, vegetation that builds in height towards the back of the garden, creating a dense garden. Large plants and small trees hang over the garden, leaving sunlight to hit the ground directly.

Tropical plants [ edit ] Main article: Tropical plant The following are some examples of tropical plants to be used in tropical gardens or as indoor plants.

Hoyas [ edit ] Main article: Hoya (plant) Hoyas are known as the “Wax Flowers” due to their texture and almost unreal appearance. They need relatively warm and humid conditions, but depending on the specific variety of Hoya, they can endure heavy rainfall for some months during the wet seasons just as they may also be exposed to long dry periods. They are commonly used indoors. They need indirect light , but the amount or required light depends on the variety. They need small amounts of water and the soil is to be kept slightly dry since a very wet soil can end up killing this kind of plant. They can be grown in pots that are not too big or in hanging baskets. They grow better if kept at a minimum temperature of 15 degree Celsius (59 Fahrenheit).

[ 1 ] Banana plants [ edit ] Main article: Musaceae Contrary to common belief, growing banana trees is not that difficult and allow people to enjoy their own bananas.

[ 2 ] Also these plants can be used as windbreaks . They need fertile soils, large mulch and organic matter, large amounts of nitrogen and potassium , warm temperature, high humidity, large amounts of water, and shelter from other banana plants. Banana plants are not to be exposed to strong winds and extreme weather conditions (too hot or too cold weather) with an ideal temperature being 26-30 degree Celsius (78-86 Fahrenheit). They stop growing below 14 degree Celsius (57 Fahrenheit). Banana rhizomes are planted upright and their roots have to be well covered with soil.

[ 3 ] Bird of paradise [ edit ] Main article: Strelitzia Among the many species commonly called birds of paradise is Strelitzia reginae , a plant that is indigenous to South Africa and South America . As a tropical plant, it grows in warm, humid climates.

[ 4 ] This exotic, colorful plant with evergreen leaves resembles a bird's beak. It is an outdoor plant, provided the weather is not too cold. Otherwise, it is better to keep it in a pot indoors. It needs rich soil as well as full sun or partial shade. Another requirement for this plant is good drainage .

Ferns [ edit ] Main article: Fern Ferns are commonly used to give gardens a great foliage. Most ferns are easy to take care of. They basically cannot be exposed to direct sunlight for long periods of time. Moreover, their soil should always be moist. One way to keep ferns moist is by misting them.

[ 5 ] Papaya tree [ edit ] Main article: Carica Papaya trees should be planted where they can be kept warm and free from wind and freeze . They need enough water to support their leaves, but it should not be excessive, which can lead to root rot. They also need a well-drained soil.

[ 6 ] Orchids [ edit ] Main article: Orchid Night temperatures between 12 and 18 degrees Celsius (55-65 Fahrenheit), and day temperatures between 23 and 26 degree Celsius (75-80 Fahrenheit) are fine temperatures for orchids. Orchids need sufficient amounts of light as well as humidity. However, there are many varieties of orchids and each of them features specific care needs.

[ 7 ] Maintenance [ edit ] A tropical garden is one of the most difficult types of garden to build and maintain; it becomes more difficult the more the local climate differs from the plants' natural habitat . The keys to a healthy tropical garden are plentiful light and water. The large leaves that feature in tropical plants require the soil to be humid at all times, so irrigation is essential for some gardens. Over-watering causes the roots to rot, killing plants.

A tropical plant that is not cold-hardy should be brought indoors during the winter and returned to the garden for the summer.

Non-tropical climates [ edit ] A greenhouse is a good way to grow tropical plants in a colder climate.

Tropical and tropical-style plants that work well in milder non-tropical climates include: Abutilon megapotamicum Acanthus mollis Aechmea recurvata Agapanthus Albizia julibrissin × Amarcrinum Amorphophallus bulbifer Aspidistra elatior Asplenium scolopendrium Aucuba Araucaria araucana Begonia grandis Begonia sikkimensis Berberis eurybracteata Billbergia nutans Bletilla Butia Canna Calanthe Campsis Cardiocrinum Catalpa Cautleya Choisya ternata Colocasia Cordyline australis Corynabutilon Crocosmia Crinodendron hookerianum Cypripedium Cyrtomium falcatum Dicksonia antarctica Embothrium coccineum Eriobotrya japonica Eucalyptus gunnii Eucomis Euphorbia mellifera Farfugium japonicum Fargesia Fascicularia × Fatshedera Fatsia Ficus carica Fuchsia magellanica Gardenia jasminoides Griselinia littoralis Gunnera manicata Haberlea Hedera algeriensis Hedychium Heptapleurum taiwanianum Hibiscus coccineus Hibiscus moscheutos Incarvillea delavayi Jasminum officinale Jubaea Kalopanax Kniphofia Lobelia tupa Magnolia grandiflora Manihot grahamii Matteuccia Musa basjoo Musa sikkimensis Musella Nelumbo nucifera Paris polyphylla Passiflora caerulea Passiflora incarnata Paulownia Phormium Phyllostachys Pittosporum tobira Pleioblastus fortunei Pleione formosana Podocarpus salignus Polystichum acrostichoides Pseudopanax Rhapidophyllum Rheum palmatum Rhododendron sinogrande Ricinus Roscoea Sabal minor Salvia guaranitica Sauromatum venosum Saxifraga stolonifera Struthiopteris spicant Tasmannia lanceolata Tetrapanax Tigridia pavonia Titanotrichum Trachelospermum jasminoides Trachycarpus Wollemia Yucca Zantedeschia Zingiber mioga Gallery [ edit ] Gator Pride Hibiscus Double Hibiscus Canna 'Auguste Ferrier' Attractions [ edit ] Many attractions feature tropical gardens, including: Alma Park Zoo , Kuranda, Queensland , Australia Kuranda Scenic Railway , Dakabin, Queensland Colasanti's Tropical Gardens , Kingsville, Ontario , Canada Flor og Fjære , Stavanger, Norway Cedarvale Botanic Garden and Restaurant, Davis, Oklahoma , USA Reiman Gardens , Ames, Iowa See also [ edit ] List of garden types References [ edit ] ^ "Hoya Care" . Retrieved 2010-06-07 .

^ "Cheap banana trees" . Archived from the original on June 8, 2010 . Retrieved 2010-06-07 .

^ "Growing bananas" . Retrieved 2010-06-07 .

^ "Jungle-Type Bird of Paradise Flowers" . Retrieved 2010-06-07 .

^ "Fern Care" . Retrieved 2010-06-07 .

^ "How Not to Kill Your Papaya Tree" . Retrieved 2010-06-07 .

^ Noyes, Amber.

"22 Types Of Orchids And How To Care For Them" .

Gardening Chores . Retrieved 2021-02-07 .

v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐scmm6
Cached time: 20250812004853
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.350 seconds
Real time usage: 0.455 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 952/1000000
Revision size: 9730/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 38259/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 419/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 38397/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.216/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5105806/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  355.413      1 -total
 34.86%  123.889      1 Template:Reflist
 31.05%  110.350      7 Template:Cite_web
 28.56%  101.511      1 Template:Horticulture_and_Gardening
 27.63%   98.194      1 Template:Navbox
 18.12%   64.400      1 Template:Short_description
  9.94%   35.313      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.71%   27.393      7 Template:Main
  5.73%   20.366      1 Template:Multiple_image
  5.29%   18.796      4 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:718110:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812004853 and revision id 1304242381. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tropical_garden&oldid=1304242381 " Categories : Types of garden Tropical flora Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 21:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tropical garden 7 languages Add topic

