Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Contributions 3 Philosophy 4 Paleoanthropology 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Rudolf Wagner 17 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Hrvatski Italiano مصرى Polski Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German scientist This article is about 19th-century anatomist. For others with the same name, see Rudolf Wagner (disambiguation) .

Rudolf Wagner Born ( 1805-07-30 ) 30 July 1805 Bayreuth Died 13 May 1864 (1864-05-13) (aged 58) Göttingen Nationality German Scientific career Fields Anatomy , physiology Doctoral advisor Johann Lukas Schönlein Other academic advisors Georges Cuvier Doctoral students Rudolf Leuckart Rudolf Friedrich Johann Heinrich Wagner (30 July 1805 – 13 May 1864) was a German anatomist and physiologist and the co-discoverer of the germinal vesicle .

[ 1 ] He made important investigations on ganglia , nerve -endings, and the sympathetic nerves .

Life [ edit ] Rudolf Wagner was born at Bayreuth , where his father was a professor in the gymnasium .
He began the study of medicine at Erlangen in 1822.  Wagner completed his curriculum in 1826 at Würzburg , where he mainly studied under Johann Lukas Schönlein in medicine and to Karl Friedrich Heusinger in comparative anatomy . Aided by a public stipend , he spent a year or more studying in the Jardin des Plantes , under the friendly eye of Cuvier , and making zoological discoveries at Cagliari and other places on the Mediterranean.

[ 2 ] On his return to Germany he set up a medical practice at Augsburg , where his father had been transferred. A few months later he found an opening for an academic position when he was appointed prosector at Erlangen. In 1832 he became full professor of zoology and comparative anatomy there, and held that office until 1840, when he was called to succeed JF Blumenbach at Göttingen . He remained at the Hanoverian university until his death, being much occupied with administrative work as pro-rector for a number of years, and for nearly the whole of his residence troubled by ill health from tuberculosis .

[ 2 ] In 1860 he gave over the physiological part of his teaching to a new chair, retaining the zoological, with which his career had begun. While at Frankfurt, on his way to examine the Neanderthal skull at Bonn , he was struck with paralysis .  Wagner died at Göttingen a few months later on 13 May 1864.

[ 2 ] Contributions [ edit ] Wagner's activity as a writer and worker was enormous, and his range extensive, most of his hard work having been done at Erlangen while his health was good. His graduation thesis was on the progress of the working classes.  The ambitious title of The historical development of epidemic and contagious diseases all over the world, with the laws of their diffusion showed the influence of Schönlein.

[ 2 ] His first treatise was Die Naturgeschichte des Menschen (in 2 vols, Kempten, 1831).
Frequent journeys to the Mediterranean, the Adriatic, and the North Sea gave him abundant materials for research on invertebrate anatomy and physiology, which he communicated first to the Munich academy of sciences, and republished in his Beiträge zur vergleichenden Physiologie des Blutes (Leipzig, 1832–33, with additions in 1838).
In 1834–35, he brought out a textbook on the subject he chaired ( Lehrbuch der vergleichenden Anatomie , Leipzig), which recommended itself to students by its clear and concise style. A new edition of it appeared in 1843 under the title of Lehrbuch der Zootomie , of which only the vertebrate section was corrected by himself.

[ 2 ] The precision of his earlier work is evidenced by his Micrometric Measurements of the Elementary Parts of Man and Animals (Leipzig, 1834). His zoological labours may be said to conclude with the atlas Icones zootomicae (Leipzig, 1841).
In 1835, he communicated to the Munich academy of sciences his researches on the physiology of generation and development, including the famous discovery of the germinal vesicle of the human ovum .

[ 2 ] These were republished under the title Prodromus historiae generationis hominis atque animalium (Leipzig, 1836).
As in zoology, his original researches in physiology were followed by a students' textbook, Lehrbuch der speciellen Physiologie (Leipzig, 1838), which soon reached a third edition, and was translated into French and English. This was supplemented by an atlas, Icones physiologicae (Leipzig, 1839).

[ 2 ] To the same period belongs a very interesting (but now little-known) work on medicine proper, of a historical and synthetic scope: Grundriss der Encyklopädie und Methodologie der medicinischen Wissenschaften nach geschichtlicher Ansicht (Erlangen, 1838).
It was translated into Danish . About the same time he worked at a translation of James Cowles Prichard 's Natural History of Man , and edited various writings of Samuel Thomas Sommerring , with a biography of that anatomist (1844), which he himself fancied most of all his writings.

[ 2 ] In 1843, after his removal to Göttingen, he began his great Handwörterbuch der Physiologie mit Rücksicht auf physiologische Pathologie 1 2 3.1 3.2 4 , and brought out the fifth (supplementary) volume in 1852.  His only original contributions to this work were on the sympathetic nerve, nerve-ganglia and nerve-endings, and he modestly disclaimed all merit except as being the organizer. While resident in Italy for his health from 1845 to 1847, he occupied himself with research on the electrical organ of the torpedo genus of electric eels and on nervous organization generally; these he published in 1853–1854 ( Neurologische Untersuchungen , Göttingen), and therewith his physiological period may be said to end.

[ 2 ] Philosophy [ edit ] He boldly stood against materialism and avowed himself a Christian believer. This lost him the respect of a number of his old friends and pupils, and was unfeelingly told that he was "suffering from an atrophy of the brain." His quarrel with Carl Vogt and other materialists began with his oration at the Göttingen meeting of the Naturforscher-Versammlung in 1854, on "Menschenschöpfung und Seelensubstanz." This was followed by a series of "Physiological Letters" in the Allgemeine Zeitung , by an essay on "Glauben and Wissen," and by the most important piece of this series, "Der Kampf um die Seele vom Standpunkt der Wissenschaft" (Göttingen, 1857).

[ 2 ] Having come to the consideration of these philosophical problems late in life, he was at some disadvantage; but he endeavoured to join as he best could in the current of contemporary German thought. He had an exact knowledge of classical German writings, especially of Goethe 's, and of the literature connected with him.

[ 2 ] Paleoanthropology [ edit ] In what may be called his fourth and last period, Wagner became an anthropologist and archaeologist .  He occupied himself with the cabinet of skulls in the Göttingen museum collected by Blumenbach and with the excavation of prehistoric remains, corresponded actively with the anthropological societies of Paris and London, and organized, in co-operation with the veteran Karl Ernst von Baer , a successful congress of anthropologists at Göttinger in 1861. His last writings were memoirs on the convolutions of the human brain, on the weight of brains, and on the brains of idiots (1860–1862).

[ 2 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Rines 1920 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Chisholm 1911 .

References [ edit ] Rines, George Edwin, ed. (1920).

"Wagner, Rudolf" .

Encyclopedia Americana .

Attribution This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Wagner, Rudolf ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

External links [ edit ] Neurotree: Rudolf Wagner Details Picture, short biography, and bibliography in the Virtual Laboratory of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science Biography from whonamedit.com, a dictionary of medical eponyms Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH Leopoldina Artists Scientific illustrators People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rudolf_Wagner&oldid=1133096167 " Categories : German physiologists German anatomists German anthropologists Physicians from Bavaria 19th-century German zoologists 1805 births 1864 deaths People from Bayreuth Academic staff of the University of Göttingen Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 12 January 2023, at 07:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rudolf Wagner 17 languages Add topic

