Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory Toggle Theory subsection 1.1 Justifications and drawbacks of property rights 1.2 Natural rights and property 1.3 Property rights 2 Priority 3 Property rights and rights to people 4 Property rights and personal rights 5 Classification 6 Possession 7 Transfer of property Toggle Transfer of property subsection 7.1 Consensual transfers 7.2 Non-consensual transfers 7.3 Legal successor 8 Lease 9 Ownership Toggle Ownership subsection 9.1 Single individuals 9.2 Groups 9.2.1 Concurrent owners 9.2.2 Joint Tenancy 9.2.2.1 Tenancy in Common 9.2.2.2 Tenancy by the Entirety 9.2.3 Corporate owners 9.2.4 State owners 10 See also Toggle See also subsection 10.1 Property law in different jurisdictions 11 Notes 12 References Toggle the table of contents Property law 32 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Area of laws governing ownership of real and personal property This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Property law" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Property law Part of the common law series Types Personal property Community property Real property Unowned property Acquisition Gift Adverse possession Deed Conquest Discovery Accession Lost, mislaid, and abandoned property Treasure trove Bailment License Alienation Estates in land Allodial title Fee simple Fee tail Life estate Defeasible estate Future interest remainder Concurrent estate Leasehold estate Condominiums Real estate Land tenure Conveyancing Bona fide purchaser Torrens title Strata title Deeds registration Estoppel by deed Quitclaim deed Mortgage Equitable conversion Action to quiet title Escheat Future use control Restraint on alienation Rule against perpetuities Rule in Shelley's Case Doctrine of worthier title Nonpossessory interest Lien Easement Profit Usufruct Covenant Equitable servitude Related topics Fixtures Waste Partition Practicing without a license Property rights Mineral rights Water rights prior appropriation riparian Lateral and subjacent support Assignment Nemo dat Quicquid plantatur Conflict of property laws Blackacre Security deposit Other common law areas Contract law Tort law Wills , trusts and estates Criminal law Evidence Higher category: Law and Common law v t e Property law is the area of law that governs the various forms of ownership in real property (land) and personal property . Property refers to legally protected claims to resources, such as land and personal property, including intellectual property .

[ 1 ] Property can be exchanged through contract law , and if property is violated, one could sue under tort law to protect it.

[ 1 ] The concept, idea or philosophy of property underlies all property law. In some jurisdictions , historically all property was owned by the monarch and it devolved through feudal land tenure or other feudal systems of loyalty and fealty .

Theory [ edit ] The word property , in everyday usage, refers to an object (or objects) owned by a person—a car, a book, or a cellphone—and the relationship the person has to it.

[ 2 ] In law, the concept acquires a more nuanced rendering. Factors to consider include the nature of the object, the relationship between the person and the object, the relationship between a number of people in relation to the object, and how the object is regarded within the prevailing political system. Most broadly and concisely, property in the legal sense refers to the rights of people in or over certain objects or things.

[ 3 ] Non-legally recognized or documented property rights are known as informal property rights. These informal property rights are non-codified or documented, but recognized among local residents to varying degrees.

Justifications and drawbacks of property rights [ edit ] In capitalist societies with market economies, much of property is owned privately by persons or associations and not the government. Five general justifications have been given on private property rights: [ 1 ] Private property is an efficient way to manage resources in a decentralized basis, allowing expertise and specialization to develop with regard to the property.

Private property is a powerful incentive for owners to put it to productive use, because they stand to gain in the investment.

Private property allows exchanges and modifications.

Private property is an important source of individual autonomy, giving individuals independence and identity distinct from others.

Private property, being dispersed, allows individuals to exercise freedom, against others or against the government.

Arguments in favor of limiting private property rights have also been raised: [ 4 ] [ 1 ] Private property can be used in a way that is harmful to others, such as a factory owner causing loud noises in nearby neighborhoods. In economics, this is known as a negative externality .

Nuisance laws and government regulations (such as zoning ) have been used to limit an owners' right to use the property in certain ways.

Property can lead to monopolies , giving the owner the power to unfairly extract advantages from others. Because of this, there are laws on competition and antitrust.

Property can lead to the commodification of certain domains which people would prefer not to be commodified, such as social relations.

Private property gives individuals power, which can exacerbate over time and lead to too much inequality within a society. The propensity for inequality is justification of wealth redistribution .

Natural rights and property [ edit ] In his Second Treatise on Government , English philosopher John Locke asserted the right of an individual to own one part of the world, when, according to the Bible , God gave the world to all humanity in common.

[ 5 ] He claimed that although persons belong to God, they own the fruits of their labor. When a person works, that labor enters into the object. Thus, the object becomes the property of that person. However, Locke conditioned property on the Lockean proviso , that is, "there is enough, and as good, left in common for others".

U.S. Supreme Court Justice James Wilson undertook a survey of the philosophical grounds of American property law in 1790 and 1791. He proceeds from two premises: "Every crime includes an injury: every injury includes a violation of a right." (Lectures III, ii.) The government's role in protecting property depends upon an idea of right. Wilson believes that "man has a natural right to his property, to his character, to liberty, and to safety." [ 6 ] He also indicates that "the primary and principal object in the institution of government... was... to acquire a new security for the possession or the recovery of those rights".

[ 7 ] Wilson states that: "Property is the right or lawful power, which a person has to a thing." He then divides the right into three degrees: possession, the lowest; possession and use; and, possession, use, and disposition – the highest. Further, he states: "Useful and skillful industry is the soul of an active life. But industry should have her just reward. That reward is property, for of useful and active industry, property is the natural result." From this simple reasoning he is able to present the conclusion that exclusive, as opposed to communal property, is to be preferred. Wilson does, however, give a survey of communal property arrangements in history, not only in colonial Virginia but also ancient Sparta .

Property rights [ edit ] There are two main views on the right to property, the traditional view and the bundle of rights view.

[ 8 ] The traditionalists believe that there is a core, inherent meaning in the concept of property, while the bundle of rights view states that the property owner only has bundle of permissible uses over the property.

[ 1 ] The two views exist on a spectrum and the difference may be a matter of focus and emphasis.

[ 1 ] William Blackstone , in his Commentaries on the Laws of England , wrote that the essential core of property is the right to exclude.

[ 9 ] That is, the owner of property must be able to exclude others from the thing in question, even though the right to exclude is subject to limitations.

[ 10 ] By implication, the owner can use the thing, unless another restriction, such as zoning law, prevents it.

[ 1 ] Other traditionalists argue that three main rights define property: the right to exclusion, use and transfer.

[ 11 ] An alternative view of property, favored by legal realists , is that property simply denotes a bundle of rights defined by law and social policy.

[ 1 ] Which rights are included in the bundle known as property rights, and which bundles are preferred to which others, is simply a matter of policy.

[ 1 ] Therefore, a government can prevent the building of a factory on a piece of land, through zoning law or criminal law, without damaging the concept of property.

[ 1 ] The "bundle of rights" view was prominent in academia in the 20th century and remains influential today in American law.

[ 1 ] Priority [ edit ] Different parties may claim a competing interest in the same property by mistake or by fraud , with the claims being inconsistent of each other. For example, the party creating or transferring an interest may have a valid title, but may intentionally or negligently create several interests wholly or partially inconsistent with each other. A court resolves the dispute by adjudicating the priorities of the interests.

Property rights and rights to people [ edit ] Property rights are rights over things enforceable against all other persons. By contrast, contractual rights are rights enforceable against particular persons. Property rights may, however, arise from a contract; the two systems of rights overlap. In relation to the sale of land, for example, two sets of legal relationships exist alongside one another: the contractual right to sue for damages, and the property right exercisable over the land. More minor property rights may be created by contract, as in the case of easements , covenants , and equitable servitudes .

[ 12 ] A separate distinction is evident where the rights granted are insufficiently substantial to confer on the nonowner a definable interest or right in the thing. The clearest example of these rights is the license . In general, even if licenses are created by a binding contract, they do not give rise to property interests.

Property rights and personal rights [ edit ] Property rights are also distinguished from personal rights . Practically all contemporary societies acknowledge this basic ontological and ethical distinction. In the past, groups lacking political power have often been disqualified from the benefits of property. In an extreme form, this has meant that people have become "objects" of property—legally "things" or chattels (see slavery .) More commonly, marginalized groups have been denied legal rights to own property. These include Jews in England and married women in Western societies until the late 19th century.

The dividing line between personal rights and property rights is not always easy to draw. For instance, is one's reputation property that can be commercially exploited by affording property rights to it? The question of the proprietary character of personal rights is particularly relevant in the case of rights over human tissue, organs and other body parts.

In the United States , a " quasi-property " interest has been explicitly declared in the dead body . Also in the United States, it has been recognised that people have an alienable proprietary " right of publicity " over their "persona". The patent/patenting of biotechnological processes and products based on human genetic material may be characterised as creating property in human life.

A particularly difficult question is whether people have rights to intellectual property developed by others from their body parts . In the pioneering case on this issue, the Supreme Court of California held in Moore v. Regents of the University of California (1990) that individuals do not have such a property right.

Classification [ edit ] Property law is characterised by a great deal of historical continuity and technical terminology . The basic distinction in common law systems is between real property (land) and personal property (chattels).

Before the mid-19th century, the principles governing the transfer of real property and personal property on an intestacy were quite different. Though this dichotomy does not have the same significance anymore, the distinction is still fundamental because of the essential differences between the two categories. An obvious example is the fact that land is immovable, and thus the rules that govern its use must differ. A further reason for the distinction is that legislation is often drafted employing the traditional terminology.

The division of land and chattels has been criticised as being not satisfactory as a basis for categorising the principles of property law since it concentrates attention not on the proprietary interests themselves but on the objects of those interests.

[ 13 ] Moreover, in the case of fixtures , chattels which are affixed to or placed on land may become part of the land.

Real property is generally sub-classified into: corporeal hereditaments – tangible real property (land) incorporeal hereditaments – intangible real property such as an easement of way Although a tenancy involves rights to real property, a leasehold estate is typically considered personal property, being derived from contract law . In the civil law system, the distinction is between movable and immovable property, with movable property roughly corresponding to personal property, while immovable property corresponding to real estate or real property, and the associated rights, and obligations thereon.

Possession [ edit ] The concept of possession developed from a legal system whose principal concern was to avoid civil disorder. The general principle is that a person in possession of land or goods, even as a wrongdoer, is entitled to take action against anyone interfering with the possession unless the person interfering is able to demonstrate a superior right to do so.

In England, the Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977 has significantly amended the law relating to wrongful interference with goods and abolished some longstanding remedies and doctrines.

[ 14 ] Transfer of property [ edit ] The term "transfer of property" means an act by which a living person, company, or state conveys property, in present or in future, to one or more other living persons, to himself and one or more other living persons, to the state, or to a private company. The transfer of property can be consensual or non-consensual, and to transfer property is to perform such an act.

Consensual transfers [ edit ] The most common method of acquiring an interest in property is as the result of a consensual transaction with the previous owner, for example, a sale , a gift , or through inheritance . In law, an inheritor is a person who is entitled to receive a share of the heritor's (the person who died) property, subject to the rules of inheritance in the jurisdiction of which the heritor was a citizen or where the heritor died or owned property at the time of death. Dispositions by will may also be regarded as consensual transactions, since the effect of a will is to provide for the distribution of the deceased person's property to nominated beneficiaries. A person may also obtain an interest in property under a trust established for his or her benefit by the owner of the property.

Non-consensual transfers [ edit ] It is also possible for property to pass from one person to another independently of the consent of the property owner. For example, this occurs when a person dies intestate , goes bankrupt , or has the property taken in execution of a court judgment.

There are cases when a person is legally capable of owning property, but is not capable of maintaining and dealing with it (such as paying property taxes). This is the case for young children and mentally handicapped individuals. The state deems them incompetent in their capacity to deal with property. Thus, they must be appointed a legal guardian to deal with the property on the incompetent individual's behalf. In cases where the individual cannot find a legal guardian to deal with the property, the property is put up for sale and the incompetent individual is involuntarily deprived of such property.

Tax sales are another process by which individuals can be forcibly deprived of their private property. A tax sale is the forced sale of property by the state due to unpaid taxes on that property. The property is typically auctioned off as a tax sale by the local government to payoff the delinquent taxes on that property. One could make the argument that, given the presence of property taxes, an individual never truly owns a piece of property; they rent it from the government.

Property can also pass from one person to the state independently of the consent of the property owner through the state's power of eminent domain . Eminent domain refers to the ability of the state to buyout private property from individuals at their will in order to use the property for public use. Eminent domain requires the state to "justly compensate" the property owner for the acquisition of their land. The practice dates back to at least the 17th century.

[ 15 ] Common examples include buying land from individuals in order for the state to build public roads, transportation systems, governmental buildings, and to construct certain public goods. The state also uses its eminent domain power for large urban renewal projects by which it will buy out large portions of typically poor housing areas in order to rebuild it.

Eminent domain also consists of enabling the state to condemn certain real estate construction and development rights for various reasons. One must meet location specific regulatory standards and building codes in order to construct on property. The general rule for stairs (in the US) is 7-11 (a 7-inch rise and 11 inch run). More exactly, no more than 7 3/4 inches for the riser (vertical) and a minimum of 10 inches for the tread (horizontal or step). Failure to meet these regulatory standards can result in an inability to receive state building permits, state destruction of property, legal fines, and increased liability.

KELO V. NEW LONDON (04-108) 545 U.S. 469 (2005) was a pivotal case that increased the scope of the eminent domain power of the state. The U.S. supreme court ruled that private property could be condemned by the state and transferred to a private company.

[ 16 ] Legal successor [ edit ] In property law, economics and finance, the term "legal successor" may refer to a legally established successor of property rights ( inheritance , interest ) or in terms of liabilities ( debt ).

In the case of bankruptcy of a lender , the legal successor in interest has the right to collect the debt.

[ 17 ] Lease [ edit ] Historically, leases served many purposes, and the regulation varied according to intended purposes and the economic conditions of the time. Leaseholds, for example, were mainly granted for agriculture until the late eighteenth century and early nineteenth century, when the growth of cities made the leasehold an important form of landholding in urban areas .

The modern law of landlord and tenant in common law jurisdictions retains the influence of the common law and, particularly, the laissez-faire philosophy that dominated the law of contract and the law of property in the 19th century. With the growth of consumerism , the law of consumer protection recognised that common law principles assuming equal bargaining power between parties may cause unfairness. Consequently, reformers have emphasised the need to assess residential tenancy laws in terms of protection they provide to tenants. Legislation to protect tenants is now common.

Ownership [ edit ] Single individuals [ edit ] Property can mostly be owned by any single human. However, many jurisdictions have some stipulations that limit property-owning capacity. The two main limiting factors include citizenship and competency of maintaining property.

In many countries, non-citizens cannot own property or are limited greatly in their capacity to own property. The United States allows foreign entities to buy and own property. But the United States does have stipulations surrounding tribal land owned by the indigenous Native Americans.

Incompetent individuals also cannot own property, at least without a legal guardian. Incompetent individuals consist largely of children and the cognitively impaired. They are legally recognized and allowed to own property, but they cannot deal with it without the consent of their legal guardians. Children do not have the capacity to pay property taxes.

Groups [ edit ] All western legal systems allow for a number of different forms of group ownership of property. Group ownership in property law is referred to as co-tenancy, or concurrent ownership. Two or more owners of a property are referred to as co-owners.

Concurrent owners [ edit ] In U.S. common law, property can be owned by many different people and parties. Property can be shared by an infinitely divisible number of people. There are three types of concurrent estates , or ways people can jointly own property: joint tenancy, tenancy in common, or tenancy by entirety.

Joint Tenancy [ edit ] In joint tenancy, each owner of the property has an undivided interest in it along with full and complete ownership. Each owner in joint tenancy has the full right to occupy and use all of it. If one owner dies in joint tenancy, then the other owner takes control of the deceased owner's interest.

[ 18 ] Tenancy in Common [ edit ] In tenancy in common, the shares of ownership can be equal or unequal in size. One person may own a larger share of the property than another. Even if owners own an unequal amount of shares, all owners still have the right to use all of the property. If one owner dies, their share of the property is transferred to the designated individual in their will contract.

[ 19 ] Tenancy by the Entirety [ edit ] In tenancy by the entirety, each owner of the property has an undivided interest in it along with full and complete ownership. Each spouse has the full right to occupy and use all of the property. It is only available to married couples. A spouse cannot transfer their interest in the property without the consent of the other spouse. If the couple divorces and goes to court, a judge is granted wide discretion on how to divide the share interests of the property in common-law jurisdictions.

[ 20 ] Corporate owners [ edit ] Corporations are legal non-human entities that are entitled to property rights just as an individual human is. A corporation has legal power to use and possess property just as a fictitious legal human would. However, a corporation is not a single human, it is the collective will of a group of people who provide a service or build a good. With many agent in play, there are many different and opposing interests in play with respect to ownership. The majority of property is now owned by corporations. They were created under general incorporation statutes that allow such fictitious legal persons to have property rights.

[ 21 ] State owners [ edit ] The community, or the state, can have many different roles concerning property: facilitator, protector, and owner. In capitalist market economies, the state largely serves as a mediator that facilitates and enforces private property laws.

Communist ideals oppose private property laws.

Communism / Marxism advocates for full state / public ownership of property. "Private property has made us so stupid and one-sided that an object is only ours when we have it – when it exists for us as capital, or when it is directly possessed, eaten, drunk, worn, inhabited, etc., – in short, when it is used by us" (Marx).

[ 22 ] However, it is important to note that many Marxist–Leninist societies such as China and the dissolved Soviet Union have forms of private property laws.

In the United States, "the federal government owns roughly 640 million acres, about 28% of the 2.27 billion acres of land in the United States. Four major federal land management agencies administer 606.5 million acres of this land (as of September 30, 2018). They are the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), and National Park Service (NPS) in the Department of the Interior (DOI) and the Forest Service (FS) in the Department of Agriculture. A fifth agency, the Department of Defense (excluding the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers), administers 8.8 million acres in the United States (as of September 30, 2017), consisting of military bases, training ranges, and more. Together, the five agencies manage about 615.3 million acres, or 27% of the U.S. land base. Many other agencies administer the remaining federal acreage." [ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Claim club Conversion (law) Detinue Escheat Ius in re Rei vindicatio Replevin Torrens title Trover Infectious invalidity Property law in different jurisdictions [ edit ] Ghanaian property law United States property law English property law Scots property law South African property law Australian property law Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Merrill, Thomas W. (2010).

Property . Smith, Henry E. New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-971808-5 .

OCLC 656424368 .

^ Ann Marie Sullivan, Cultural Heritage & New Media: A Future for the Past, 15 J. MARSHALL REV. INTELL. PROP. L. 604 (2016) https://repository.jmls.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1392&context=ripl Archived 2020-04-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ Badenhorst, PJ, Juanita M. Pienaar, and Hanri Mostert.

Silberberg and Schoeman's The Law of Property . 5th Edition. Durban: LexisNexis/Butterworths, 2006, p. 9.

^ Property, mainstream and critical positions . Macpherson, C. B. (Crawford Brough), 1911-1987. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 1978.

ISBN 0-8020-2305-3 .

OCLC 3706603 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Locke, John (1980).

Second treatise of government . Macpherson, C. B. (Crawford Brough), 1911-1987. (1st ed.). Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett Pub. Co.

ISBN 0-915144-93-X .

OCLC 6278220 .

^ "Of the Natural Rights of Individuals | Teaching American History" .

teachingamericanhistory.org .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-02 . Retrieved 2018-03-24 .

^ Dreisbach, Daniel L.; Hall, Mark D.; Morrison, Jeffry H. (2004-10-08).

The Founders on God and Government . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

ISBN 9780742580466 .

^ Henry E. Smith, Exclusion Versus Governance: Two Strategies for Delineating Property Rights , 31 J. Legal Stud. S453 (2002).

^ Blackstone, William (14 July 2015).

Commentaries on the laws of England, volume 2 : of the rights of things (1766) . Chicago.

ISBN 978-0-226-16294-2 .

OCLC 913869367 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Penner, J. E. (James E.) (1997).

The idea of property in law . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0-19-826029-6 .

OCLC 35620409 .

^ Epstein, Richard Allen (1985).

Takings : private property and the power of eminent domain . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-674-86728-9 .

OCLC 12079263 .

^ "Archived copy" .

Archived from the original on 2023-11-29 . Retrieved 2023-09-11 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Felix Cohen, "Dialogue on Private Property" (1954) Rutgers LR 357.

^ "Disposal Goods Tenancy Terminated Abandoned Property | Articles | Insights | Shoosmiths Lawyers" .

www.shoosmiths.com . Retrieved 2023-09-11 .

^ "History Of The Federal Use Of Eminent Domain" .

www.justice.gov . 2015-04-13.

Archived from the original on 2020-11-28 . Retrieved 2020-12-18 .

^ Kelo v. New London (Syllabus) , vol. 545, 23 June 2005, p. 469, archived from the original on 2020-12-12 , retrieved 2020-12-18 ^ "What Happens if Your Lender Goes Under?" Archived 2021-11-20 at the Wayback Machine , by Louis DeNicola, Money Management International , 4/9/2021 ^ "Joint Tenancy" .

LII / Legal Information Institute .

Archived from the original on 2020-12-01 . Retrieved 2020-12-18 .

^ "Tenancy in Common" .

LII / Legal Information Institute .

Archived from the original on 2021-04-21 . Retrieved 2020-12-18 .

^ "Tenancy by the Entirety" .

LII / Legal Information Institute .

Archived from the original on 2020-11-12 . Retrieved 2020-12-18 .

^ "26 U.S. Code § 362 - Basis to corporations" .

LII / Legal Information Institute .

Archived from the original on 2021-02-28 . Retrieved 2020-12-18 .

^ Marx, Karl (1844).

Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 .

^ "Federal Land Ownership: Overview and Data" (PDF) . February 21, 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 24, 2015 . Retrieved December 18, 2020 .

References [ edit ] Library resources about Property law Resources in your library Resources in other libraries AA Berle , 'Property, Production and Revolution' (1965) 65 Columbia Law Review 1 AA Berle , 'Family Lawsuits Over Real Property' (2012) Los Angeles Article Review on Real Property 2 Archived 2016-06-25 at the Wayback Machine Jeremy Waldron (2004-09-06).

"Property(Moveable and Immoveable Property)" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Real estate Property Tertiary sector By location Bangladesh Canada China Indonesia Italy Turkey Kenya Pakistan Panama Puerto Rico Russia Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates United Kingdom Types Commercial property Commercial building Corporate Real Estate Extraterrestrial real estate International real estate Lease administration Niche real estate Garden real estate Healthcare real estate Vacation property Arable land Golf property Luxury real estate Off-plan property Private equity real estate Real estate owned Residential property Sectors Property management Real estate development Real estate investing Real estate flipping Relocation Law and regulation Adverse possession Chain of title Closing Concurrent estate Conditional sale Conveyancing Deed Eminent domain Encumbrance Foreclosure Just cause eviction Land law Land registration Leasehold estate Lease Property abstract Real estate transaction Real estate contract Real property Rent regulation Severance Torrens title Zoning Economics, financing and valuation Asset-based lending Capitalization rate Cash out refinancing Effective gross income Gross rent multiplier Hard money loan Highest and best use Home equity Home equity investments Home equity loan Home equity line of credit Investment rating for real estate Mortgage insurance Mortgage loan Negative equity Real estate derivative Real estate economics Real estate bubble Real estate valuation Remortgage Rental value Reverse mortgage Parties Appraiser Buyer agent Buyer broker Chartered Surveyor Exclusive buyer agent Land banking Landlord Moving company Property manager Real estate broker Real estate investment club Real estate investment trust Real property administrator Tenant Other Companies Eviction Filtering Gentrification Graduate real estate education Green belt Indices Industry trade groups Investment firms Land banking People Property cycle Real estate trends Undergraduate real estate programs Urban decay Urban planning List of housing markets by real estate prices Category Commons List of topics v t e English criminal law Classes of crimes Indictable Either way Summary Regulatory (lowered mens rea) Statutory Common law Elements of crimes Actus reus Causation Mens rea Intention (criminal law) Intention in English law Recklessness Criminal negligence Corporate / Vicarious / Strict liability Omissions Doctrines Lesser included offences Concurrence Ignorantia juris non excusat Inchoate offences Encouraging or assisting a crime Conspiracy Accessory Attempt Common purpose Defences Self-defence Duress Necessity Loss of control Consent inc. participation in a sporting event Medical procedures Prevention of crime Lawful excuse Insanity Diminished responsibility Intoxication Category:Criminal defences Offences against the person Homicide ( Murder / Manslaughter / Corporate manslaughter / Infanticide ) Unlawful killing Child destruction Concealment of birth Wounding or causing grievous bodily harm Assault occasioning actual bodily harm Common assault Attempting to choke, &c. in order to commit any indictable offence Assault with intent to rob Robbery Assault with intent to rape Assault with intent to resist lawful apprehension Assaulting a constable in the execution of his duty Battery Kidnapping Child abduction False imprisonment Harassment Offences Against the Person Act 1861 Treason Sexual offences Rape Sexual assault Sexual Offences Act 2003 Public order offences Riot Violent disorder Affray Unlawful assembly Fear or provocation of violence Harassment, alarm or distress intent aggravates Public Order Act 1986 Incitement to ethnic or racial hatred Nuisance Causing Public nuisance Outraging public decency Effecting a public mischief Keeping a disorderly house Preventing the lawful burial of a body Breach of the peace Rout Forcible entry Accessory (legal term) Misconduct in a public office Misfeasance in public office Abuse of authority Perjury of oath Dereliction of duty Offences against property Arson Dishonesty Cheating (law) Burglary Robbery Theft Criminal damage Squatting Trespass Taking without owner's consent Deception Handling stolen goods Misappropriation of funds Blackmail Extortion Cybercrime Theft Act 1968 Theft Act 1978 Fraud Act 2006 Fraud by abuse of position Conspiracy to defraud Fare evasion Webcam blackmail Forgery, personation and cheating Forgery Cheating the public revenue Uttering Offences against justice Bribery Perjury Perverting the course of justice Witness intimidation Witness tampering Misprision of treason Jury tampering Assault with intent to resist lawful apprehension Assaulting a constable in the execution of his duty Harboring a fugitive Encouraging or assisting a crime Escape from lawful custody Obstruction of justice Obstruction of a police officer Wasting police time Refusing to assist a constable Sedition Espionage Contempt of court Fabrication of false evidence Rescuing a prisoner Other common law areas Contract Tort Property Wills Trusts and estates Evidence Criminal procedure English law portal For obsolete aspects see History of English criminal law table v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Authority control databases National Germany Japan Korea Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Property_law&oldid=1291666774 " Categories : Property law Common law legal systems Common law Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: others CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2015 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 22 May 2025, at 17:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Property law 32 languages Add topic

