Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Political thought 3 Works in English translation 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Gaetano Mosca 26 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian political scientist and journalist Gaetano Mosca COSML COCI SoK Member of the Italian Chamber of Deputies for Palermo In office 24 March 1909 – 29 September 1919 Constituency Caccamo Personal details Born ( 1858-04-01 ) 1 April 1858 Palermo , Kingdom of the Two Sicilies Died 8 November 1941 (1941-11-08) (aged 83) Rome , Italy Political party Historical Right Alma mater University of Palermo Profession Teacher , journalist Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Italian school of elitism Main interests Politics , economics , sociology Notable ideas Political class , political formula (a set of doctrines propagated by the ruling elites), [ 1 ] elite theory Gaetano Mosca COSML COCI SoK ( Italian: [ɡaeˈtaːno ˈmoska] ; 1 April 1858 – 8 November 1941) was an Italian political scientist , journalist and public servant . He is credited with developing the elite theory and the doctrine of the political class and is one of the three members constituting the Italian school of elitism together with Vilfredo Pareto and Robert Michels .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Mosca earned a degree in law from the University of Palermo in 1881. In 1887 he moved to Rome and took a position as editor of proceedings of the Chamber of Deputies of Italy . Having taught occasionally at Palermo and Rome , Mosca became chair of constitutional law at the University of Turin in 1896. He would hold this position until 1924, when he settled permanently in Rome to occupy the chair of public law at the University of Rome . Mosca held several other academic positions throughout his life.

He was skeptical towards democracy , and placed his lifelong liberalism in direct opposition to mass democracy. In a 1904 interview, he stated: I can certainly call myself an anti-democrat, but I am not an anti-liberal; indeed I am opposed to pure democracy precisely because I am a liberal. I believe that the ruling class ought not to be monolithic and homogeneous but ought to consist of elements which are diverse in regard to origin and interests; when, instead, political power originates from a single source, even if this be elections with universal suffrage , I regard it as dangerous and liable to become oppressive. Democratic Jacobinism is an illiberal doctrine precisely because it subordinates everything to a single force, that of the so-called majority, on which it does not set any limits.

[ 4 ] In 1909 Mosca was elected to the Chamber of Deputies of Italy , in which he served until 1919.  During this time, he served as Under-secretary for the Colonies from 1914 until 1916. During this time, Mosca also worked as a political journalist for the Corriere della Sera of Milan (after 1901) and the Tribuna of Rome (from 1911 to 1921).

[ 5 ] In 1919, Mosca was nominated life senator of the Kingdom of Italy . He served actively in this capacity until 1926. In 1925 he signed the Manifesto of the Anti-Fascist Intellectuals . On numerous occasions, the elderly Mosca took to the floor to speak against bills endorsed by Benito Mussolini which intended to curtail political rights and parliamentary institutions.

[ 6 ] Mosca explained his opposition to these bills not only by referring to his own faith in political liberties as values worth preserving, but also by appealing to the "development and progress" that accompanied those nations where political liberties had been safeguarded through representative institutions.

[ 6 ] Parliamentary regimes were able to protect civil and political liberties because they provided an independent source of authority through which to limit the power of the rulers.

[ 6 ] Mosca's speeches in support of civil liberties and parliamentary government, as well as his steadfast refusal to compromise with the fascist regime, exerted an important influence on members of the intellectual opposition to Mussolini's dictatorship such as Gaetano Salvemini and Piero Gobetti .

[ 6 ] Mosca is most famous for his works of political theory.  These were Sulla teorica dei governi e sul governo parlamentare (Theory of Governments and Parliamentary Government), published in 1884; Elementi di scienza politica (The Ruling Class), published in 1896; and Storia delle dottrine politiche (History of Political Doctrines), published in 1936.

Political thought [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Italy Ideologies Berlusconism Italian nationalism Padanian Italian school of elitism Liberal conservatism Liberismo Neo-Bourbonism Ultramontanism Populism Principles Agrarianism Anti-communism Christian values Clericalism Familialism Italian culture Maternalism Metapolitics Monarchism Patriotism Property rights Subsidiarity History 1946 Italian institutional referendum Black nobility Historical Right Italian Empire Kingdom of Italy Lateran Treaty Papal States Risorgimento Sanfedismo Propaganda Due Intellectuals Adinolfi Bresciani Cuoco Evola Fini Giannini Giubilei Lampedusa Leopardi Locchi Lombroso Longanesi Maistre Mattei Margotti Montanelli Mordini Mosca Mughini Papini Pareto Pera Romano Salandra Sogno Taparelli Zolla Literature The Rise and Fall of the Elites (1900) Political Parties (1911) The Mind and Society (1916) Revolt Against the Modern World (1934) The Rage and the Pride (2001) Politicians Andreotti Berlusconi Cacciari Fini Forlani De Gasperi Di Cavour Meloni Pera Procaccini Salandra Salvini Sogno Tatarella Parties Active Brothers of Italy Coraggio Italia Forza Italia (2013) Future and Freedom Identity and Action Lega Nord Monarchist Alliance Popular Alternative Us with Italy Defunct Cambiamo!

Common Man's Front Conservatives and Reformists Direction Italy Economic Party Forza Italia (1994) Italian Democratic Party of Monarchist Unity Italian Nationalist Association Liberal Constitutional Party Monarchist National Party New Centre-Right The People of Freedom People's Monarchist Party Think tanks FareFuturo Foundation for Subsidiarity Liberal Foundation Machiavelli Center Magna Carta Foundation New Italy The Republicans Media Annabella L'Armonia Il Borghese Candido Corriere della Sera (formerly) Epoca Eurasia, Rivista di Studi Geopolitici Il Foglio Il Giornale L'Italia settimanale Libero Secolo d'Italia La Verità Il Tempo Related European New Right Immigrant criminality Italian school of criminology Metapolitics Politics of Italy Socialism Roman question Conservatism portal Italy portal v t e Mosca's enduring contribution to political science is the observation that all but the most primitive societies are ruled in fact, if not in theory, by a numerical minority.  He named this minority the political class . That means that every society could be split between two social classes: the one who rules and the one which is ruled. This is always true, for Mosca, because without a political class there is no rule.

Although his theory is correctly characterized as elitist , its basis is different from The Power Elite described, for example, by C. Wright Mills . Unlike Mills and later sociologists, Mosca aimed at developing a universal theory of political society . His more general theory of the Political Class reflects this aim.

[ 7 ] Mosca defined modern elites in term of their superior organisational skills.  These skills are especially useful in gaining political power in modern bureaucratic society. Nevertheless, Mosca's theory was more liberal than the elitist theory of Pareto , for example. In Mosca's view, elites are not always hereditary, as peoples from all classes of society can theoretically become elite. When this happens, the reproduction of power is defined as democratic; in contrast, when the members' turnover remains inside the elite, the reproduction of power is defined as aristocratic. He also adhered to the concept of the circulation of elites, a dialectical theory of constant competition among elites, with different elite groups alternating with each other repeatedly over time. This concept originated from his materialist idea of history as a conflict between classes ( Marx ), from the conflictual nature of politics considered as a fight for acquisition and deployment of power ( Machiavelli ), and finally from the non-egalitarian, hierarchical structure of society. Unlike Marx, Mosca has not a narrow concept of historical time, but a circular one, as in classical political theory, which consists in a perpetual condition of conflict and recycling of the elite. For Mosca, the dichotomous structure of society would not be solved by a revolution.

[ 8 ] Works in English translation [ edit ] Chisholm, George Goudie; Mosca, Gaetano ; Ashby, Thomas (1911).

"Sicily" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 25 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

20– 35.

The Ruling Class, McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1939.

"On the Ruling Class." In Talcott Parsons, ed., Theories of Society; Foundations of Modern Sociological Theory, Vol. I, Part Two, The Free Press of Glencoe, 1961.

"What is Mafia." M&J, 2014. Translation of the book "Cosa è la Mafia," Giornale degli Economisti, Luglio 1901, pp. 236-62.

Mosca, G. (1972).

A short history of political philosophy (S. Z. Koff, Tran.; [1st American ed.].). Crowell.

Notes [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ^ N. Jayapalan, Comprehensive Modern Political Analysis , Atlantic Publishers, 2002, p. 156.

^ Robert A. Nye, The Anti-Democratic Sources of Elite Theory: Pareto, Mosca, Michels , Sage, 1977, p. 22.

^ J. J. Chambliss (ed.), Philosophy of Education: An Encyclopedia , Routledge, 2013, p. 179.

^ Finocchiaro, Maurice A. (1999).

Beyond Right and Left: Democratic Elitism in Mosca and Gramsci . Yale University Press. p. 146.

^ A.. Colombo, "L'eredità di Gaetano Mosca" , Corriere della Sera , August 8, 2010, p. 38.

^ a b c d Käsler, Dirk; Turner, Stephen P. (1992).

Sociology Responds to Fascism . Routledge. pp.

70– 75.

^ C.. Martinelli, "L'organizzazione del potere nel pensiero di Gaetano Mosca" , Giornale di Storia Costituzionale , 17, first semester, 2009, pp. 177-205.

^ Galli, Carlo (2011).

Manuale di storia del pensiero politico . Bologna: Il Mulino.

ISBN 978-88-15-23233-5 .

References [ edit ] Albertoni, Ettore, Mosca and the Theory of Elitism . Oxford: Basil Blackwell (1987).

ISBN 0-631-15254-7 Carlo Lottieri , "Un Élitisme Technocratique et Libéral. L'Autorité et l'État Selon Mosca", L’Année Sociologique, 1994; now this article is also in Raymond Boudon - Mohamed Cherkaoui - Jeffrey C. Alexander (eds.), The Classical Tradition in Sociology. The European Tradition, vol.II (The Emergence of European Sociology: II - The Classical Tradition [1880-1920]) , London: Sage Publications (1997).

Martinelli, Claudio.

"Gaetano Mosca’s Political Theories: a Key to Interpret the Dynamics of the Power," Italian Journal of Public Law, Vol. I, 2009.

Meisel, James H.

The Myth of the Ruling Class: Gaetano Mosca and the "Elite," University of Michigan Press, 1958.

Meisel, James H.

Pareto and Mosca, Prentice-Hall 1965.

Sereno, Renzo.

"The Anti-Aristotelianism of Gaetano Mosca and Its Fate," Ethics, Vol. 48, No. 4, Jul., 1938.

Further reading [ edit ] Acemoglu, Daron.

Persistence of Power, Elites and Institutions, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2006.

Bottomore, Thomas.

Elites and Society, Watts, 1964.

Lasch, Christopher .

The Revolt of the Elites and the Betrayal of Democracy , W. W. Norton & Company, 1996.

Lasswell, Harold & Lerner, Daniel.

The Comparative Study of Elites, Stanford University Press, 1952.

Mills, C. Wright.

The Power Elite, Oxford University Press, 2000.

Pareto, Vilfredo.

The Rise and Fall of Elites, Transaction Publishers, 1991.

Putnam, Robert D.

The Comparative Study of Political Elites, Prentice-Hall, 1976.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Gaetano Mosca .

Ferraresi, Furio (2012).

"MOSCA, Gaetano" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 77: Morlini–Natolini (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

ISBN 978-88-12-00032-6 .

Britannica.com: Gaetano Mosca What is Mafia: "What is Mafia." M&J, 2014. Translation of the book "Cosa è la Mafia," Giornale degli Economisti, Luglio 1901 Academic Agent (2020).

Elite Theory: Gaetano Mosca and Vilfredo Pareto.

v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Italian People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gaetano_Mosca&oldid=1299974173 " Categories : 1858 births 1941 deaths 20th-century Italian philosophers Deputies of Legislature XXIII of the Kingdom of Italy Deputies of Legislature XXIV of the Kingdom of Italy Elite theory Historians of the Sicilian Mafia Historical Right politicians Italian liberal politicians Italian male journalists Italian political philosophers Italian political scientists Italian sociologists Journalists from Palermo Members of the Senate of the Kingdom of Italy Politicians from Palermo University of Palermo alumni Academic staff of the University of Turin Writers from Palermo Power (social and political) Power (social and political) theories Power (international relations) Power (social and political) concepts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Pages with Italian IPA Articles containing Italian-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 14:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gaetano Mosca 26 languages Add topic

