Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Personal life 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Nikolai Bugaev 15 languages العربية বাংলা Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Kreyòl ayisyen مصرى Português Română Русский Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian mathematician (1837–1903) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is about the Russian mathematician. For the Soviet scientist, see Nikolai Bugaev (Soviet scientist) .

Nikolai Bugaev Born ( 1837-09-14 ) September 14, 1837 Georgia , Russian Empire Died June 11, 1903 (1903-06-11) (aged 65) Moscow , Russian Empire Nationality Russian Alma mater Imperial Moscow University (1859) Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions Imperial Moscow University Doctoral advisor Karl Weierstrass Ernst Kummer Joseph Liouville Doctoral students Dmitri Egorov Nikolay Sonin Other notable students Pavel Florensky Nikolai Vasilievich Bugaev ( Russian : Никола́й Васи́льевич Буга́ев ; September 14, 1837 – June 11, 1903) was a Russian mathematician , the father of Andrei Bely .

Early life and education [ edit ] Bugaev was born in Georgia , Russian Empire into a somewhat unstable family (his father was an army doctor), and at the age of ten young Nikolai was sent to Moscow to find his own means of obtaining an education. He graduated in 1859 from Moscow University , where he majored in mathematics and physics .

Bugaev then studied engineering and then wrote a master's thesis in 1863 on the convergence of infinite series .  This document was considered sufficiently impressive to win him a place studying under Karl Weierstrass and Ernst Kummer in Berlin . He also spent some time in Paris studying under Joseph Liouville . He earned his doctoral degree in 1866.

Career [ edit ] After his doctoral degree, Bugaev returned to Moscow and taught there for the remainder of his career. Some of his most influential papers offered proofs of previously unproven assertions of Liouville, but his most original work centered around the development of formal analogies between arithmetic and analytic operations.

Bugaev was an active member and president (1891-1903) of the Moscow Mathematical Society . He also wrote influential philosophical essays in which he trumpeted the virtues of mathematical analysis and decried the influence of geometry and probability .  Many [ who?

] feel he is largely responsible for the pronounced predilection towards "hard analysis" which is characteristic of so much of the best Russian mathematics. Through Bugaev's star student, Dmitri Egorov , many famous Russian mathematicians, such as Andrei Kolmogorov and Nikolai Luzin , directly "descend" from Bugaev—and thus from the Prince of Mathematicians, Carl Friedrich Gauss .

Personal life [ edit ] Bugaev was a talented chess player. He defeated William Steinitz in 1896 in a Simul.

Bugaev was a memorable "character" whose life was touched by scandal.  He was not, it is said, much admired for his looks, but his wife was considered brilliant, beautiful, and rich, and the Bugaevs were socially prominent. Their mathematically, musically, and artistically talented son, Boris Nikolaevich Bugaev (14 October 1880 O.S.-8 January 1934), went on to adopt the pseudonym Andrei Bely , under which name he helped found the Symbolist movement . Professor Korobkin, the main character of Bely's innovative novel Moscow , was inspired by Nikolai Bugaev. In view of his father's prejudices, Boris Bugaev was fascinated by probability and particularly by the notion of entropy , which is mentioned in several of his novels and poems.

References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nikolai Bugaev .

"Nicolai Vasilievich Bugaev" .

The Mathematics Genealogy Project . American Mathematical Society . Retrieved August 13, 2005 .

O'Connor, J.J.; Robertson, E.F.

"Nicolai Vasilievich Bugaev" .

MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive . Archived from the original on February 11, 2006 . Retrieved August 13, 2005 .

Steinberg, Ada (1982).

Word and music in the novels of Andrey Bely . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-23731-9 .

Bibliography [ edit ] A. Andreev, D. Tsygankov, ed. (2010).

Imperial Moscow University: 1755-1917: encyclopedic dictionary . Moscow: Russian political encyclopedia (ROSSPEN). pp.

99– 100.

ISBN 978-5-8243-1429-8 .

External links [ edit ] Bugaev's chess games Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Sweden Poland Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nikolai_Bugaev&oldid=1278461187 " Categories : Corresponding members of the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences 19th-century mathematicians from the Russian Empire Philosophers from the Russian Empire 1837 births 1903 deaths Academic staff of Imperial Moscow University Imperial Moscow University alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2015 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with hCards Articles containing Russian-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 March 2025, at 16:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nikolai Bugaev 15 languages Add topic

