Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nature, definition and sources Toggle Nature, definition and sources subsection 1.1 As an indefinite repertoire of norms 1.2 Law as necessarily rule-governed 2 Codification 3 International law 4 Within contemporary legal systems 5 Custom in torts 6 Customary legal systems 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 7.2 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Customary law 53 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Basa Bali 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legal principle Part of a series on Political and legal anthropology Basic concepts Status and rank Ascribed status Achieved status Social status Caste Age grade / Age set Leveling mechanism Leadership Big man Patriarchy Matriarchy Elder Pantribal sodalities Chief Paramount chief Polities Band society Segmentary lineage Tribe Chiefdom Petty kingdom House society Ethnic group Theatre state Law and custom Customary law Legal culture Ritual warfare Case studies Acephelous Societies without hierarchical leaders African Political Systems Papuan Big man system The Art of Not Being Governed State Non-western state systems Negara Mandala Technology, Tradition, and the State in Africa Legal systems Kapu Colonialism and resistance Europe and the People Without History Cargo cult Major theorists E. Adamson Hoebel Georges Balandier F. G. Bailey Fredrik Barth Jeremy Boissevain Robert L. Carneiro Henri J. M. Claessen Jean Comaroff John Comaroff Pierre Clastres E. E. Evans-Pritchard Wolfgang Fikentscher Meyer Fortes Morton Fried Numa Denis Fustel de Coulanges Ernest Gellner David Graeber Lesley Gill Ulf Hannerz Thomas Blom Hansen Ted C. Lewellen Edmund Leach Ralph Linton Elizabeth Mertz Sidney Mintz Sally Falk Moore Rodney Needham Marshall Sahlins James C. Scott Elman Service Aidan Southall Jonathan Spencer Bjorn Thomassen Douglas R. White Eric Wolf Related articles Circumscription theory Legal anthropology Left–right paradigm State formation Political economy in anthropology Network Analysis and Ethnographic Problems Journals Political and Legal Anthropology Review Journal of Legal Anthropology Journal of Law and Society Social and cultural anthropology v t e A legal custom is the established pattern of behavior within a particular social setting. A claim can be carried out in defense of "what has always been done and accepted by law".

Customary law (also, consuetudinary or unofficial law ) exists where: a certain legal practice is observed and the relevant actors consider it to be an opinion of law or necessity ( opinio juris ).

Most customary laws deal with standards of the community that have been long-established in a given locale. However, the term can also apply to areas of international law where certain standards have been nearly universal in their acceptance as correct bases of action – for example, laws against piracy or slavery (see hostis humani generis ). In many, though not all instances, customary laws will have supportive court rulings and case law that have evolved over time to give additional weight to their rule as law and also to demonstrate the trajectory of evolution (if any) in the judicial interpretation of such law by relevant courts .

Nature, definition and sources [ edit ] A central issue regarding the recognition of custom is determining the appropriate methodology to know what practices and norms actually constitute customary law. It is not immediately clear that classic Western theories of jurisprudence can be reconciled in any useful way with conceptual analyses of customary law, and thus some scholars (like John Comaroff and Simon Roberts) [ 1 ] have characterized customary law norms in their own terms.  Yet, there clearly remains some disagreement, which is seen in John Hund's critique of Comaroff and Roberts' theory, and preference for the contributions of H. L. A. Hart . Hund argues that Hart's The Concept of Law solves the conceptual problem with which scholars who have attempted to articulate how customary law principles may be identified, defined, and how they operate in regulating social behavior and resolving disputes.

[ 2 ] Customary law refers to the set of customs, practices, and beliefs that a community accepts as binding rules of conduct.

As an indefinite repertoire of norms [ edit ] A court presided over by a customary chief in the Belgian Congo , c.

1942 Comaroff and Roberts' famous work, "Rules and Processes", [ 1 ] attempted to detail the body of norms that constitute Tswana law in a way that was less legalistic (or rule-oriented) than had Isaac Schapera. They defined "mekgwa le melao ya Setswana" in terms of Casalis and Ellenberger's definition: melao therefore being rules pronounced by a chief and mekgwa as norms that become customary law through traditional usage.

[ 3 ] Importantly, however, they noted that the Tswana seldom attempt to classify the vast array of existing norms into categories [ 3 ] and they thus termed this the 'undifferentiated nature of the normative repertoire'. Moreover, they observe the co-existence of overtly incompatible norms that may breed conflict, either due to circumstances in a particular situation or inherently due to their incongruous content.

[ 4 ] This lack of rule classification and failure to eradicate internal inconsistencies between potentially conflicting norms allows for much flexibility in dispute settlement and is also viewed as a 'strategic resource' for disputants who seek to advance their own success in a case. The latter incongruities (especially inconsistencies of norm content) are typically solved by elevating one of the norms (tacitly) from 'the literal to the symbolic.

[ 5 ] This allows for the accommodation of both as they now theoretically exist in different realms of reality. This is highly contextual, which further illustrates that norms cannot be viewed in isolation and are open to negotiation. Thus, although there are a small number of so-called non-negotiable norms, the vast majority are viewed and given substance contextually, which is seen as fundamental to the Tswana.

Comaroff and Roberts describe how outcomes of specific cases have the ability to change the normative repertoire, as the repertoire of norms is seen to be both in a state of formation and transformation at all times.

[ 6 ] These changes are justified on the grounds that they are merely giving recognition to de facto observations of transformation. Furthermore, the legitimacy of a chief is a direct determinant of the legitimacy of his decisions.

[ 7 ] In the formulation of legislative pronouncements, as opposed to decisions made in dispute resolution, [ 8 ] the chief first speaks of the proposed norm with his advisors, then council of headmen, then the public assembly debate the proposed law and may accept or reject it. A chief can proclaim the law even if the public assembly rejects it, but this is not often done; and, if the chief proclaims the legislation against the will of the public assembly, the legislation will become melao, however, it is unlikely that it will be executed because its effectiveness depends on the chief's legitimacy and the norm's consistency with the practices (and changes in social relations) and will of the people under that chief.

[ 8 ] Regarding the invocation of norms in disputes, Comaroff and Roberts used the term, "paradigm of argument", to refer to the linguistic and conceptual frame used by a disputant, whereby 'a coherent picture of relevant events and actions in terms of one or more implicit or explicit normative referents' is created.

[ 9 ] In their explanation, the complainant (who always speaks first) thus establishes a paradigm the defendant can either accept and therefore argue within that specific paradigm or reject and therefore introduce his or her own paradigm (usually, the facts are not contested here). If the defendant means to change the paradigm, they will refer to norms as such, where actually norms are not ordinarily explicitly referenced in Tswana dispute resolution as the audience would typically already know them and just the way one presents one's case and constructs the facts will establish one's paradigm. The headman or chief adjudicating may also do same: accept the normative basis implied by the parties (or one of them), and thus not refer to norms using explicit language but rather isolate a factual issue in the dispute and then make a decision on it without expressly referring to any norms, or impose a new or different paradigm onto the parties.

[ 9 ] Law as necessarily rule-governed [ edit ] Hund finds Comaroff and Roberts' flexibility thesis of a 'repertoire of norms' from which litigants and adjudicator choose in the process of negotiating solutions between them uncompelling.

[ 2 ] He is therefore concerned with disproving what he calls "rule scepticism" on their part. He notes that the concept of custom generally denotes convergent behaviour, but not all customs have the force of law. Hund therefore draws from Hart's analysis distinguishing social rules, which have internal and external aspects, from habits, which have only external aspects. Internal aspects are the reflective attitude on the part of adherents toward certain behaviours perceived to be obligatory, according to a common standard. External aspects manifest in regular, observable behaviour, but is not obligatory. In Hart's analysis, then, social rules amount to custom that has legal force.

Hart identifies three further differences between habits and binding social rules.

[ 2 ] First, a social rule exists where society frowns on deviation from the habit and attempts to prevent departures by criticising such behaviour. Second, when this criticism is seen socially as a good reason for adhering to the habit, and it is welcomed. And, third, when members of a group behave in a common way not only out of habit or because everyone else is doing it, but because it is seen to be a common standard that should be followed, at least by some members. Hund, however, acknowledges the difficulty of an outsider knowing the dimensions of these criteria that depend on an internal point of view.

For Hund, the first form of rule scepticism concerns the widely held opinion that, because the content of customary law derives from practice, there are actually no objective rules, since it is only behaviour that informs their construction. On this view, it is impossible to distinguish between behaviour that is rule bound and behaviour that is not—i.e., which behaviour is motivated by adherence to law (or at least done in recognition of the law) and is merely a response to other factors. Hund sees this as problematic because it makes quantifying the law almost impossible, since behaviour is obviously inconsistent. Hund argues that this is a misconception based on a failure to acknowledge the importance of the internal element . In his view, by using the criteria described above, there is not this problem in deciphering what constitutes "law" in a particular community.

[ 2 ] According to Hund, the second form of rule scepticism says that, though a community may have rules, those rules are not arrived at 'deductively' , i.e. they are not created through legal/moral reasoning only but are instead driven by the personal/political motives of those who create them. The scope for such influence is created by the loose and undefined nature of customary law, which, Hund argues, grants customary-lawmakers (often through traditional 'judicial processes') a wide discretion in its application. Yet, Hund contends that the fact that rules might sometimes be arrived at in the more ad hoc way, does not mean that this defines the system. If one requires a perfect system, where laws are created only deductively, then one is left with a system with no rules. For Hund, this cannot be so and an explanation for these kinds of law-making processes is found in Hart's conception of "secondary rules" (rules in terms of which the main body of norms are recognised). Hund therefore says that for some cultures, for instance in some sections of Tswana society, the secondary rules have developed only to the point where laws are determined with reference to politics and personal preference. This does not mean that they are not "rules". Hund argues that if we acknowledge a developmental pattern in societies' constructions of these secondary rules then we can understand how this society constructs its laws and how it differs from societies that have come to rely on an objective, stand-alone body of rules.

[ 2 ] Codification [ edit ] Main article: Codification (law) The modern codification of civil law developed from the tradition of medieval custumals , collections of local customary law that developed in a specific manorial or borough jurisdiction, and which were slowly pieced together mainly from case law and later written down by local jurists . Custumals acquired the force of law when they became the undisputed rule by which certain rights , entitlements, and obligations were regulated between members of a community.

[ 10 ] Some examples include Bracton 's De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliae for England, the Coutume de Paris for the city of Paris, the Sachsenspiegel for northern Germany, and the many fueros of Spain.

International law [ edit ] Main article: Customary international law In international law , customary law refers to the Law of Nations or the legal norms that have developed through the customary exchanges between states over time, whether based on diplomacy or aggression. Essentially, legal obligations are believed to arise between states to carry out their affairs consistently with past accepted conduct. These customs can also change based on the acceptance or rejection by states of particular acts. Some principles of customary law have achieved the force of peremptory norms , which cannot be violated or altered except by a norm of comparable strength. These norms are said to gain their strength from universal acceptance, such as the prohibitions against genocide and slavery . Customary international law can be distinguished from treaty law, which consists of explicit agreements between nations to assume obligations. However, many treaties are attempts to codify pre-existing customary law.

Within contemporary legal systems [ edit ] Customary law is a recognized source of law within jurisdictions of the civil law tradition, where it may be subordinate to both statutes and regulations . In addressing custom as a source of law within the civil law tradition, John Henry Merryman notes that, though the attention it is given in scholarly works is great, its importance is "slight and decreasing".

[ 11 ] On the other hand, in many countries around the world, one or more types of customary law continue to exist side by side with official law, a condition referred to as legal pluralism (see also List of national legal systems ).

In the canon law of the Catholic Church , custom is a source of law.

Canonical jurisprudence , however, differs from civil law jurisprudence in requiring the express or implied consent of the legislator for a custom to obtain the force of law.

[ citation needed ] In the English common law , "long usage" must be established.

[ citation needed ] It is a broad principle of property law that, if something has gone on for a long time without objection, whether it be using a right of way or occupying land to which one has no title, the law will eventually recognise the fact and give the person doing it the legal right to continue.

[ citation needed ] It is known in case law as "customary rights". Something which has been practised since time immemorial by reference to a particular locality may acquire the legal status of a custom, which is a form of local law. The legal criteria defining a custom are precise.  The most common claim in recent times, is for customary rights to moor a vessel.

[ citation needed ] The mooring must have been in continuous use for "time immemorial" which is defined by legal precedent as 12 years (or 20 years for Crown land) for the same purpose by people using them for that purpose. To give two examples: a custom of mooring which might have been established in past times for over two hundred years by the fishing fleet of local inhabitants of a coastal community will not simply transfer so as to benefit present day recreational boat owners who may hail from much further afield. Whereas a group of houseboats on a mooring that has been in continuous use for the last 25 years with a mixture of owner occupiers and rented houseboats, may clearly continue to be used by houseboats, where the owners live in the same town or city. Both the purpose of the moorings and the class of persons benefited by the custom must have been clear and consistent.

[ 12 ] In Canada, customary aboriginal law has a constitutional foundation [ 13 ] and for this reason has increasing influence.

[ 14 ] In the Scandinavian countries customary law continues to exist and has great influence.

[ citation needed ] Customary law is also used in some developing countries , usually used alongside common or civil law.

[ 15 ] For example, in Ethiopia , despite the adoption of legal codes based on civil law in the 1950s according to Dolores Donovan and Getachew Assefa there are more than 60 systems of customary law currently in force, "some of them operating quite independently of the formal state legal system". They offer two reasons for the relative autonomy of these customary law systems: one is that the Ethiopian government lacks sufficient resources to enforce its legal system to every corner of Ethiopia; the other is that the Ethiopian government has made a commitment to preserve these customary systems within its boundaries.

[ 16 ] In 1995, President of Kyrgyzstan Askar Akaev announced a decree to revitalize the aqsaqal courts of village elders. The courts would have jurisdiction over property, torts and family law.

[ 17 ] The aqsaqal courts were eventually included under Article 92 of the Kyrgyz constitution. As of 2006, there were approximately 1,000 aqsaqal courts throughout Kyrgyzstan , including in the capital of Bishkek .

[ 17 ] Akaev linked the development of these courts to the rekindling of Kyrgyz national identity. In a 2005 speech, he connected the courts back to the country's nomadic past and extolled how the courts expressed the Kyrgyz ability of self-governance.

[ 18 ] [ full citation needed ] Similar aqsaqal courts exist, with varying levels of legal formality, in other countries of Central Asia .

The Somali people in the Horn of Africa follow a customary law system referred to as xeer . It survives to a significant degree everywhere in Somalia [ 19 ] and in the Somali communities in the Ogaden .

[ 20 ] Economist Peter Leeson attributes the increase in economic activity since the fall of the Siad Barre administration to the security in life, liberty and property provided by Xeer in large parts of Somalia .

[ 21 ] The Dutch attorney Michael van Notten also draws upon his experience as a legal expert in his comprehensive study on Xeer, The Law of the Somalis: A Stable Foundation for Economic Development in the Horn of Africa (2005).

[ 22 ] In India many customs are accepted by law. For example, Hindu marriage ceremonies are recognized by the Hindu Marriage Act .

In Indonesia, customary adat laws of the country's various indigenous ethnicities are recognized, and customary dispute resolution is recognized in Papua . Indonesian adat law are mainly divided into 19 circles, namely Aceh , Gayo , Alas , and Batak , Minangkabau , South Sumatra , the Malay regions, Bangka and Belitung , Kalimantan , Minahasa , Gorontalo , Toraja , South Sulawesi , Ternate , the Molluccas , Papua , Timor , Bali and Lombok , Central and East Java including the island of Madura , Sunda , and the Javanese monarchies, including the Yogyakarta Sultanate , Surakarta Sunanate , and the Pakualaman and Mangkunegaran princely states.

In the Philippines , the Indigenous Peoples' Rights Act of 1997 recognizes customary laws of indigenous peoples within their domain.

[ 23 ] Custom in torts [ edit ] This section may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the section . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( November 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Custom is used in tort law to help determine negligence . Following or disregarding a custom is not determinative of negligence, but instead is an indication of possible best practices or alternatives to a particular action.

Customary legal systems [ edit ] See also: List of national legal systems Adat ( Malays of Nusantara ) Anglo-Saxon law (England) Aqsaqal ( Central Asia ) Australian Aboriginal customary law Ayllu (Andean peoples) Barbagian Code Basque and Pyrenean law Bedouin systems of justice Canadian Indigenous law Celtic law Constitutions of Melfi (Southern Italy) Coutume (France) Custom (Catholic canon law) Custumal (England) Early Germanic law Early Irish law (Ireland) Foral (Portugal) Fuero (Spain) Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit Indigenous Australian customary law Kanun of Leke Dukagjini ( Albania ) Keyoh Kievan Rus' law Kris (Romani court) ( Romani people ) Laws of the Brets and Scots (Scotland) Medieval Scandinavian laws Millet (Ottoman Empire) Mos maiorum Norman law Old French law Pashtunwali and Jirga ( Pashtuns of Pakistan and Afghanistan) Smriti and Ācāra (India) Statutes of Lithuania Customary law (South Africa) Talmudic law Tikanga Māori Urf ( Arab world / Islamic law ) Ülüş system Cyfraith Hywel ( Wales ) Xeer ( Somalia ) Usages of Barcelona ( Catalonia ) Usos y costumbres (various regions of Latin America ) Vlach law ( Romania ) Vyavahāramālā ( Kerala ) Wahkohtowin ( Cree Territories, Canada) References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Comaroff & Roberts 1981 ^ a b c d e Hund 1998 ^ a b Comaroff & Roberts 1981 , p. 70 ^ Comaroff & Roberts 1981 , p. 73 ^ Comaroff & Roberts 1981 , p. 75 ^ Comaroff & Roberts 1981 , p. 79 ^ Comaroff & Roberts 1981 , p. 81 ^ a b Comaroff & Roberts 1981 , p. 82 ^ a b Comaroff & Roberts 1981 , p. 85 ^ In R. v Secretary of State For Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs [1982] 2 All E.R. 118, Lord Denning said "These customary laws are not written down. They are handed down by tradition from one generation to another. Yet beyond doubt they are well established and have the force of law within the community." ^ Merryman, John Henry (2007).

The Civil Law Tradition: An Introduction to the Legal Systems of Europe and Latin America (3rd ed.).

Stanford University Press . p. 24.

ISBN 978-0-8047-5569-6 .

LCCN 2007003956 .

^ "Customary Mooring Rights" .

Associated Yacht Brokers . Archived from the original on 13 April 2015 . Retrieved 19 April 2015 .

^ "Constitution Act, 1982, s. 35(1)" . Archived from the original on 20 March 2007 . Retrieved 29 July 2008 .

^ Multiple sources: Slattery, Brian .

Generic and Specific Aboriginal Rights (PDF) . p. 6 . Retrieved 21 August 2008 .

Foster, Hamar (2007). Raven, Heather; Webber, Jeremy (eds.).

Let Right Be Done: Aboriginal title, the Calder Case, and the Future of Indigenous Rights . Vol. 18 No. 7 (July, 2008). Vancouver: UBC Press. pp.

574– 578. Archived from the original on 30 August 2008 . Retrieved 11 September 2010 .

^ "JuryGlobe" .

University of Ottawa . Archived from the original on 24 September 2008 . Retrieved 11 September 2010 .

^ Dolores A. Donovan and Getachew Assefa , "Homicide in Ethiopia: Human Rights, Federalism, and Legal Pluralism" American Journal of Comparative Law , 51 (2003), p. 505 ^ a b Judith Beyer, "Kyrgyz Aksakal Courts: Pluralistic Accounts of History", 53 Journal of Legal Pluralism and Unofficial Law 144 (2006) ^ Former President Akaev, quoted in Beyer, Kyrgyz Aksakal Courts ^ Spencer Heath MacCallum (12 September 2007).

"The Rule of Law without the State" .

Ludwig von Mises Institute . Retrieved 11 September 2010 .

^ "Grassroots Conflict Assessment of the Somali Region, Ethiopia" (PDF) . CHF International. August 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 July 2011 . Retrieved 11 September 2010 .

^ "Better off stateless" (PDF) . Retrieved 11 September 2010 .

^ Van Notten, Michael. 2005.

The Law of the Somalis: A Stable Foundation for Economic and Social Development in the Horn of Africa , Trenton, New Jersey: Red Sea Press.

^ Calde, Nimreh (March 2021).

"Customary Laws, Ancestral Land Titling and the NCIP's Quasi-Judicial Powers" . University of the Philippines Baguio . Retrieved 24 September 2024 .

Sources [ edit ] Hund, John (1998). "Customary law is what people say it is".

ARSP .

84 : 420– 433.

Comaroff, J.; Roberts, S. (1981).

Rules and Processes: The Cultural Logic of Dispute in an African Context . University of Chicago Press.

External links [ edit ] Customary IHL Database Druzin, Bryan H. (2014, April). "Planting Seeds of Order: How the State Can Create, Shape, and Use Customary Law" , BYU Journal of Public Law 28 : 373–412.

Williams, James (1911).

"Prescription" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 22 (11th ed.). pp.

296– 297.

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Spain Korea Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland 2 Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐xv55n
Cached time: 20250814220513
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.768 seconds
Real time usage: 0.933 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3644/1000000
Revision size: 27185/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 115453/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5431/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 84229/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.479/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26277124/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  759.082      1 -total
 27.62%  209.688      1 Template:Reflist
 14.16%  107.460      7 Template:Lang
 13.15%   99.814      4 Template:Cite_book
 10.65%   80.819      1 Template:Political_anthropology
 10.37%   78.739      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.99%   60.660      1 Template:Short_description
  7.84%   59.521      5 Template:Citation_needed
  7.60%   57.677      7 Template:Cite_web
  7.31%   55.520      1 Template:Law Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:218798:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220513 and revision id 1301527343. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Customary_law&oldid=1301527343 " Categories : Customary legal systems International law Sources of law Tort law Social agreement Customary law Political anthropology Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from February 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2008 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 09:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Customary law 53 languages Add topic

