Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Macedon 2 City states and leagues 3 Philip V 4 Rise of Rome 5 End of Greek independence 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Hellenistic Greece 19 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Български Català 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu پښتو Русский Shqip Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historical period of Greece following Classical Greece This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is about the geopolitics of Greece during the Hellenistic period. For all aspects of the Hellenistic period internationally, see Hellenistic Period .

A map of Hellenistic Greece in 200 BC, with the Kingdom of Macedonia (orange) under Philip V ( r.

221–179 BC ), Macedonian dependent states (dark yellow), the Seleucid Empire (bright yellow), Roman protectorates (dark green), the Kingdom of Pergamon (light green), independent states (light purple), and possessions of the Ptolemaic Empire (violet purple) Part of a series on the History of Greece Neolithic Greece Pelasgians Greek Bronze Age Helladic chronology Cycladic ( c.

3100–1000 BC) Minoan ( c.

3100–1100 BC) Mycenean ( c.

1750–1050 BC) Ancient Greece Greek Dark Ages (1100 BC–750 BC) Archaic Greece (800 BC–480 BC) Classical Greece (500 BC–323 BC) Hellenistic Greece (323 BC–31 BC) Roman Greece (146 BC–330 AD) Medieval Greece Byzantine Greece Frankish and Latin states (1204-1579) Early modern Greece Venetian Crete (1205-1667) Venetian Ionian Islands (1363-1797) Ottoman Greece (1371-1822) Modern Greece Septinsular Republic (1800-1807) War of Independence (1821-1829) First Hellenic Republic (1822-1832) Kingdom of Greece (1832-1924, 1935-1973) National Schism (1914/15-1917) Second Hellenic Republic (1924-1935) 4th of August Regime (1936-1941) Axis occupation ( Collaborationist regime , Free Greece ) (1941-1944) Civil War (1946-1949) Military Junta (1967-1974) Third Hellenic Republic (1974-) History by topic Agriculture Alphabet Art Church Constitution Economy Ethnonyms Language Music Military Greece portal v t e Hellenistic Greece is the historical period of Ancient Greece following Classical Greece and between the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BC and the annexation of the classical Greek Achaean League heartlands by the Roman Republic . This culminated at the Battle of Corinth in 146 BC, a crushing Roman victory in the Peloponnese that led to the destruction of Corinth and ushered in the period of Roman Greece . Hellenistic Greece's definitive end was with the Battle of Actium in 31 BC, when Octavian defeated Ptolemaic queen Cleopatra VII and Mark Antony , the next year taking over Alexandria , the last great center of Hellenistic Greece.

[ 1 ] The Hellenistic period began with the wars of the Diadochi , armed contests among the former generals of Alexander the Great to carve up his empire in Europe, Asia, and North Africa. The wars lasted until 275 BC, witnessing the fall of both the Argead and Antipatrid dynasties of Macedonia in favor of the Antigonid dynasty . The era was also marked by successive wars between the Kingdom of Macedonia and its allies against the Aetolian League , Achaean League , and the city-state of Sparta .

During the reign of Philip V of Macedon (r. 221–179 BC), the Macedonians not only lost the Cretan War (205–200 BC) to an alliance led by Rhodes , but their erstwhile alliance with Hannibal of Carthage also entangled them in the First and Second Macedonian War with ancient Rome . The perceived weakness of Macedonia in the aftermath of these conflicts encouraged Antiochus III the Great of the Seleucid Empire to invade mainland Greece , yet his defeat by the Romans at Thermopylae in 191 BC and Magnesia in 190 BC secured Rome's position as the leading military power in the region. Within roughly two decades after conquering Macedonia in 168 BC and Epirus in 167 BC, the Romans would eventually control the whole of Greece.

During the Hellenistic period the importance of Greece proper within the Greek-speaking world declined sharply. The great centers of Hellenistic culture were Alexandria and Antioch , capitals of Ptolemaic and Seleucid Kingdoms respectively. Cities such as Pergamon , Ephesus , Rhodes and Seleucia were also important, and increasing urbanisation of the Eastern Mediterranean was characteristic of the time.

Macedon [ edit ] Further information: History of Macedonia (ancient kingdom) Coin depicting Cassander , first post- Argead leader of Hellenistic Greece and founder of Thessaloniki The quests of Alexander had a number of consequences for the Greek city-states. It greatly widened the horizons of the Greeks, making the endless conflicts between the cities which had marked the 5th and 4th centuries BC seem petty and unimportant. It led to a steady emigration, particularly of the young and ambitious, to the new Greek empires in the east. Many Greeks migrated to Alexandria, Antioch and the many other new Hellenistic cities founded in Alexander's wake, as far away as what are now Afghanistan and Pakistan , where the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom and the Indo-Greek Kingdom survived until the end of the 1st century BC.

The defeat of the Greek cities by Philip and Alexander also taught the Greeks that their city-states could never again be powers in their own right, and that the hegemony of Macedon and its successor states could not be challenged unless the city states united, or at least federated. The Greeks valued their local independence too much to consider actual unification, but they made several attempts to form federations through which they could hope to reassert their independence.

Following Alexander's death a struggle for power broke out among his generals, which resulted in the break-up of his empire and the establishment of a number of new kingdoms. Macedon fell to Cassander , son of Alexander's leading general Antipater , who after several years of warfare made himself master of most of the rest of Greece. He founded a new Macedonian capital at Thessaloniki and was generally a constructive ruler.

Cassander's power was challenged by Antigonus , ruler of Anatolia, who promised the Greek cities that he would restore their freedom if they supported him. This led to successful revolts against Cassander's local rulers. In 307 BC, Antigonus's son Demetrius captured Athens and restored its democratic system, which had been suppressed by Alexander. But in 301 BC a coalition of Cassander and the other Hellenistic kings defeated Antigonus at the Battle of Ipsus , ending his challenge.

Hellenistic Greek tomb door bas relief , Leeds City Museum .

After Cassander's death in 298 BC, however, Demetrius seized the Macedonian throne and gained control of most of Greece. He was defeated by a second coalition of Greek rulers in 285 BC, and mastery of Greece passed to the king Lysimachus of Thrace . Lysimachus was in turn defeated and killed in 280 BC. The Macedonian throne then passed to Demetrius's son Antigonus II , who also defeated an invasion of the Greek lands by the Gauls , who at this time were living in the Balkans. The battle against the Gauls united the Antigonids of Macedon and the Seleucids of Antioch, an alliance which was also directed against the wealthiest Hellenistic power, the Ptolemies of Egypt.

Antigonus II ruled until his death in 239 BC, and his family retained the Macedonian throne until it was abolished by the Romans in 146 BC. Their control over the Greek city states was intermittent, however, since other rulers, particularly the Ptolemies, subsidised anti-Macedonian parties in Greece to undermine the Antigonids' power. Antigonus placed a garrison at Corinth , the strategic centre of Greece, but Athens, Rhodes , Pergamum and other Greek states retained substantial independence, and formed the Aetolian League as a means of defending it.

Sparta also remained independent, but generally refused to join any league.

In 267 BC, Ptolemy II persuaded the Greek cities to revolt against Antigonus, in what became the Chremonidean War , after the Athenian leader Chremonides . The cities were defeated and Athens lost her independence and her democratic institutions. The Aetolian League was restricted to the Peloponnese , but on being allowed to gain control of Thebes in 245 BC became a Macedonian ally. This marked the end of Athens as a political actor, although it remained the largest, wealthiest and most cultivated city in Greece. In 255 BC, Antigonus defeated the Egyptian fleet at Cos and brought the Aegean islands, except Rhodes, under his rule as well.

City states and leagues [ edit ] Detail of a Hellenistic mosaic floor panel showing an Alexandrine parakeet , from the acropolis of Pergamon (near modern Bergama , Turkey ), dated to the middle of the 2nd century BC (during the reigns of Eumenes II and Attalus II of Pergamon) In spite of their decreased political power and autonomy, the Greek city state or polis continued to be the basic form of political and social organization in Greece. Classical city states such as Athens and Ephesus grew and even thrived in this period. While warfare between Greek cities continued, the cities responded to the threat of the post Alexandrian Hellenistic states by banding together into alliances or becoming allies of a strong Hellenistic state which could come to its defense therefore making it asylos or inviolate to attack by other cities.

The Aetolians and the Achaeans developed strong federal states or leagues ( koinon ), which were governed by councils of city representatives and assemblies of league citizens. Initially ethnic leagues, these leagues later began to include cities outside of their traditional regions.

[ 2 ] The Achaean League eventually included all of the Peloponnese except Sparta , while the Aetolian League expanded into Phocis . During the third century BCE these leagues were able to defend themselves against Macedon and the Aetolian league defeated a Celtic invasion of Greece at Delphi.

After Alexander's death, Athens had been defeated by Antipater in the Lamian War and its port in the Piraeus housed a Macedonian garrison. To counter the power of Macedon under Cassander, Athens courted alliances with other Hellenistic rulers such as Antigonus I Monophthalmus , and in 307 Antigonus sent his son Demetrius to capture the city. After Demetrius captured Macedon, Athens became allied with Ptolemaic Egypt in an effort to gain its independence from Demetrius, and with Ptolemaic troops they managed to rebel and defeat Macedon in 287, though the Piraeus remained garrisoned. Athens fought more unsuccessful wars against Macedon with Ptolemaic aid such as the Chremonidean War . The Ptolemaic kingdom was now the city's main ally, supporting it with troops, monies and material in multiple conflicts. Athens rewarded the Ptolemaic Kingdom in 224/223 BC by naming the 13th phyle Ptolemais and establishing a religious cult called the Ptolemaia. Hellenistic Athens also saw the rise of New Comedy and the Hellenistic schools of philosophy such as Stoicism and Epicureanism . By the turn of the century, the Attalids in Pergamon became patrons and protectors of Athens as the Ptolemaic empire weakened. Athens would later also establish a cult for the Pergamene king Attalos I .

Philip V [ edit ] Philip V , " the darling of Hellas ", wearing the royal diadem .

Antigonus II died in 239 BC. His death saw another revolt of the city-states of the Achaean League , whose dominant figure was Aratus of Sicyon . Antigonus's son Demetrius II died in 229 BC, leaving a child (Philip V) as king, with the general Antigonus Doson as regent. The Achaeans, while nominally subject to Ptolemy, were in effect independent, and controlled most of southern Greece. Athens remained aloof from this conflict by common consent.

Sparta remained hostile to the Achaeans, and in 227 BC Sparta's king Cleomenes III invaded Achaea and seized control of the League. Aratus preferred distant Macedon to nearby Sparta, and allied himself with Doson, who in 222 BC defeated the Spartans and annexed their city – the first time Sparta had ever been occupied by a foreign power.

Philip V, who came to power when Doson died in 221 BC, was the last Macedonian ruler with both the talent and the opportunity to unite Greece and preserve its independence against the "cloud rising in the west": the ever-increasing power of Rome. He was known as "the darling of Hellas". Under his auspices the Peace of Naupactus (217 BC) brought conflict between Macedon and the Greek leagues to an end, and at this time he controlled all of Greece except Athens, Rhodes and Pergamum.

In 215 BC, however, Philip formed an alliance with Rome's enemy Carthage , which drew Rome directly into Greek affairs for the first time. Rome promptly lured the Achaean cities away from their nominal loyalty to Philip, and formed alliances with Rhodes and Pergamum, now the strongest power in Asia Minor . The First Macedonian War broke out in 212 BC, and ended inconclusively in 205 BC, but Macedon was now marked as an enemy of Rome. Rome's ally Rhodes gained control of the Aegean islands.

In 202 BC, Rome defeated Carthage, and was free to turn her attention eastwards, urged on by her Greek allies, Rhodes and Pergamum. In 198 BC, the Second Macedonian War broke out for obscure reasons, but very likely because Rome saw Macedon as a potential ally of the Seleucids, the greatest power in the east. Philip's allies in Greece deserted him and in 197 BC he was decisively defeated at the Cynoscephalae by the Roman proconsul Titus Quinctius Flamininus .

Luckily for the Greeks, Flamininus was a moderate man and an admirer of Greek culture. Philip had to surrender his fleet and become a Roman ally, but was otherwise spared. At the Isthmian Games in 196 BC, Flamininus declared all the Greek cities free, although Roman garrisons were placed at Corinth and Chalcis . But the freedom promised by Rome was an illusion. All the cities except Rhodes were enrolled in a new League which Rome ultimately controlled, and democracies were replaced by aristocratic regimes allied to Rome.

Rise of Rome [ edit ] A tetradrachm of Antiochus III the Great (r. 222–187 BC), struck after 197 BC in Mesopotamia , a region of the Seleucid Empire In 192 BC, war broke out between Rome and the Seleucid ruler Antiochus III . Antiochus invaded Greece with a 10,000 man army, and was elected the commander in chief of the Aetolians. Some Greek cities now thought of Antiochus as their saviour from Roman rule, but Macedon threw its lot in with Rome. In 191 BC, the Romans under Manius Acilius Glabrio routed him at Thermopylae and obliged him to withdraw to Asia. During the course of this war Roman troops moved into Asia for the first time, where they defeated Antiochus again at Magnesia on the Sipylum (190 BC). Greece now lay across Rome's line of communications with the east, and Roman soldiers became a permanent presence. The Peace of Apamaea (188 BC) left Rome in a dominant position throughout Greece.

During the following years Rome was drawn deeper into Greek politics, since the defeated party in any dispute appealed to Rome for help. Macedon was still independent, though nominally a Roman ally. When Philip V died in 179 BC, he was succeeded by his son Perseus , who like all the Macedonian kings dreamed of uniting the Greeks under Macedonian rule. Macedon was now too weak to achieve this objective, but Rome's ally Eumenes II of Pergamum persuaded Rome that Perseus was a potential threat to Rome's position.

End of Greek independence [ edit ] A Hellenistic Greek mosaic depicting the god Dionysos as a winged daimon riding on a tiger, from the House of Dionysos at Delos in the South Aegean region of Greece , late 2nd century BC, Archaeological Museum of Delos As a result of Eumenes's intrigues Rome declared war on Macedon in 171 BC, bringing 100,000 troops into Greece. Macedon was no match for this army, and Perseus was unable to rally the other Greek states to his aid. Poor generalship by the Romans enabled him to hold out for three years, but in 168 BC the Romans sent Lucius Aemilius Paullus to Greece, and at Pydna the Macedonians were crushingly defeated. Perseus was captured and taken to Rome, the Macedonian kingdom was broken up into four smaller states, and all the Greek cities who aided her, even rhetorically, were punished. Even Rome's allies Rhodes and Pergamum effectively lost their independence.

Under the leadership of an adventurer called Andriscus , Macedon rebelled against Roman rule in 149 BC: as a result it was directly annexed the following year and became a Roman province , the first of the Greek states to suffer this fate. Rome now demanded that the Achaean League, the last stronghold of Greek independence, be dissolved. The Achaeans refused and, feeling that they might as well die fighting, declared war on Rome. Most of the Greek cities rallied to the Achaeans' side, even slaves were freed to fight for Greek independence. The Roman consul Lucius Mummius advanced from Macedonia and defeated the Greeks at Corinth , which was razed to the ground.

In 146 BC, the Greek peninsula, though not the islands, became a Roman protectorate. Roman taxes were imposed, except in Athens and Sparta, and all the cities had to accept rule by Rome's local allies. In 133 BC, the last king of Pergamum died and left his kingdom to Rome: this brought most of the Aegean peninsula under direct Roman rule as part of the province of Asia.

Macedo-Ptolemaic soldiers of the Ptolemaic kingdom, 100 BC, detail of the Nile mosaic of Palestrina .

The final downfall of Greece came in 88 BC, when King Mithridates of Pontus rebelled against Rome, and massacred up to 100,000 Romans and Roman allies across Asia Minor. Although Mithridates was not Greek, many Greek cities, including Athens, overthrew their Roman puppet rulers and joined him. When he was driven out of Greece by the Roman general Lucius Cornelius Sulla , Roman vengeance fell upon Greece again, and the Greek cities never recovered. Mithridates was finally defeated by Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus (Pompey the Great) in 65 BC.

Further ruin was brought to Greece by the Roman civil wars, which were partly fought in Greece. Finally, in 27 BC, Augustus directly annexed Greece to the new Roman Empire as the province of Achaea . The struggles with Rome had left certain areas of Greece depopulated and demoralised. Nevertheless, Roman rule at least brought an end to warfare, and cities such as Athens, Corinth, Thessaloniki and Patras soon recovered their prosperity.

See also [ edit ] Ancient Greek architecture Ancient Greek art Culture of ancient Greece Hellenization References [ edit ] ^ Ferguson, John (2024).

"Hellenistic Age" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on 14 May 2013 . Retrieved 21 June 2022 .

{{ cite encyclopedia }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Sarah B. Pomeroy , Stanley M. Burstein, Walter Donlan, Jennifer Tolbert Roberts, and David Tandy, Ancient Greece: A Political, Social, and Cultural History , 2011, p. 476.

Further reading [ edit ] Austin, M. M.

The Hellenistic World From Alexander to the Roman Conquest: A Selection of Ancient Sources In Translation . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.

--, editor and translator.

The Hellenistic world from Alexander to the Roman conquest: A selection of ancient sources in translation . 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Bagnall, Roger, and Peter Derow, editors and translators.

Historical sources in translation: The Hellenistic period . 2nd edition. Oxford: Blackwell, 2004.

Bugh, Glenn. R., editor.

The Cambridge companion to the Hellenistic world . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Chaniotis, Angelos.

War in the Hellenistic world: A Social and Cultural History . Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2005.

Crook, J. A., Andrew Lintott, and Elizabeth Rawson, editors.

The Cambridge ancient history. volume IX, part 1: The last age of the Roman Republic, 146–43 BC . 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1994.

Errington, R. Malcolm.

A history of the Hellenistic world, 323–30 BC . Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2008.

Erskine, Andrew, editor.

A companion to the Hellenistic world . Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2003.

Green, Peter.

Alexander to Actium: The Historical Evolution of the Hellenistic Age . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990.

Gruen, Erich S.

The Hellenistic world and the coming of Rome . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984.

Lewis, David M., John Boardman, Simon Hornblower, and Martin Ostwald, editors.

The Cambridge ancient history, volume VI: The fourth century BC . 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

Shipley, Graham.

The Greek World after Alexander, 323–30 BC . London: Routledge, 2000.

Walbank, Frank W.

A historical commentary on Polybius. Volume I: Commentary on Books I–VI. Volume II: Commentary on Books VII–XVIII. Volume III: Commentary on Books XIX–XL . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1957–79.

--.

The Hellenistic World . Brighton, Sussex: Harvester Press, 1981.

Walbank, Frank W., Alan E. Astin, Martin W. Frederiksen, and Robert M. Ogilvie, editors.

The Cambridge ancient history, volume VIII: Rome and the Mediterranean to 133 BC . 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.

--.

The Cambridge ancient history, volume VII, part 1: The Hellenistic world . 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Hellenistic Greece Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Media related to Hellenistic Greece at Wikimedia Commons v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e History of Anatolia v t e Greece topics Basic topics Alphabetical index of topics History Prehistory (pre-1100 BC) Neolithic Age Bronze Age Pelasgians Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Helladic period Mycenaean period Bronze Age collapse Antiquity (1100 BC-330 AD) Greek Dark Ages Iron Age migrations Archaic period Greco-Persian Wars Classical period Delian and Peloponnesian League Peloponnesian War League of Corinth Wars of Alexander the Great Hellenistic period Wars of the Diadochi Roman–Greek wars Roman era Foundation of Constantinople Middle Ages (330–1453) Byzantine period Persecution of paganism Migration period Plague of Justinian Arab–Byzantine wars Iconoclasm Macedonian Renaissance East–West Schism Fourth Crusade Frankokratia Empire of Nicaea , Despotate of Epirus and Despotate of the Morea Fall of Constantinople Early modern and Modern era (post-1453) Stato da Màr ( Venetian Ionian islands , Kingdom of Candia ) Ottoman Greece Modern Greek Enlightenment Septinsular Republic War of Independence First Republic Kingdom Balkan Wars World War I National Schism Greco-Turkish War History of Greece (1923–1940) Second Republic 4th of August Regime World War II Civil war Military junta Democratization Third Republic By topic Ancient regions and tribes Byzantine and Ottoman Greeks Christianization Colonization Coups d'état Demographic ( Modern ) Economic Geographical name changes Greek countries and regions Greek Muslims Renaissance scholars Hellenic languages and Proto-Greek Inventions and discoveries Language question Military Monarchy ( Kings and royal family ) Phanariotes Polis Population exchange of 1923 Geography Overview Borders Cities ( capital and co-capital ) Extreme points Place names Regions Central Greece ( Aetolia-Acarnania ( Aetolia , Acarnania ), Attica , Boeotia , Euboea , Evrytania , Phocis , Phthiotis , Saronic Islands ) Crete ( Chania , Heraklion , Rethymno , Lasithi ) Cyclades ( Andros , Delos , Kea , Kythnos , Milos , Mykonos , Naxos , Paros , Santorini , Syros , Tinos ) Dodecanese ( Agathonisi , Astypalaia , Chalki , Kalymnos , Karpathos , Kasos , Kos , Leipsoi , Leros , Nisyros , Patmos , Rhodes , Symi , Tilos , Kastellorizo ) Epirus ( Arta , Ioannina , Preveza , Thesprotia ) Ionian Islands ( Corfu , Ithaca , Kefalonia , Kythira , Lefkada , Paxi , Zakynthos ) Macedonia ( Chalkidiki , Drama , Florina , Grevena , Imathia , Kastoria , Kavala , Kilkis , Kozani , Pella , Pieria , Serres , Thasos , Thessaloniki ) North Aegean islands ( Chios , Ikaria , Lemnos , Lesbos , Samos ) Peloponnese ( Arcadia , Argolis , Corinthia , Laconia , Messenia , Achaea , Elis ) Thessaly ( Karditsa , Larissa , Magnesia , Trikala , Sporades ) Thrace ( Evros , Rhodope , Xanthi ) Terrain Canyons and gorges Caves Geology Islands ( Aegean , Ionian , Crete ) Mountains ( Olympus , Pindus , Rhodopes ) Peninsulas Plains Volcanoes Water Coasts Lakes Rivers Mediterranean Sea Aegean Sea ( Sea of Crete , Icarian Sea , Myrtoan Sea , Thracian Sea ) Ionian Sea Libyan Sea Environment Climate Natural disasters ( earthquakes ) Ecoregions Environmental issues Forests Mammals and birds National Parks Protected areas Politics Constitution Constitutional amendments ( 1986 , 2001 , 2008 , 2019) Constitutions ( 1822 , 1827 , 1844 , 1864 , 1911 ) Supreme Special Court Executive Cabinet Government ( Government Gazette ) President ( Presidential Mansion ) Prime Minister ( Maximos Mansion ) Legislature Conference of Presidents Hellenic Parliament ( Speaker ) Parliamentary Committees Presidium Elections Nationality law Parataxis Parliamentary constituencies Pasokification Political parties Judicial system Council of State Court of Audit Supreme Court Security Police Capital punishment Corruption Crime ( Greek mafia ) Life imprisonment Terrorism Coast Guard Foreign relations Aegean dispute Cyprus dispute Council of Europe European Union Macedonia naming dispute ( Language naming dispute ) NATO Passport Treaties United Nations Military Air Force Alliances Army Conscription Military ranks Navy Evzones ( Presidential Guard ) National Guard Tomb of the Unknown Soldier Social issues Abortion Cannabis Education ( universities ) Healthcare ( hospitals , obesity , smoking ) Human rights Human rights abuses LGBT rights Prostitution Political scandals Racism Ideologies Conservatism ( Monarchism ) Fascism ( Metaxism ) Liberalism ( Republicanism , Venizelism ) Nationalism ( Hellenocentrism , Megali Idea , Enosis ) New Social Movements ( Environmentalism , Feminism , Pacifism ) Socialism ( Laocracy , Trotskyism ) Anarchism Administrative divisions Municipalities and communities Administrative regions Regional units Decentralized administrations Economy Agriculture Airports Athens Stock Exchange ( companies ) Banking ( Central bank ) Central bank Brands Companies ( electric power ) Debt crisis ( Grexit ) Drachma Energy ( renewable , nuclear ) Euro coins Greece and the International Monetary Fund Greek economic miracle Highways Laiki agora Ports Public pensions Railways ( history ) Rankings Science and technology Shipping ( Merchant Marine ) Space Agency Subdivisions by GDP Taxation Telecommunications Thessaloniki International Fair Tourism Trade unions Transportation ( Rio–Antirrio bridge , Athens Metro , Thessaloniki Metro ) Water supply and sanitation Society Demographics Diaspora Greeks ( names of Greece and the Greeks ) Immigration Minorities ( Muslim minority , Jews , Arvanites , Aromanians ( Aromanian question ), Megleno-Romanians , Slavophones , Roma ) Women Life expectancy Culture Anastenaria Caryatid Clean Monday Concept of kingship Dress ( Chiton , Chlamys , Exomis , Fustanella , Himation , Mariner's cap , Peplos , Perizoma , Tsarouchi , Vraka ) Eastern Party Festivals Folklore Greek East and Latin West Greektown Hellenization Hospitality Carols ( Christmas , New Year's , Theophany's ) Mangas Mountza Naming customs Paideia Philhellenism and Hellenophobia Plate smashing Philosophy Public holidays ( Independence Day , Ohi Day ) Rouketopolemos Souliotic songs Theophany Tsiknopempti Units of measurement Worry beads Art Architecture ( Castles ) Cretan and Heptanese school Modern art ( 19th century ) Theatre ( Ancient ) Religious art Cuisine Breads ( Daktyla , Kritsini , Lagana , Paximadi , Tsoureki ) Desserts ( Diples , Halva , Koulourakia , Kourabiedes , Loukoumades , Melomakarona , Pasteli , Spoon sweets , Vasilopita ) List of dishes Drinks ( Mastika , Metaxa , Ouzo , Rakomelo , Sideritis , Tentura , Tsipouro , Tsikoudia , Frappé coffee ) Cheeses ( Anthotyros , Feta , Graviera , Kasseri , Kefalotyri , Ladotyri , Manouri , Metsovone , Mizithra ) Filo ( Amygdalopita , Bougatsa , Galaktoboureko , Karydopita , Spanakopita , Tiropita ) Greek salad ( Dakos ) Meze Pasta ( Gogges , Flomaria , Hilopites ) Restaurants ( Kafenio , Ouzeri , Taverna ) Sauces ( Skordalia , Taramosalata , Tirokafteri , Tzatziki ) Souvlaki Varieties ( Heptanesean , Cretan , Epirote , Macedonian ) Wine ( Agiorgitiko , Aidini , Assyrtiko , Athiri , Kotsifali , Lesbian , Limnio , Mavrodafni , Mandilaria , Malagousia , Malvasia , Moschofilero , Retsina , Robola , Savatiano , Vilana , Xinomavro ) Languages Greek alphabet ( History , Orthography , Diacritics , Braille , Cyrillization , Romanization ( Greeklish ) and numerals Greek language ( Demotic , Katharevousa ) and dialects ( Cappadocian , Cretan , Cypriot , Greco-Australian , Maniot , Pontic , Tsakonian , Yevanic ) Greek Sign Language History ( Mycenaean Greek , Ancient Greek , Koine Greek , Medieval Greek , Modern Greek ) Literature ( Ancient , Medieval , Modern ) Minority languages ( Albanian language ( Arvanitika ), Aromanian , Balkan Romani , Bulgarian , Ladino , Macedonian , Megleno-Romanian , Turkish ) Proverbs Words for love Media Cinema Internet Newspapers Television Media freedom Corruption Music Church music Dances ( Ai Georgis , Angaliastos , Antikristos , Ballos , Dionysiakos , Fisounis , Gaitanaki , Geranos , Hasapiko , Ikariotikos , Kalamatianos , Kangeli , Kastorianos , Kerkiraikos , Koftos , Pidikhtos , Leventikos , Maniatikos , Metsovitikos , Ntames , Palamakia , Partalos , Pentozali , Proskinitos , Pyrrhichios , Rougatsiarikos , Sirtaki , Sousta , Syrtos , Trata , Tsakonikos , Tsamikos , Zeibekiko , Zervos ) Éntekhno Folk music ( Cretan , Epirote , Heptanesian , Macedonian , Nisiotika , Peloponnesian , Pontic , Thessalian , Thracian ) Hip Hop Ionian School Laïko ( Skyladiko ) Musical instruments ( Askomandoura , Aulos , Bouzouki , Byzantine lyra ( Cretan , Macedonian , Politiki , Pontic ), Crotala , Floghera , Gaida , Harp , Laouto , Lyre , Organo , Pan flute , Phorminx , Psaltery , Salpinx , Santouri , Souravli , Tambouras , Tambourine , Trigono , Tsampouna , Tympano , Zilia ) Rebetiko Rock ( Punk ) Religion and lore Ancient religion ( Origins , Modern Revival ) Aerico Buddhism Catholicism Drosoulites Eastern Orthodox Church (Timeline: Antiquity , Early Middle Ages , Late Middle Ages , Early Modern Era , 19th century , Early 20th century , Late 20th century , Contemporary ) Fairy tales Gello Greek Orthodox Church ( Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople , Church of Greece , Flag ) Greek Old Calendarists Hinduism Hypertimos Islam Judaism ( History ) Kallikantzaros Lamia Mormo Mount Athos Mythology ( Primordial deities , Titans , Twelve Olympians , Heracles , Odysseus , Jason , Oedipus , Perseus , Daedalus , Orpheus , Theseus , Bellerephon , Satyr , Centaur ) Nymph Protestantism Psychai Sikhism Thymiaterion Name days Vrykolakas Wayside shrine Sport Ancient Olympics Baseball Basketball Cricket Football Hockey Ice hockey Modern Olympics ( 1896 , 1906 , 2004 ) Rugby league Symbols Anthem Coat of arms Flag and national colours Flags Motto Orders and decorations World Heritage Sites Category Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5749f589c8‐zqljx
Cached time: 20250813000159
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.558 seconds
Real time usage: 0.768 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2804/1000000
Revision size: 23154/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 333613/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2795/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61969/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.251/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7415182/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  477.861      1 -total
 19.54%   93.381      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 19.22%   91.841     15 Template:Navbox
 17.01%   81.265      1 Template:History_of_Greece
 16.72%   79.888      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.90%   71.185      1 Template:Ancient_Greece_topics
 14.30%   68.353      1 Template:Reflist
 12.47%   59.600      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
 12.13%   57.982      1 Template:Short_description
 11.45%   54.724      1 Template:History_of_Anatolia Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:565604:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250813000159 and revision id 1292334796. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hellenistic_Greece&oldid=1292334796 " Categories : Hellenistic Greece Ancient history Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Pages using the EasyTimeline extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2023 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from February 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 12:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hellenistic Greece 19 languages Add topic

