Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Eudicots 2 Monocots 3 Storage organ 4 Hypocotyl elongation assay 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Hypocotyl 23 languages Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia ქართული മലയാളം မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Oromoo Polski Português ไทย Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Plant part This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Hypocotyl" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Diagram of Scouler's willow ( Salix scouleriana ) seed, indicating position of hypocotyl.

The hypocotyl (short for "hypocotyledonous stem", [ 1 ] meaning "below seed leaf") is the stem of a germinating seedling , found below the cotyledons (seed leaves) and above the radicle ( root ).

Eudicots [ edit ] As the plant embryo grows at germination, it sends out a shoot called a radicle that becomes the primary root, and then penetrates down into the soil . After emergence of the radicle, the hypocotyl emerges and lifts the growing tip (usually including the seed coat) above the ground, bearing the embryonic leaves (called cotyledons ), and the plumule that gives rise to the first true leaves. The hypocotyl is the primary organ of extension of the young plant and develops into the stem . The most massive hypocotyl is that of Myrmecodia lamii which can be 70 cm (28 in) in height by 45 cm (18 in) wide, and is filled with chambers and passageways used by their ant symbionts [ 2 ] Monocots [ edit ] The early development of a monocot seedling like cereals and other grasses is somewhat different. A structure called the coleoptile , essentially a part of the cotyledon , protects the young stem and plumule as growth pushes them up through the soil. A mesocotyl —that part of the young plant that lies between the seed (which remains buried) and the plumule—extends the shoot up to the soil surface, where secondary roots develop from just beneath the plumule. The primary root from the radicle may then fail to develop further. The mesocotyl is considered to be partly hypocotyl and partly cotyledon (see seed ).

Not all monocots develop like the grasses. The onion develops in a manner similar to the first sequence described above, the seed coat and endosperm (stored food reserve) pulled upwards as the cotyledon extends. Later, the first true leaf grows from the node between the radicle and the sheath-like cotyledon, breaking through the cotyledon to grow past it.

Storage organ [ edit ] In some plants, the hypocotyl becomes enlarged as a storage organ . Examples include cyclamen , gloxinia and celeriac . In cyclamen this storage organ is called a tuber .

Hypocotyl elongation assay [ edit ] One of the widely used assays in the field of photobiology is the investigation of the effect of changes in light quantity and quality on hypocotyl elongation. It is frequently used to study the growth promoting vs. growth repressing effects of application of plant hormones like ethylene. Under normal light conditions, hypocotyl growth is controlled by a process called photomorphogenesis, while shading the seedlings evokes a rapid transcriptional response which negatively regulates photomorphogenesis and results in increased rates of hypocotyl growth.

[ 3 ] This rate is highest when plants are kept in darkness mediated by a process called skotomorphogenesis, which contrasts photomorphogenesis.

See also [ edit ] Epicotyl Monocotyledon Dicotyledon References [ edit ] ^ "hypocotyl" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ BLUMEA, volume 27 issue 2 (1993) pages 322-323 ^ Debatosh Das, "Ethylene- and shade-induced hypocotyl elongation share transcriptome patterns and functional regulators" , "Plant Physiology",21-06-2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hypocotyl&oldid=1297845510 " Categories : Plant anatomy Plant morphology Plant reproduction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2009 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 21:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hypocotyl 23 languages Add topic

