Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life, education and career 2 Awards 3 Controversy 4 Publications 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Sumit Sarkar 6 languages বাংলা हिन्दी മലയാളം مصرى ਪੰਜਾਬੀ தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian historian of modern India (born 1939) This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Sumit Sarkar" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sumit Sarkar Alma mater University of Calcutta Presidency College Sumit Sarkar (born 1939) is one of the foremost historians of modern India . He is a Marxist historian. He is the author of Swadeshi Movement in Bengal, 1903-1908 (1973), Modern India (1989), and Writing Social History (1998), among others. He was a founding member of the Subaltern Studies Group as well as one of its most important critics.

[ 1 ] Early life, education and career [ edit ] He was born to Susobhan Sarkar . His maternal uncle was Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis .

He completed his BA (Honours) in history at Presidency College, Calcutta and MA and Ph.D. in the same subject at the University of Calcutta . He taught for many years as a lecturer at the University of Calcutta, and later as a reader at the University of Burdwan . He completed his postdoctoral fellowship at Wolfson College, Oxford . He was professor of history at the University of Delhi .

[ 2 ] Awards [ edit ] He was awarded the Rabindra Puraskar literary award for his book Writing Social History by the West Bengal government in 2004. He returned the award in 2007 in protest against the expulsion of farmers from their land by the erstwhile state government ran by the CPI(M) led Left Front (West Bengal) .

[ 3 ] Controversy [ edit ] He was one of the founding members of the Subaltern Studies Collective , but later distanced himself from the project. He noted that arguments made in the later issues of the journal as well as in books by Partha Chatterjee blanketly criticized Enlightenment , the nation-state and secularism lined up with indigenist critiques that were at home with the Hindu right . In his view this error was traceable to a basic confusion in the early project that posed an absolute separation between the elite and subaltern domains.

[ 4 ] He contributed a volume to the Towards Freedom project of the Indian Council of Historical Research (ICHR), publication of which was blocked in 2000 by the ICHR under the influence of then Indian government administered by the Bharatiya Janata Party as alleged by Sarkar.

[ 5 ] The publication of the volume was eventually allowed by the Government of India once the Congress party came to power after the general election of 2004 .

[ 6 ] Publications [ edit ] Modern Times (Ranikhet, 2014) Towards Freedom: Documents on the Movement for Independence in India, 1946 , (New Delhi, 2007) Beyond Nationalist Frames: Post-Modernism, Hindu Fundamentalism, History , (Delhi, 2002) Writing Social History , (Delhi, 1998) Khaki Shorts and Saffron Flags: A Critique of the Hindu Right , (with Tapan Basu, Pradip Datta, Tanika Sarkar and Sambuddha Sen; Orient Longman, 1993).

ISBN 0863113834 .

Modern India: 1885-1947 , (Basingstoke, 1989) The Swadeshi Movement in Bengal, 1903-1908 , (New Delhi, 1973) References [ edit ] ^ "Sumit Sarkar – Marxian Social History of Modern India" .

Counterfire . Retrieved 17 December 2023 .

^ "SUMIT SARKAR | UPSCPORTAL Online Store : Buy IAS, IPS, Civil Services; Books, Courses and Study Materials easily" . Archived from the original on 17 July 2011 . Retrieved 27 January 2010 .

^ "Nandigram was more shocking than Jallianwala Bagh" .

The Times of India . 17 March 2007. Archived from the original on 7 December 2010 . Retrieved 27 March 2008 .

^ Sumit Sarkar, "The Decline of the Subaltern in Subaltern Studies," in Writing Social History pp. 82-108 ^ "Righting or rewriting Hindu history" .

Asia Times . 23 February 2000. Archived from the original on 25 September 2000 . Retrieved 27 March 2008 .

^ " 'Towards Freedom' project revived" .

The Hindu . 21 September 2004. Archived from the original on 14 November 2004 . Retrieved 27 March 2008 .

External links [ edit ] The Decline of the Subaltern in Subaltern Studies "Delhi Historians Group's Publication "Communalization of Education: The History Textbooks Controversy", A report in 2002, New Delhi: Jawaharlal Nehru University, India [ usurped ] .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Netherlands Norway Croatia Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sumit_Sarkar&oldid=1298223347 " Categories : 1939 births Bengali Hindus Bengali-language writers 20th-century Bengalis Presidency University, Kolkata alumni University of Calcutta alumni Academic staff of the University of Calcutta Academic staff of the University of Burdwan Academic staff of Delhi University Academic staff of Jawaharlal Nehru University Bengali historians Brahmos Fellows of Wolfson College, Oxford Historians of South Asia Historians of colonialism 20th-century Indian historians Living people Indian Marxist historians Indian political writers Writers about Hindu nationalism Indian lecturers 20th-century Indian male writers 20th-century Indian scholars Scholars from West Bengal English-language writers from India People from Kolkata district Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2019 All articles lacking in-text citations BLP articles lacking sources from February 2019 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from May 2020 Use Indian English from May 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 05:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sumit Sarkar 6 languages Add topic

