Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Practical application 3 Close-up types 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Close-up 20 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Photography and film term referring to framing a shot For other uses, see Close up (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Close-up" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mexican actress Dolores del Río in a closeup publicity photograph of 1961 A close-up of Cornus florida A close-up or closeup in filmmaking , television production , still photography , and the comic strip medium is a type of shot that tightly frames a person or object.

[ 1 ] Close-ups are one of the standard shots used regularly with medium and long shots ( cinematic techniques ). Close-ups display the most detail, but they do not include the broader scene. Moving toward or away from a close-up is a common type of zooming . A close up is taken from head to neck, giving the viewer a detailed view of the subject's face.

History [ edit ] Most early filmmakers, such as Thomas Edison , Auguste and Louis Lumière and Georges Méliès , tended not to use close-ups and preferred to frame their subjects in long shots, similar to the stage. Film historians disagree as to the filmmaker who first used a close-up. One of the best claims is for George Albert Smith in Hove , who used medium close-ups in films as early as 1898 and by 1900 was incorporating extreme close-ups in films such as As Seen Through a Telescope and Grandma's Reading Glass . In 1901, James Williamson , also working in Hove, made perhaps the most extreme close-up of all in The Big Swallow in which his character approaches the camera and appears to swallow it. The film Hamlet (1913) also makes use of early close ups. One of D. W. Griffith 's short films, The Lonedale Operator (1911), makes significant use of a close-up of a wrench that a character pretends is a gun.

Lillian Gish remarked on Griffith's use of the close-up: The people in the front office got very upset. They came down and said: "The public doesn't pay for the head or the arms or the shoulders of the actor. They want the whole body. Let's give them their money's worth." Griffith stood very close to them and said: "Can you see my feet?" When they said no, he replied: "That's what I'm doing. I am using what the eyes can see." [ 2 ] Practical application [ edit ] Close-ups are used in many ways and for many reasons. They are often employed as cutaways from a more distant shot to show detail, such as characters' emotions or some intricate activity with their hands. Close cuts to characters' faces are used far more often in television than in movies [ citation needed ] and are especially common in soap operas [ citation needed ] . For a director, deliberately avoiding close-ups may create in the audience an emotional distance from the subject matter [ citation needed ] .

Close-ups are used for distinguishing main characters. Major characters are often given a close-up when they are introduced as a way of indicating their importance. Leading characters will have multiple close-ups. At the close of Sunset Boulevard (1950), the main character, a faded star under the delusion that she is making a triumphant return to acting, declaims melodramatically, "All right, Mr.

DeMille , I'm ready for my close-up." Close-up shots do not show the subject in the broad context of its surroundings.

Low-budget films may use close-ups to avoid the expense of set construction . If overused, close-ups may leave viewers uncertain as to what they are seeing. Close-ups are rarely done with wide-angle lenses because perspective causes objects closer to the lens to be unnaturally enlarged. That may convey a sense of confusion, intoxication, or another unusual mental state.

[ citation needed ] Close-up types [ edit ] An extreme close-up from the 1901 short film The Big Swallow There are various degrees of close-up depending on how tight (zoomed in) the shot is. The terminology varies between countries and even different companies, but in general, these are: Medium Close Up ("MCU" on camera scripts): Halfway between a mid shot and a close-up. Usually covers the subject's head and shoulders.

Close Up ("CU"): A certain feature, such as someone's head, takes up the whole frame.

Extreme Close Up ("ECU" or "XCU"): The shot is so tight that only a detail of the subject, such as someone's eyes, can be seen.

[ 3 ] Lean-In: when the juxtaposition of shots in a sequence, usually in a scene of dialogue, starts with medium or long shots, for example, and ends with close-ups.

Lean-Out: the opposite of a lean-in , moving from close-ups out to longer shots.

Lean: when a lean-in is followed by a lean-out .

When the close-up is used in the shooting, the subject should not be put in exactly the middle of the frame. Instead, it should be located in the frame according to the law of the golden section .

See also [ edit ] Macro photography Micrograph Shot (filmmaking) References [ edit ] ^ Brown, Blain (2012).

Cinematography: Theory and Practice, Image Making for Cinematographers and Directors . Burlington, Massachusetts: Focal Press. p. 21.

ISBN 9781136047381 . Retrieved August 11, 2023 .

^ Lekich, John (October 24, 1986).

"First Lady of the Silent Screen" .

The Globe and Mail .

^ Ask The Cameraman: Shot Sizes: The Extreme Close-Up Archived June 10, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Sources [ edit ] Bordwell, David; Thompson, Kristin (2006).

Film Art: An Introduction . New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 0-07-331027-1 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Close-up shots at Wikimedia Commons v t e Cinematic techniques Lighting Background Cameo Fill Flood High-key Key Lens flare Low-key Mood Rembrandt Stage Soft Sound Diegetic Non-diegetic Narration Film score Sound effects Shooting Field size Wide / Long / Full American Medium Close-up Italian Two shot Camera placement Perspective Over-the-shoulder Point-of-view (POV) Reverse Trunk Single / multiple-camera setup Camera angle Tilt Aerial High-angle Bird's-eye Crane shot Jib shot Low-angle Worm's-eye view Dutch angle Camera movement Unchained camera technique Tilting Panning Whip pan Hand-held Shaky Tracking Dolly Steadicam SnorriCam Walk and talk Follow Dolly zoom Lens effects Focus Racking Depth of field Shallow Deep Zooming Other techniques Establishing shot Master shot B-roll Freeze-frame shot Long take One-shot Insert v t e Special effects Practical Aerial rigging ( wire-flying ) Air bladder effect Animatronics Bullet hit squib Costumed character Creature suit Dead-character costume Kitbashing Miniature effect ( hanging ) Prosthetic makeup Puppetry Pyrotechnics Rubber mask Matte painting Sugar glass Theatrical blood In-camera Bipacks Bullet time Dolly zoom Forced perspective Front projection Infrared photography Lens flares Lighting effects Multiple exposure Filtration Rear projection Reverse motion Schüfftan process Shutter effects Slit-scan Tilted plane focus Time-lapse Fast motion Slow motion Speed ramping Stop motion Visual Bullet time Chroma key Compositing ( digital ) Computer-generated imagery Go motion Introvision Match moving Optical printing Smallgantics Split screen Stop motion Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Close-up&oldid=1304419284 " Categories : Cinematic techniques Television terminology Photography by genre Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2016 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 23:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Close-up 20 languages Add topic

