Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sources 2 Collection and processing Toggle Collection and processing subsection 2.1 Valorization 2.1.1 Crop residue 2.1.2 Food waste 2.1.3 Human excreta 3 Climate change impacts Toggle Climate change impacts subsection 3.1 Landfill gas 3.2 Food waste 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Biodegradable waste 27 languages العربية বাংলা Bikol Central Български Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Bahasa Indonesia עברית Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Simple English Suomi தமிழ் Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organic matter that can be broken down Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Biodegradable waste includes any organic matter in waste which can be broken down into carbon dioxide , water , methane , compost , humus , and simple organic molecules by micro-organisms and other living things by composting , aerobic digestion , anaerobic digestion or similar processes. It mainly includes kitchen waste (spoiled food, trimmings, inedible parts), ash, soil, dung and other plant matter.  In waste management, it also includes some inorganic materials which can be decomposed by bacteria. Such materials include gypsum and its products such as plasterboard and other simple sulfates which can be decomposed by sulfate reducing bacteria to yield hydrogen sulfide in anaerobic land-fill conditions.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In domestic waste collection, the scope of biodegradable waste may be narrowed to include only those degradable wastes capable of being handled in the local waste handling facilities.

[ 3 ] To address this, many local waste management districts are integrating programs related to sort the biodegradable waste for composting or other waste valorization strategies, where biodegradable waste gets reused for other products, such as using agricultural waste for fiber production or biochar .

Biodegradable waste when not handled properly can have an outsized impact on climate change , especially through methane emissions from anaerobic fermentation that produces landfill gas . Other approaches to reducing the impact include reducing the amount of waste produced, such as through reducing food waste .

Sources [ edit ] Biodegradable waste can be found in municipal solid waste (sometimes called biodegradable municipal waste, or  as green waste , food waste , paper waste and biodegradable plastics ). Other biodegradable wastes include human waste , manure , sewage , sewage sludge and slaughterhouse waste . In the absence of oxygen , much of this waste will decay to methane by anaerobic digestion .

[ 4 ] In the UK, 7.4 million tonnes of biodegradable waste was sent to landfill in 2018 having reduced from 7.8 million tonnes in 2017.

[ 5 ] Collection and processing [ edit ] In many parts of the developed world, biodegradable waste is separated from the rest of the waste stream, either by separate curb-side collection or by waste sorting after collection. At the point of collection such waste is often referred to as green waste .

[ 6 ] Removing such waste from the rest of the waste stream substantially reduces waste volumes for disposal and also allows biodegradable waste to be composted .

Biodegradable waste can be used for composting or a resource for heat, electricity and fuel by means of incineration or anaerobic digestion .

[ 7 ] Swiss Kompogas and the Danish AIKAN process are examples of anaerobic digestion of biodegradable waste.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] While incineration can recover the most energy, anaerobic digestion plants retain nutrients and make compost for soil amendment and still recover some of the contained energy in the form of biogas . Kompogas produced 27 million Kwh of electricity and biogas in 2009. The oldest of the company's lorries has achieved 1,000,000 kilometers driven with biogas from household waste in the last 15 years.

[ 10 ] Valorization [ edit ] Crop residue [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Waste valorization § Crop residue .

[ edit ] Crop residue , such as corncob , and other residues from the food processing industry , such as residues from biorefineries , have high potential for use in further processes, such as producing biofuel , bioplastics , and other biomaterials for industrial processes.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Food waste [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Waste valorization § Food waste .

[ edit ] One of the more fruitful fields of work is food waste—when deposited in landfills, food waste produces the greenhouse gas methane and other toxic compounds that can be dangerous to humans and local ecosystems.

[ 11 ] Landfill gas utilization and municipal composting can capture and use the organic nutrients.

[ 11 ] Food waste collected from non-industrial sources is harder to use, because it often has much greater diversity than other sources of waste—different locations and different windows of time produce very different compositions of material, making it hard to use for industrial processes.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Transforming food waste to either food products, feed products, or converting it to or extracting food or feed ingredients is termed as food waste valorisation. Valorisation of food waste offers an economical and environmental opportunity, which can reduce the problems of its conventional disposal. Food wastes have been demonstrated to be valuable bioresources that can be utilised to obtain a number of useful products, including biofertilizers , bioplastics , biofuels , chemicals, and nutraceuticals. There is much potential to recycle food wastes by conversion to insect protein .

[ 13 ] Human excreta [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Reuse of human excreta .

[ edit ] Harvest of capsicum grown with compost made from human excreta at an experimental garden in Haiti Reuse of human excreta is the safe, beneficial use of treated human excreta after applying suitable treatment steps and risk management approaches that are customized for the intended reuse application. Beneficial uses of the treated excreta may focus on using the plant-available nutrients (mainly nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium) that are contained in the treated excreta. They may also make use of the organic matter and energy contained in the excreta. To a lesser extent, reuse of the excreta's water content might also take place, although this is better known as water reclamation from municipal wastewater . The intended reuse applications for the nutrient content may include: soil conditioner or fertilizer in agriculture or horticultural activities. Other reuse applications, which focus more on the organic matter content of the excreta, include use as a fuel source or as an energy source in the form of biogas .

There is a large and growing number of treatment options to make excreta safe and manageable for the intended reuse option.

[ 14 ] Options include urine diversion and dehydration of feces ( urine-diverting dry toilets ), composting ( composting toilets or external composting processes ), sewage sludge treatment technologies and a range of fecal sludge treatment processes. They all achieve various degrees of pathogen removal and reduction in water content for easier handling. Pathogens of concern are enteric bacteria, virus, protozoa, and helminth eggs in feces.

[ 15 ] As the helminth eggs are the pathogens that are the most difficult to destroy with treatment processes, they are commonly used as an indicator organism in reuse schemes. Other health risks and environmental pollution aspects that need to be considered include spreading micropollutants , pharmaceutical residues and nitrate in the environment which could cause groundwater pollution and thus potentially affect drinking water quality .

Climate change impacts [ edit ] Landfill gas [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Landfill gas .

[ edit ] A gas flare produced by a landfill in Lake County, Ohio Landfill gas is a mix of different gases created by the action of microorganisms within a landfill as they decompose organic waste, including for example, food waste and paper waste . Landfill gas is approximately forty to sixty percent methane , with the remainder being mostly carbon dioxide . Trace amounts of other volatile organic compounds (VOCs) comprise the remainder (<1%). These trace gases include a large array of species, mainly simple hydrocarbons .

[ 16 ] Landfill gases have an influence on climate change . The major components are CO 2 and methane , both of which are greenhouse gases . Methane in the atmosphere is a far more potent greenhouse gas, with each molecule having twenty-five times the effect of a molecule of carbon dioxide. Methane, however, accounts for less composition of the atmosphere than does carbon dioxide. Landfills are the third-largest source of methane in the US.

[ 17 ] Because of the significant negative effects of these gases, regulatory regimes have been set up to monitor landfill gas , reduce the amount of biodegradable content in municipal waste , and to create landfill gas utilization strategies, which include gas flaring or capture for electricity generation.

Food waste [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Food loss and waste .

[ edit ] Fruit and vegetables in a dumpster, discarded uneaten Food recovered by food waste critic Robin Greenfield in Madison, Wisconsin, from two days of recovery from dumpsters [ 18 ] The causes of food going uneaten are numerous and occur throughout the food system , during production , processing , distribution , retail and food service sales, and consumption . Overall, about one-third of the world's food is thrown away.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] A similar amount is lost on top of that by feeding human-edible food to farm animals (the net effect wastes an estimated 1144 kcal/person/day). A 2021 meta-analysis , that did not include food lost during production, by the United Nations Environment Programme found that food waste was a challenge in all countries at all levels of economic development .

[ 21 ] The analysis estimated that global food waste was 931 million tonnes of food waste (about 121 kg per capita) across three sectors: 61 percent from households , 26 percent from food service and 13 percent from retail .

[ 21 ] Food loss and waste is a major part of the impact of agriculture on climate change (it amounts to 3.3 billion tons of CO 2 e emissions annually [ 22 ] [ 23 ] ) and other environmental issues , such as land use , water use and loss of biodiversity . Prevention of food waste is the highest priority, and when prevention is not possible, the food waste hierarchy ranks the food waste treatment options from preferred to least preferred based on their negative environmental impacts.

[ 24 ] Reuse pathways of surplus food intended for human consumption, such as food donation, is the next best strategy after prevention, followed by animal feed , recycling of nutrients and energy followed by the least preferred option, landfill , which is a major source of the greenhouse gas methane .

[ 25 ] Other considerations include unreclaimed phosphorus in food waste leading to further phosphate mining . Moreover, reducing food waste in all parts of the food system is an important part of reducing the environmental impact of agriculture , by reducing the total amount of water, land , and other resources used.

The UN's Sustainable Development Goal Target 12.3 seeks to "halve global per capita food waste at the retail and consumer levels and reduce food losses along production and supply chains, including post-harvest losses" by 2030.

[ 26 ] Climate change mitigation strategies prominently feature reducing food waste.

[ 27 ] In the 2022 United Nations Biodiversity Conference nations agree to reduce food waste by 50% by the year 2030.

[ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Biodegradability prediction Biodegradable bags Biodegradation Biodrying Compost Brown waste Green waste Landfarming Landfill diversion List of waste types Miniwaste Sewage treatment References [ edit ] ^ "Why can't I put my leftover gyproc/drywall in the garbage?" . Recycling Council of British Columbia. 19 September 2008.

^ "Fact Sheet: Methane and Hydrogen Sulfide Gases at C&DD Landfills" (PDF) . Environmental Protection Agency. State of Ohio, U.S.

^ "Organics -Green Bin" . Christchurch City Council . Retrieved 19 March 2016 .

^ CSL London Olympics Waste Review . cslondon.org ^ "UK Statistics on Waste" (PDF) . March 2019 . Retrieved 7 November 2019 .

^ "Organics - Green Bin" . Christchurch City Council . Retrieved 12 March 2016 .

^ National Non-Food Crops Centre .

NNFCC report on Evaluation of Opportunities for Converting Indigenous UK Wastes to Fuels and Energy Archived 20 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . nnfcc.co.uk ^ Recycling chain Archived 2012-03-23 at the Wayback Machine . kompogas-utzenstorf.ch ^ AIKAN website . aikantechnology.com ^ "Gesundheit, Kraft und Energie für 2002" .

zuonline.ch . 3 January 2002. Archived from the original on 2 September 2002.

^ a b c d Arancon, Rick Arneil D.; Lin, Carol Sze Ki; Chan, King Ming; Kwan, Tsz Him; Luque, Rafael (2013). "Advances on waste valorization: New horizons for a more sustainable society".

Energy Science & Engineering .

1 (2): 53– 71.

Bibcode : 2013EneSE...1...53A .

doi : 10.1002/ese3.9 .

^ a b Nayak, A.; Bhushan, Brij (2019). "An overview of the recent trends on the waste valorization techniques for food wastes".

Journal of Environmental Management .

233 : 352– 370.

Bibcode : 2019JEnvM.233..352N .

doi : 10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.12.041 .

PMID 30590265 .

^ Jagtap, Sandeep; Garcia-Garcia, Guillermo; Duong, Linh; Swainson, Mark; Martindale, Wayne (August 2021).

"Codesign of Food System and Circular Economy Approaches for the Development of Livestock Feeds from Insect Larvae" .

Foods .

10 (8): 1701.

doi : 10.3390/foods10081701 .

PMC 8391919 .

PMID 34441479 .

^ Tilley, Elizabeth; Ulrich, Lukas; Lüthi, Christoph; Reymond, Philippe; Zurbrügg, Chris (2014). "Septic tank".

Compendium of Sanitation Systems and Technologies (PDF) (2nd ed.). Duebendorf, Switzerland: Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology (Eawag). pp.

74– 75.

ISBN 978-3-906484-57-0 .

^ Harder, Robin; Wielemaker, Rosanne; Larsen, Tove A.; Zeeman, Grietje; Öberg, Gunilla (2019). "Recycling nutrients contained in human excreta to agriculture: Pathways, processes, and products".

Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology .

49 (8): 695– 743.

Bibcode : 2019CREST..49..695H .

doi : 10.1080/10643389.2018.1558889 .

^ Hans-Jürgen Ehrig, Hans-Joachim Schneider and Volkmar Gossow "Waste, 7. Deposition" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2011, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim.

doi : 10.1002/14356007.o28_o07 ^ "Methane Emissions" . Environmental Protection Agency. 23 December 2015 . Retrieved 13 June 2016 .

^ Greenfield, Robin (2014-10-06).

"The Food Waste Fiasco: You Have to See it to Believe it!" .

www.robingreenfield.org .

^ Jenny Gustavsson.

Global food losses and food waste : extent, causes and prevention : study conducted for the International Congress "Save Food!" at Interpack 2011 Düsseldorf, Germany .

OCLC 1126211917 .

^ "UN Calls for Action to End Food Waste Culture" . Daily News Brief. 2021-10-04.

Archived from the original on 2021-10-04 . Retrieved 2021-10-04 .

^ a b UNEP Food Waste Index Report 2021 (Report). United Nations Environment Programme. 2021-03-04.

ISBN 9789280738513 .

Archived from the original on 2022-02-01 . Retrieved 2022-02-01 .

^ "FAO - News Article: Food wastage: Key facts and figures" .

www.fao.org .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-07 . Retrieved 2021-06-07 .

^ "A third of food is wasted, making it third-biggest carbon emitter, U.N. says" .

Reuters . 2013-09-11.

Archived from the original on 2021-06-07 . Retrieved 2021-06-07 .

^ "Brief on food waste in the European Union" . European Commission. 2020-08-25.

Archived from the original on 2022-11-15 . Retrieved 2022-11-15 .

^ "Food Recovery Hierarchy" .

www.epa.gov . 2015-08-12. Archived from the original on 2019-05-23 . Retrieved 2022-05-15 .

^ United Nations (2017) Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 July 2017, Work of the Statistical Commission pertaining to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development ( A/RES/71/313 Archived 2020-10-23 at the Wayback Machine ) ^ "Reduced Food Waste" .

Project Drawdown . 2020-02-12.

Archived from the original on 2020-09-24 . Retrieved 2020-09-19 .

^ "COP15: Nations Adopt Four Goals, 23 Targets for 2030 in Landmark UN Biodiversity Agreement" .

Convention on Biological Diversity . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 2022-12-20 . Retrieved 9 January 2023 .

v t e Biosolids , waste , and waste management Major types Agricultural wastewater Biodegradable waste Biomedical waste Brown waste Chemical waste Construction waste Demolition waste Electronic waste by country Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Heat waste Industrial waste Industrial wastewater Litter Marine debris Mining waste Municipal solid waste Open defecation Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Radioactive waste Scrap metal Sewage Sharps waste Surface runoff Toxic waste Processes Anaerobic digestion Balefill Biodegradation Composting Durable good Ecological design Garden waste dumping Illegal dumping Incineration Landfill Landfill mining Mechanical biological treatment Mechanical sorting Photodegradation Reclaimed lumber Recycling appliance recycling battery recycling bottle recycling fluorescent lamp recycling land recycling plastic recycling textile recycling timber recycling tire recycling water heat recycling water recycling shower Repurposing Resource recovery Reusable packaging Right to repair Sewage treatment Urban mining Waste collection Waste sorting Waste trade Waste treatment Waste-to-energy Countries Afghanistan Albania Armenia Australia Belgium Bangladesh Brazil Bosnia and Herzegovina Egypt Georgia Hong Kong India Israel Japan Kazakhstan New Zealand Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Switzerland Syria Tanzania Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States Agreements Bamako Convention Basel Convention EU directives batteries Recycling framework incineration landfills RoHS vehicles waste water WEEE London Convention Oslo Convention OSPAR Convention Occupations Sanitation worker Street sweeper Waste collector Waste picker Other topics Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future China's waste import ban Cleaner production Downcycling Eco-industrial park Extended producer responsibility High-level radioactive waste management History of waste management Landfill fire Sewage regulation and administration Supervised injection site Toxic colonialism Upcycling Waste hierarchy Waste legislation Waste minimisation Zero waste Environment portal Category: Waste Index Journals Lists Organizations Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Latvia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biodegradable_waste&oldid=1268875829 " Categories : Biodegradable waste management Biogas substrates Waste Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 12 January 2025, at 00:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biodegradable waste 27 languages Add topic

