Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Composition 2 Components of solid waste management Toggle Components of solid waste management subsection 2.1 Collection 2.2 Waste handling and separation, storage and processing at the source 2.3 Segregation and processing and transformation of solid wastes 2.4 Transfer and transport 2.5 Disposal 2.6 Reusing 2.7 Landfills 2.8 Energy generation 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Municipal solid waste 36 languages العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Igbo Íslenska Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of waste consisting of everyday items discarded by the public "Municipal waste" and "Urban waste" redirect here. For other uses, see Municipal waste (disambiguation) . For the punk band, see Urban Waste (band) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( March 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Municipal solid waste" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Pollution Mixed municipal waste, Hiriya , Tel Aviv Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Municipal solid waste ( MSW ), commonly known as trash or garbage in the United States and rubbish in Britain , is a waste type consisting of everyday items that are discarded by the public. " Garbage " can also refer specifically to food waste , as in a garbage disposal ; the two are sometimes collected separately. In the European Union, the semantic definition is 'mixed municipal waste,' given waste code 20 03 01 in the European Waste Catalog. Although the waste may originate from a number of sources that has nothing to do with a municipality, the traditional role of municipalities in collecting and managing these kinds of waste have produced the particular etymology 'municipal.' Composition [ edit ] The composition of municipal solid waste varies greatly from municipality to municipality, [ 1 ] and it changes significantly with time. In municipalities which have a well-developed waste recycling system, the waste stream mainly consists of intractable wastes such as plastic film and non-recyclable packaging materials . At the start of the 20th century, the majority of domestic waste (53%) in the UK consisted of coal ash from open fires.

[ 2 ] In developed areas without significant recycling activity it predominantly includes food wastes, market wastes, yard wastes , plastic containers and product packaging materials, and other miscellaneous solid wastes from residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial sources.

[ 3 ] Most definitions of municipal solid waste do not include industrial wastes , agricultural wastes, medical waste , radioactive waste or sewage sludge .

[ 4 ] Waste collection is performed by the municipality within a given area. The term residual waste relates to waste left from household sources containing materials that have not been separated out or sent for processing.

[ 5 ] Waste can be classified in several ways, but the following list represents a typical classification: Biodegradable waste : food and kitchen waste , green waste , paper (most can be recycled, although some difficult to compost plant material may be excluded [ 6 ] ) Recyclable materials: paper , cardboard , glass , bottles , jars , tin cans , aluminum cans , aluminium foil , metals , certain plastics , textiles , clothing , tires , batteries , etc.

Inert waste: construction and demolition waste , dirt , rocks , debris Electrical and electronic waste ( WEEE ) – ⁣ electrical appliances , light bulbs , washing machines , TVs , computers , screens, mobile phones , alarm clocks , watches , etc.

Composite wastes: waste clothing , Tetra Pack food and drink cartons , waste plastics such as toys and plastic garden furniture Hazardous waste including most paints , chemicals , tires , batteries , light bulbs , electrical appliances , fluorescent lamps , aerosol spray cans , and fertilizers Toxic waste including pesticides , herbicides , and fungicides Biomedical waste , expired pharmaceutical drugs , etc.

For example, typical municipal solid waste in China is composed of 55.9% food residue, 8.5% paper, 11.2% plastics, 3.2% textiles, 2.9% wood waste, 0.8% rubber, and 18.4% non-combustibles.

[ 7 ] Components of solid waste management [ edit ] Bins to collect paper , aluminium , glass , PET bottles and incinerable waste The municipal solid waste industry has four components: recycling , composting , disposal , and waste-to-energy via incineration.

[ 8 ] There is no single approach that can be applied to the management of all waste streams, therefore the Environmental Protection Agency , a U.S. federal government agency, developed a hierarchy ranking strategy for municipal solid waste.

[ 9 ] The waste management hierarchy is made up of four levels ordered from most preferred to least preferred methods based on their environmental soundness: Source reduction and reuse; recycling or composting; energy recovery ; treatment and disposal.

[ 10 ] Collection [ edit ] The functional element of collection includes not only the gathering of solid waste and recyclable materials, but also the transport of these materials, after collection, to the location where the collection vehicle is emptied. This location may be a materials processing facility, a transfer station or a landfill disposal site.

Waste handling and separation, storage and processing at the source [ edit ] Waste handling and separation involves activities associated with waste management until the waste is placed in storage containers for collection. Handling also encompasses the movement of loaded containers to the point of collection. Separating different types of waste components is an important step in the handling and storage of solid waste at the source of collection.

Segregation and processing and transformation of solid wastes [ edit ] The types of means and facilities that are now used for the recovery of waste materials that have been separated at the source include kerbside collection, drop-off, and buy-back centres. The separation and processing of wastes that have been separated at the source and the separation of commingled wastes usually occur at a materials recovery facility, transfer stations, combustion facilities, and treatment plants.

Transfer and transport [ edit ] This element involves two main steps. First, the waste is transferred from a smaller collection vehicle to larger transport equipment. The waste is then transported, usually over long distances, to a processing or disposal site.

Disposal [ edit ] Today, the disposal of wastes by land filling or land spreading is the ultimate fate of all solid wastes, whether they are residential wastes collected and transported directly to a landfill site, residual materials from materials recovery facilities (MRFs), residue from the combustion of solid waste, compost , or other substances from various solid waste processing facilities. A modern sanitary landfill is not a dump; it is an engineered facility used for disposing of solid wastes on land without creating nuisances or hazards to public health or safety, such as the problems of insects and the contamination of groundwater .

Reusing [ edit ] In recent years, environmental organizations, such as Freegle or The Freecycle Network , have been gaining popularity for their online reuse networks. These networks provide a worldwide online registry of unwanted items that would otherwise be thrown away, for individuals and nonprofits to reuse or recycle. Therefore, this free Internet-based service reduces landfill pollution and promotes the gift economy .

Landfills [ edit ] Segregation of Trash Landfills are created by land dumping. Land dumping methods vary, most commonly it involves the mass dumping of waste into a designated area, usually a hole or sidehill. After the waste is dumped, it is then compacted by large machines. When the dumping cell is full, it is then "sealed" with a plastic sheet and covered in several feet of dirt. This is the primary method of dumping in the United States because of the low cost and abundance of unused land in North America. Landfills are regulated in the US by the Environmental Protection Agency , which enforces standards provided in the Resource Conservation Recovery Act , such as requiring liners and groundwater monitoring.

[ 11 ] This is because landfills pose the threat of pollution and can contaminate groundwater. The signs of pollution are effectively masked by disposal companies, and it is often hard to see any evidence. Usually, landfills are surrounded by large walls or fences hiding the mounds of debris. Large amounts of chemical odor eliminating agent are sprayed in the air surrounding landfills to hide the evidence of the rotting waste inside the plant.

[ 12 ] Energy generation [ edit ] Municipal solid waste produces enormous amounts of methane , a potent greenhouse gas .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] However, nearly 90% of these methane emissions could be avoided with existing technologies.

[ 14 ] [ 13 ] In particular, municipal solid waste can be used to generate energy because of the lipid content present within it. A lot of MSW products can be converted into clean energy if the lipid content can be accessed and utilized.

[ 15 ] Several technologies have been developed that make the processing of MSW for energy generation cleaner and more economical than ever before, including landfill gas capture, combustion, pyrolysis , gasification , and plasma arc gasification .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] While older waste incineration plants emitted a lot of pollutants, recent regulatory changes and new technologies have significantly reduced this concern.

United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulations in 1995 and 2000 under the Clean Air Act have succeeded in reducing emissions of dioxins from waste-to-energy facilities by more than 99 percent below 1990 levels, while mercury emissions have been reduced by over 90 percent.

[ 18 ] The EPA noted these improvements in 2003, citing waste-to-energy as a power source "with less environmental impact than almost any other source of electricity ".

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Category:Waste by country Garbology (study of modern refuse and trash) List of waste management acronyms MSW/LFG (municipal solid waste and landfill gas ) Methanol fuel#History and production Sewage Waste management Waste minimisation Global waste trade References [ edit ] ^ Kumar, Sunil; Dhar, Hiya; Nair, Vijay V.; Bhattacharyya, J. K.; Vaidya, A. N.; Akolkar, A. B. (2016). "Characterization of municipal solid waste in high-altitude sub-tropical regions".

Environmental Technology .

37 (20): 2627– 2637.

doi : 10.1080/09593330.2016.1158322 .

PMID 26915419 .

S2CID 8140600 .

^ Centenary history of waste and waste managers in London and south east England- Page 7 Archived 2013-08-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ Non-hazardous Waste U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Municipal Solid Waste ^ Municipal Solid Waste Archived 2010-11-20 at the Wayback Machine U.S. Energy Information Administration ^ Mechanical Biological Treatment Archived 2007-09-27 at archive.today Welsh Assembly (2005) Mechanical Biological Treatment, Environment Countryside and Planning Website, Welsh Assembly ^ "Organics -Green Bin" . Christchurch City Council . Retrieved 19 March 2016 .

^ Zhou, Hui; Meng, AiHong; Long, YanQiu; Li, QingHai; Zhang, YanGuo (August 2014). "An overview of characteristics of municipal solid waste fuel in China: Physical, chemical composition and heating value".

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews .

36 : 107– 122.

doi : 10.1016/j.rser.2014.04.024 .

^ Nonhazardous waste Archived 2010-11-20 at the Wayback Machine U.S. Energy Information Administration ^ "System Overview > Solid Waste - GSA Sustainable Facilities Tool" .

sftool.gov .

^ US EPA, OSWER (22 September 2015).

"Advancing Sustainable Materials Management: Facts and Figures" .

US EPA .

^ Horinko, Marianne, Cathryn Courtin.

"Waste Management: A Half Century of Progress." EPA Alumni Association. March 2016.

^ Rogers, Heather (2006).

Gone Tomorrow: The Hidden Life of Garbage . New York: The New Press.

ISBN 9781595581204 .

^ a b Webber, Michael; Glazer, Yael (17 November 2023). "Solid waste, a lever for decarbonization".

Science .

382 (6672): 762.

^ a b Hoy, Zheng Xuan; Woon, Kok Sin; Chin, Wen Cheong; Fan, Yee Van; Yoo, Seung Jick (17 November 2023). "Curbing global solid waste emissions toward net-zero warming futures".

Science .

382 (6672): 797.

^ Caircross, Richard (1 January 2018).

"Longitudinal Study of Wastewater Greases and Their Potential for the Production of Biofuels" .

Energy and Fuels .

32 (2): 1831– 1842.

doi : 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.7b03550 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 .

^ "Environmental and Energy Study Institute Issue Brief" (PDF) .

^ Agaton, Casper Boongaling; Guno, Charmaine Samala; Villanueva, Resy Ordona; Villanueva, Riza Ordona (2020-10-01).

"Economic analysis of waste-to-energy investment in the Philippines: A real options approach" .

Applied Energy .

275 : 115265.

doi : 10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115265 .

ISSN 0306-2619 .

^ US EPA, ORD (26 March 2015).

"Research Grants" .

US EPA .

^ U.S. EPA Letter to Maria Zannes, President, Integrated Waste Services Association Archived 2011-09-28 at the Wayback Machine Further reading [ edit ] Vergara, S. E.; Tchobanoglous, G. (2012).

"Municipal Solid Waste and the Environment: A Global Perspective" .

Annual Review of Environment and Resources .

37 : 277– 309.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-environ-050511-122532 .

Kumar, Sunil; Dhar, Hiya; Nair, Vijay V.; Bhattacharyya, J. K.; Vaidya, A. N.; Akolkar, A. B. (22 March 2016). "Characterization of municipal solid waste in high-altitude sub-tropical regions".

Environmental Technology .

37 (20): 2627– 2637.

doi : 10.1080/09593330.2016.1158322 .

PMID 26915419 .

S2CID 8140600 .

v t e Biosolids , waste , and waste management Major types Agricultural wastewater Biodegradable waste Biomedical waste Brown waste Chemical waste Construction waste Demolition waste Electronic waste by country Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Heat waste Industrial waste Industrial wastewater Litter Marine debris Mining waste Municipal solid waste Open defecation Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Radioactive waste Scrap metal Sewage Sharps waste Surface runoff Toxic waste Processes Anaerobic digestion Balefill Biodegradation Composting Durable good Ecological design Garden waste dumping Illegal dumping Incineration Landfill Landfill mining Mechanical biological treatment Mechanical sorting Photodegradation Reclaimed lumber Recycling appliance recycling battery recycling bottle recycling fluorescent lamp recycling land recycling plastic recycling textile recycling timber recycling tire recycling water heat recycling water recycling shower Repurposing Resource recovery Reusable packaging Right to repair Sewage treatment Urban mining Waste collection Waste sorting Waste trade Waste treatment Waste-to-energy Countries Afghanistan Albania Armenia Australia Belgium Bangladesh Brazil Bosnia and Herzegovina Egypt Georgia Hong Kong India Israel Japan Kazakhstan New Zealand Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Switzerland Syria Tanzania Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States Agreements Bamako Convention Basel Convention EU directives batteries Recycling framework incineration landfills RoHS vehicles waste water WEEE London Convention Oslo Convention OSPAR Convention Occupations Sanitation worker Street sweeper Waste collector Waste picker Other topics Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future China's waste import ban Cleaner production Downcycling Eco-industrial park Extended producer responsibility High-level radioactive waste management History of waste management Landfill fire Sewage regulation and administration Supervised injection site Toxic colonialism Upcycling Waste hierarchy Waste legislation Waste minimisation Zero waste Environment portal Category: Waste Index Journals Lists Organizations Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Municipal_solid_waste&oldid=1303431797 " Category : Waste Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2012 United States-centric Articles needing additional references from April 2011 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 00:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Municipal solid waste 36 languages Add topic

