Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Examples 3 As subobjects 4 Submodel 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Substructure (mathematics) 4 languages Português Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Structure in mathematical logic This article is about mathematics. For substructures of buildings in civil engineering, see Substructure (engineering) .

In mathematical logic , an ( induced ) substructure or ( induced ) subalgebra is a structure whose domain is a subset of that of a bigger structure, and whose functions and relations are restricted to the substructure's domain. Some examples of subalgebras are subgroups , submonoids , subrings , subfields , subalgebras of algebras over a field , or induced subgraphs . Shifting the point of view, the larger structure is called an extension or a superstructure of its substructure.

In model theory , the term " submodel " is often used as a synonym for substructure, especially when the context suggests a theory of which both structures are models.

In the presence of relations (i.e. for structures such as ordered groups or graphs , whose signature is not functional) it may make sense to relax the conditions on a subalgebra so that the relations on a weak substructure (or weak subalgebra ) are at most those induced from the bigger structure. Subgraphs are an example where the distinction matters, and the term "subgraph" does indeed refer to weak substructures.

Ordered groups , on the other hand, have the special property that every substructure of an ordered group which is itself an ordered group, is an induced substructure.

Definition [ edit ] Given two structures A and B of the same signature σ, A is said to be a weak substructure of B , or a weak subalgebra of B , if the domain of A is a subset of the domain of B , f A = f B | A n for every n -ary function symbol f in σ, and R A ⊆ ⊆ {\displaystyle \subseteq } R B ∩ ∩ {\displaystyle \cap } A n for every n -ary relation symbol R in σ.

A is said to be a substructure of B , or a subalgebra of B , if A is a weak subalgebra of B and, moreover, R A = R B ∩ ∩ {\displaystyle \cap } A n for every n -ary relation symbol R in σ.

If A is a substructure of B , then B is called a superstructure of A or, especially if A is an induced substructure, an extension of A .

Examples [ edit ] Some substructure relations of common associative algebras. The upper lattice shows subalgebras and is in Galois correspondence with the lattice of groups generated by basis elements.

In the language consisting of the binary operations + and ×, binary relation <, and constants 0 and 1, the structure ( Q , +, ×, <, 0, 1) is a substructure of ( R , +, ×, <, 0, 1). More generally, the substructures of an ordered field (or just a field ) are precisely its subfields. Similarly, in the language (×, −1 , 1) of groups, the substructures of a group are its subgroups . In the language (×, 1) of monoids , however, the substructures of a group are its submonoids . They need not be groups; and even if they are groups, they need not be subgroups.

Subrings are the substructures of rings , and subalgebras are the substructures of algebras over a field .

In the case of graphs (in the signature consisting of one binary relation), subgraphs , and its weak substructures are precisely its subgraphs.

As subobjects [ edit ] For every signature σ, induced substructures of σ-structures are the subobjects in the concrete category of σ-structures and strong homomorphisms (and also in the concrete category of σ-structures and σ- embeddings ). Weak substructures of σ-structures are the subobjects in the concrete category of σ-structures and homomorphisms in the ordinary sense.

Submodel [ edit ] In model theory, given a structure M which is a model of a theory T , a submodel of M in a narrower sense is a substructure of M which is also a model of T . For example, if T is the theory of abelian groups in the signature (+, 0), then the submodels of the group of integers ( Z , +, 0) are the substructures which are also abelian groups. Thus the natural numbers ( N , +, 0) form a substructure of ( Z , +, 0) which is not a submodel, while the even numbers (2 Z , +, 0) form a submodel.

Other examples: The algebraic numbers form a submodel of the complex numbers in the theory of algebraically closed fields .

The rational numbers form a submodel of the real numbers in the theory of fields .

Every elementary substructure of a model of a theory T also satisfies T ; hence it is a submodel.

In the category of models of a theory and embeddings between them, the submodels of a model are its subobjects .

See also [ edit ] Conservative extension (model theory) Elementary substructure End extension Löwenheim–Skolem theorem Prime model References [ edit ] Burris, Stanley N.; Sankappanavar, H. P. (1981), A Course in Universal Algebra , Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag Diestel, Reinhard (2005) [1997], Graph Theory , Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 173 (3rd ed.), Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag , ISBN 978-3-540-26183-4 Hodges, Wilfrid (1997), A shorter model theory , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , ISBN 978-0-521-58713-6 v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Substructure_(mathematics)&oldid=1299182034 " Categories : Mathematical logic Model theory Universal algebra Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 23:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Substructure (mathematics) 4 languages Add topic

