Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 Spread 3 Analysis Toggle Analysis subsection 3.1 Joshua Cooper Ramo 3.2 In China 3.3 Daniel Bell 3.4 Frank Fang 3.5 Arif Dirlik 3.6 Stefan Halper 3.7 Zhang Feng 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Beijing Consensus 8 languages Čeština Español Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Русский 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic policies of post-Maoist China Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e Politics of China Leadership Leadership generations Succession of power Hu–Wen Administration (2002–2012) Xi–Li Administration (2012–2017) Xi's general secretaryship (since 2012) 4th Leadership Core : Xi Jinping 20th Party Politburo : Xi Jinping 14th State Council : Li Qiang Current state leaders Current provincial leaders Party and state leaders Orders of precedence Paramount leader : Xi Jinping First lady : Peng Liyuan Communist Party leader : Xi Jinping State representative : Xi Jinping Head of government : Li Qiang Congress Chairman : Zhao Leji Conference Chairman : Wang Huning Commander-in-chief : Xi Jinping Politburo Standing Committee longest-serving members Related systems Unified power Democratic centralism Collective leadership Organization Department Elections Civil service Constitution Law Constitution Previous constitutions 1954 1975 1978 "People's democratic dictatorship" (Article 1) Democratic centralism (Article 3) Constitutional oath of office (Article 27) Protection of human rights (Article 33) Freedom of religion (Article 36) Highest state organ of power (Article 57) Chinese legal system Civil law tradition Socialist law tradition Laws Legislation Law List of statutes General Principles of the Civil Law (to 2020) Civil Code (from 2021) Marriage Law Labour law Labour Law Labour Contract Law Property law Property Law Intellectual property law Patent law Administrative law Administrative Procedure Law Criminal law Capital punishment Capital offences Death sentence with reprieve Communist Party History Principal leaders Constitution and ideology Admission Oath (Article 6) Socialism with Chinese characteristics Communism Marxism–Leninism Mao Zedong Thought Deng Xiaoping Theory Primary stage of socialism Four Cardinal Principles Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Harmonious Socialist Society Xi Jinping Thought Chinese Dream Democracy Whole-process people's democracy Organization National Party Congress ( 20th ) Central Committee ( 20th ) General Secretary ( list ) Xi Jinping Central Politburo ( 20th ) Standing Committee ( 20th ) Central Secretariat ( 20th ) First-ranked secretary: Cai Qi Central Military Commission Chairman : Xi Jinping Vice Chairmen : Zhang Youxia , He Weidong National Security Commission Chairman: Xi Jinping Vice-Chairman: Li Qiang , Zhao Leji , Cai Qi Office Chief: Cai Qi Comprehensively Deepening Reforms Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Directors: Li Qiang , Wang Huning , Cai Qi Secretary-General: Wang Huning Financial & Economic Affairs Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Director: Li Qiang Office Chief: He Lifeng General Office Director : Cai Qi Office of the General Secretary Director: Han Shiming Central Guard Bureau Central Guard Unit Office of the Central Secrecy Commission Organization Department Head : Shi Taifeng Central Commission for Discipline Inspection ( 20th ) Standing Committee ( 20th ) Secretary : Li Xi Commission for Discipline Inspection of the Central Military Commission Secretary: Zhang Shengmin Central Leading Group for Inspection Work Leader: Li Xi Provincial committee Standing committee Secretary Deputy secretaries Party group National People's Congress ( 14th ) Elections Democracy System of people's congress Standing Committee ( 14th ) Council of Chairpersons Chairman : Zhao Leji Vice-Chairpersons Top-ranked: Li Hongzhong Secretary-General : Liu Qi Special Committees Ethnic Affairs Constitution and Law Supervisory and Judicial Affairs Financial and Economic Affairs Education, Science, Culture and Public Health Foreign Affairs Overseas Chinese Affairs Environmental Protection and Resources Conservation Agriculture and Rural Affairs Social Development Affairs Presidium State representative President ( list ): Xi Jinping Presidential Office Chief: Han Shiming Vice President : Han Zheng Executive organ State Council (Central People's Government) Li Qiang Cabinet Premier ( list ): Li Qiang Vice-Premiers ( list ) Ding Xuexiang He Lifeng Zhang Guoqing Liu Guozhong State Councilors Wang Xiaohong Wu Zhenglong Shen Yiqin Secretary-General : Wu Zhenglong Cabinet-level departments National Development & Reform Commission Central bank National Audit Office General Office Secretary-General Deputy Secretaries-General State-owned Assets Supervision & Administration Commission most Central Enterprises Military organ Central Military Commission (CMC) Chairman ( supreme commander ): Xi Jinping Vice Chairmen : Zhang Youxia He Weidong Members: Liu Zhenli Miao Hua Zhang Shengmin Departments: General Office Director: Zhong Shaojun Joint Staff Dept.

Chief : Liu Zhenli Political Work Dept.

Director: Miao Hua Logistic Support Dept.

Director: Zhang Lin Equipment Development Dept.

Director: Xu Xueqiang Training and Administration Dept.

Director: Wang Peng National Defense Mobilization Dept.

Director: Liu Faqing Discipline Inspection Commission Secretary: Zhang Shengmin Politics and Legal Affairs Commission Science and Technology Commission Strategic Planning Office Reform & Organizational Structure Office Int'l Military Cooperation Office Audit Office Offices Administration Agency National armed forces: People's Liberation Army Theater commands People's Armed Police 1st Mobile Contingent 2nd Mobile Contingent China Coast Guard Militia State Council National Defense Mobilization Commission Chairman : Li Qiang Ministry of National Defense Minister : Dong Jun Ministry of Veterans Affairs State Administration for Sci., Tech. & Industry for National Defense Military history Armed conflicts Military modernization Military reform since 2015 CMC Leading Group for Military Reform Leader: Xi Jinping Supervisory organ National Supervisory Commission Director : Liu Jinguo Corruption in China Anti-corruption campaign since 2012 Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong) Commission Against Corruption (Macau) Judicial organs Supreme People's Court President : Zhang Jun People's Courts Judicial Police Supreme People's Procuratorate Procurator-General : Ying Yong People's Procuratorates Judicial Police Judiciary of Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal Department of Justice Prosecutions Division Law enforcement in Hong Kong Disciplined Services Security Bureau Hong Kong Police Force Judiciary of Macau Court of Final Appeal Public Prosecutions Office Secretariat for Security Macau Security Force Unitary Police Services [ zh ] Public Security Police Judiciary Police [ zh ] United front System of multi-party cooperation and political consultation Political Consultative Conference National Committee ( 14th ) Chairman : Wang Huning Vice-Chairpersons Top-ranked: Shi Taifeng Secretary-General : Wang Dongfeng Political parties : CCP (ruling) United Front Work Department Head : Li Ganjie Democratic parties RCCK CDL CNDCA CAPD CPWDP CZGP JS TDSL Historical parties: KMT CDSP YCP Federation of Industry and Commerce People's organizations Law enforcement CCP Central Politics and Law Commission Secretary : Chen Wenqing Enforced disappearance Ministry of Public Security Minister : Wang Xiaohong Public Security Organs People's Police State Immigration Administration Local public security bureaus Ministry of State Security Minister : Chen Yixin State Security Organs People's Police Ministry of Justice Minister : He Rong Judicial Administrative Organs People's Police People's Armed Police 1st Mobile Contingent 2nd Mobile Contingent China Coast Guard Bureau of Prison Administration [ zh ] Office for Safeguarding National Security Urban Management (chengguan) Propaganda Central Leading Group for Propaganda, Ideology and Culture Leader: Cai Qi Deputy Leaders: Li Shulei , Shen Yiqin Central Guidance Commission on Building Spiritual Civilization Director: Cai Qi Deputy Director: Li Shulei Publicity Department of the Chinese Communist Party Head : Li Shulei General Administration of Press and Publication China Film Administration State Council Information Office China Daily Ministry of Culture and Tourism National Radio and Television Administration China Media Group China Central Television China Global Television Network China National Radio China Radio International Xinhua News Agency Reference News China News Service People's Daily Global Times China Today Censorship in China Great Cannon Great Firewall Overseas censorship Radio jamming Media of China Internal media International communication centers Publishing industry in China Internet in China Internet censorship Central Cyberspace Affairs Commission Director: Cai Qi Cyberspace Administration of China Director: Zhuang Rongwen Hong Kong Macau Central Leading Group on Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Leader: Ding Xuexiang HK & Macau Affairs Office Director: Xia Baolong Hong Kong Liaison Office Macau Liaison Office One country, two systems Special administrative regions Hong Kong Basic Law Chief Executive : John Lee Ka-chiu Hong Kong SAR Government Politics of Hong Kong Pro-Beijing camp Pro-democracy camp Independence movement Mainland & HK CEPA Macao Basic Law Chief Executive : Ho Iat-seng Macau SAR Government Politics of Macau Mainland & Macau CEPA Cross-strait relations Cross-strait relations Chinese Civil War One China Political status of Taiwan Republic of China on Taiwan Taiwan Area "Taiwan Province", PRC Taiwan independence movement Anti-Secession Law Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement Chinese unification Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs Leader: Xi Jinping Deputy Leader: Wang Huning Taiwan Affairs Office Director: Song Tao Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits Foreign relations Central Foreign Affairs Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Director: Li Qiang Secretary-General: Wang Yi Ministry of Foreign Affairs Minister : Wang Yi Spokespersons Diplomatic missions Diplomatic missions of China / in China Foreign aid from China / to China International Development Cooperation Agency Ministry of Commerce Exim Bank of China China Development Bank Belt and Road Initiative Silk Road Fund Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank BRICS New Development Bank Ministry of National Defense International Military Cooperation Office NPC Foreign Affairs Committee CCP International Department State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs Overseas Chinese Affairs Office Chinese nationality law Chinese passports ( Hong Kong ; Macau ) Visa requirements for Chinese citizens ( Hong Kong , Macau ) Visa policy of China ( Hong Kong ; Macau ) National Immigration Administration Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Panda diplomacy Beijing Consensus Community of Common Destiny China and the United Nations China and the World Trade Organization Shanghai Cooperation Organisation China–Africa relations China–Arab relations China–Caribbean relations China–European Union relations China–Latin America relations China–Pacific relations China–Russia relations China–United States relations Related topics Administrative divisions Chinese information operations Ethnic minorities Family planning Hukou system Human rights in China Chinese intelligence activity abroad China portal Other countries v t e The Beijing Consensus ( Chinese : 北京共识 ) or China Model ( Chinese : 中国模式 ), also known as the Chinese Economic Model , [ 1 ] is the political and economic policies of the People's Republic of China (PRC) [ 2 ] that began to be instituted by Hua Guofeng and Deng Xiaoping after Mao Zedong 's death in 1976. The policies are thought to have contributed to China's "economic miracle" and eightfold growth in gross national product over two decades.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In 2004, the phrase "Beijing Consensus" was coined by Joshua Cooper Ramo to frame China's economic development model as an alternative—especially for developing countries—to the Washington Consensus of market-friendly policies promoted by the IMF , World Bank , and U.S. Treasury .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In 2016, Ramo explained that the Beijing Consensus shows not that "every nation will follow China's development model, but that it legitimizes the notion of particularity as opposed to the universality of a Washington model".

[ 7 ] The term's definition is not agreed upon. Ramo has detailed it as a pragmatic policy that uses innovation and experimentation to achieve "equitable, peaceful high-quality growth", and "defense of national borders and interests", [ 4 ] whereas other scholars have used it to refer to "stable, if repressive, politics and high-speed economic growth".

[ 8 ] Others criticize its vagueness, claiming that there is "no consensus as to what it stands for" other than being an alternative to the neoliberal Washington Consensus, [ 9 ] and that the term "is applied to anything that happens in Beijing, regardless of whether or not it has to do with a 'Chinese Model of Development,' or even with the People's Republic of China (PRC) per se".

[ 10 ] Characteristics [ edit ] In academic literature on economics the study of the modern People's Republic of China (PRC) is influenced by parallel academic evaluations of neoliberalism .

[ 11 ] The China Model is sometimes used interchangeably with the Beijing Consensus, [ 1 ] though there are people who state "it is inaccurate to describe the Chinese model as the 'Beijing consensus' versus the ' Washington consensus '." [ 12 ] As of at least early 2024, there is not yet a well-developed theoretical framework for a Chinese Model.

[ 13 ] : 51 Commentators have cited various aspects of China's historical experience to describe their views of such a model.

[ 13 ] : 50–51 There is general scholarly agreement that the four key characteristics of the concept are: (1) development is key to promoting peace and stability, (2) incremental political reform better promotes peace and stability than sudden reform, (3) robust state capacity is critical to implementing development plans and managing conflicts within a country, and (4) preserving sovereignty and independence are important to peace and stability.

[ 13 ] : 49–51 For example, Academic Zhang Weiwei characterizes the model as focusing on down-to-earth pragmatic concern with serving the people; [ 12 ] constant trial and error experimentation; [ 12 ] gradual reform rather than neo-liberal economic shock therapy ; [ 12 ] a strong and pro-development state; [ 12 ] "selective cultural borrowing" of foreign ideas; [ 12 ] a pattern of implementing easy reforms first, difficult ones later.

[ 12 ] Researcher John Williamson describes the Beijing Consensus as consisting of five points: Incremental Reform (as opposed to a Big Bang approach), Innovation and Experimentation, Export Led Growth , State Capitalism (as opposed to Socialist Planning or Free Market Capitalism), Authoritarianism (as opposed to a Democratic regime type).

[ 14 ] Observations of Western commentators sometimes characterize the model as replacing trust in the free market for economic growth with "a more muscular state hand on the levers of capitalism"; [ 15 ] an absence of political liberalization; [ 3 ] strong leading role of ruling political party; [ 3 ] population control.

[ 16 ] Spread [ edit ] The model began to receive considerable attention following the 2008-9 severe economic downturn as Western economies faltered and recovered slowly while Chinese economic growth remained dynamic; comparisons began to portray the China Model or the "Beijing Consensus" as China's alternative to the "Washington Consensus"  liberal-market approach.

[ 15 ] As China's economic growth has continued, the China Model or the "Beijing Consensus" as a template has grown more popular around the world. According to Indonesian scholar Ignatius Wibowo, "the China Model clearly has gained ground in Southeast Asia" as countries there "have shifted their development strategy from one based on free markets and democracy to one based on semi-free markets and an illiberal political system." Under Chinese Communist Party general secretary Xi Jinping , China has become an active participant: launching the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), increasing foreign aid and investment around the world,  and by providing training in economic management and various civil-service skills for more than 10,000 bureaucrats from other developing countries. The training includes sessions where China's successes in improving living standards are promoted.

[ 8 ] Analysis [ edit ] Joshua Cooper Ramo [ edit ] The term's birth into the mainstream political lexicon was in 2004 when the United Kingdom 's Foreign Policy Centre published a paper by Joshua Cooper Ramo titled The Beijing Consensus.

[ 4 ] In this paper, he laid out three broad guidelines for economic development under what he called the "China model". Ramo was a former senior editor and foreign editor of Time magazine and later a partner at Kissinger Associates , the consulting firm of former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger .

[ 9 ] The first guideline involves a "commitment to innovation and constant experimentation." One of the major criticisms of the Washington Consensus is its complacency. Ramo argues that there is no perfect solution, and that the only true path to success is one that is dynamic, as no one plan works for every situation.

[ 9 ] The second guideline states that per capita income (GDP/capita) should not be the lone measure of progress. Rather, Ramo feels that the sustainability of the economic system and an even distribution of wealth, along with GDP , are important indicators of progress.

[ 9 ] The third guideline urges a policy of self-determination , where the less-developed nations use leverage to keep the superpowers in check and assure their own financial sovereignty. This includes not only financial self-determination, but also a shift to the most effective military strategy, which Ramo suggests is more likely to be an asymmetric strategy rather than one that seeks direct confrontation. Unlike the Washington Consensus, which largely ignored questions of geo-politics , Ramo argues—particularly in the Chinese context—that geo-politics and geoeconomics are fundamentally linked.

In China [ edit ] Among Chinese elites, the debate over whether a Beijing Consensus or China Model exists is a highly divisive topic.

[ 17 ] : 201 Academic David Daokui Li characterizes Chinese officials and academics as frequently "allergic" to the topic, often viewing it as more appropriate to discuss the "Chinese experience" but premature to view that experience as a "model".

[ 17 ] : 201 Among the major Chinese proponents of a China Model is Zhang Weiwei , who defines the model as a blend of a planned economy with market mechanisms and a top-down governance structure complemented by some grassroots electoral participation.

[ 18 ] : 29–30 Xi Jinping states that China does not seek to export its socialist system or its developmental model.

[ 19 ] : 190 According to Xi, developing countries can and should learn from Chinese wisdom and solutions as appropriate.

[ 19 ] : 190 Daniel Bell [ edit ] Daniel Bell asserts that the China Model China's strategy is creating free-market capitalism with an authoritarian one-party state that prioritizes political stability. Yet he unveils more complexity to the China Model in his analysis.

[ 20 ] On the economic side, he argues that though the flow of labor, capital, and commodities resembles a free-market economy , the government still has a tight grip on key industries, including "utilities, transportation, telecommunications, finance, and the media." He describes China's economic model as a "three-tier enterprise system consisting of large, central government firms; hybrid local and foreign firms; and small-scale capitalism." On the politics side, though security apparatus is essential to the CCP, CCP has initiated some reforms, unlike the dictatorships in North Korea and the Middle East. He again proposes a three-tier model: "democracy at the bottom, experimentation in the middle, and meritocracy at the top." He concludes that, since these characteristics are unique to China, it is permissible to call it the China Model.

Frank Fang [ edit ] Frank Fang defends the China Model—mainly, the state structure of One-Party Constitutionalism—in the article "Taking the China Model Seriously: One-Party Constitutionalism and Economic Development," published in Contemporary Chinese Political Thought, 2012.

[ 21 ] China's nominal GDP trend from 1952 to 2005. Note the rapid increase since reform in the late 1970s.

Partly, Fang's formulation of One-Party Constitutionalism is a response to Fukuyama's " End of History " thesis— "the end point of mankind's ideological evolution and the universalization of Western liberal democracy as the final form of human government." [ 22 ] Rather, he posits that each form of state has its weaknesses, and democracy is not the necessarily the one with the fewest; he argues that the China's "dominant-party rulership," which characterizes the China Model, is thriving.

To push forward this notion of "dominant-party rulership," Fang introduces the concept of "property right theory of the state." He asserts that state should not be conceived with "numbers of rulers"—like monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy; rather, state is considered as an "object," or a special firm or organization, to be taken and owned by different "entities." In the light of this interpretation, Fang believes that the "impersonality" and "perpetuality"—or the quality and characteristics—of the entity owning the state, rather than the number of rulers (one for monarchy or many for democracy), should be the standard of evaluation of state structure.

In the light of this model, Fang believes that the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) should be exalted because its presidency with a term limit is a "merit-based system." Fang holds that the five-year, two-term presidential term reflects the virtue of "constitutionalization", although the Chinese President is a figurehead with limited powers.  Differentiating this model from previous communist leadership, Fang proposes that the term limit institutes "party-based meritocracy," internally electing a strong leader with merits and competency: "In the current regime under the CCP, the long-practiced hereditary succession in dynastic politics came to an end. This is common sense, plain and simple. yet party politics with succession (with term limits) had been institutionally transformed from a genetics-driven to a merit-driven arrangement. The logic here is that the merit-driven arrangement would inevitably evolve from reliance on revolutionary credentials, for the first- generation leaders, to reliance on regime-building credentials, for later- generation leaders. in other words, dynastic politics appealed to the "man- date of heaven" and genetics for legitimacy; party politics appealed to the "mandate of merit" and performance for legitimacy. The genetics factor is gone, the patronage factor still helps, and the merit factor is of overwhelming importance." Fang's essay was published in 2012, before Xi Jinping removed the presidential term limit in 2018.

[ 23 ] Arif Dirlik [ edit ] One critic of Ramo's plan is University of Oregon professor Arif Dirlik , a "notable specialist in Chinese and in intellectual history," who wrote the paper Beijing Consensus: Beijing "Gongshi." Who Recognizes Whom and to What End.

Although Dirlik is intrigued by the concepts and philosophy of Ramo's Beijing Consensus, he says that Ramo's plan is a "Silicon Valley model of development" that ignores the fact that the exploitation of China's labor force by foreign countries was a major part of the Chinese development.

[ 9 ] Ultimately though, and despite other criticism, Dirlik concludes that the Beijing Consensus does serve an important goal: "The most important aspect of the Beijing Consensus may be an approach to global relationships that seeks, in multinational relationships, a new global order founded on economic relationships, but which also recognizes political and cultural difference as well as differences in regional and national practices within a common global framework." [ 10 ] Stefan Halper [ edit ] Stefan Halper , Director of American Studies at the Department of Politics, University of Cambridge and foreign policy official in the Nixon , Ford , and Reagan administrations, offered his own interpretation of the term in his 2012 book, The Beijing Consensus: How China's Authoritarian Model Will Dominate the Twenty-First Century . Halper argues that China's model of economic development without corresponding democratic reforms is serving as a template throughout the developing world . It is one that Beijing eagerly exports (as demonstrated by its support of other illiberal regimes, such as those in Sudan , Angola , or Zimbabwe ) by offering developing countries "no-strings-attached gifts and loans", rather than "promoting democracy through economic aid", as does the West.

[ 24 ] Halper argues China's dependence on natural resources will lock Beijing into relationships with rogue states and that Beijing will not feel increasing pressure to democratize as it grows richer, because it is wealth that gives the regime its legitimacy.

[ 25 ] He sees this as establishing a trend "Away from the market - democratic model—and toward a new type of capitalism , which can flourish without the values and norms of Western liberalism " [ 26 ] which could ultimately supplant the Washington consensus .

Zhang Feng [ edit ] The China Model also extends to other fields besides the state structure and economics. Zhang Feng [ who?

] extends the discussion to the field of international relations , critiquing the development of "IR theory with Chinese characteristics" and "the Chinese School" of IR.

[ 27 ] The first mention of term "IR theory with Chinese characteristics" was in 1987, it was later developed by Liang Shoude, a prominent IR Scholar at Peking University . He believes IR theory with Chinese Characteristics should be "developed under the guidance of Marxism, that are based on the paradigms of the international political theory of Chinese statesmen, that draw on both China's cultural tradition and Western IR theory." [ 28 ] Fang raises several objections to this model, pointing to vagueness of "Chinese Characteristics" and suggesting that the theory might be "an academic variant of the political slogan 'socialism with Chinese characteristics'." Also, he posits that the "explanatory power"—the ability to explain different situations using the theory—is the main concern for the IR with Chinese Characteristics than defining what it is precisely.

Starting from 2000, there are more voices for "Chinese School of IR", evidenced by a conference in Shanghai 2004 with the theme of "creating Chinese theories, constructing the Chinese School." Yet, Feng thinks this school has not been established so far, although the motivation of such school is clear: "Chinese scholars' confidence, ambition, and self-consciousness about theoretical innovation." [ 29 ] Feng, again, raises several objections. He points out that Chinese scholars seem to be obsessed with "grand theory" while methodology and empirical research is usually overlooked. Further, he observes that Chinese scholars seem to be not so critical and reflective on how Chinese traditions might play a role in IR; they rather draw ideas from other academic fields from history, culture, and philosophy, which might not be compatible with academic discipline of IR as it is positivist in nature.

Criticism [ edit ] Critics at the free-market oriented magazine The Economist have called the model "unclear" and an invention of "American think-tank eggheads" and "plumage-puffed Chinese academics".

[ 15 ] Instead of strong government, critics have stated that China's success results from its "vast, cheap labor supply", its "attractive internal market for foreign investment", and its access to the American market, which provides a perfect spendthrift counterpart for China's exports and a high savings rate.

[ 15 ] In May 2012, The New York Times stated that China had released data that "showed its economy was continuing to weaken", and quoted a political scientist at Renmin University of China in Beijing (Zhang Ming) as saying: Many economic problems that we face are actually political problems in disguise, such as the nature of the economy, the nature of the ownership system in the country and groups of vested interests. ... The problems are so serious that they have to be solved now and can no longer be put off.

[ 30 ] In 2018, Zhang Weiying , professor at Peking University 's National School of Development, argued that China's economic development since 1978 was not due to a distinctive "China model". He added that, "From the western perspective, the 'China model' theory makes China into an alarming outlier, and must lead to conflict between China and the western world", adding that the tariffs and the trade war pursued by U.S. president Donald Trump are an understandable response to perceived antagonism from China: "In the eyes of westerners, the so-called 'China model' is ' state capitalism ', which is incompatible with fair trade and world peace and must not be allowed to advance triumphantly without impediment".

[ 31 ] This speech was removed from the university website after it was widely circulated online. Shen Hong of the Unirule Institute of Economics warned against abandoning Deng Xiaoping 's post-1978 neoliberal reforms in China , telling the Financial Times : "Without a doubt, reform and opening up eliminated the ideological conflict between China and the US, as well as the whole western world, and gradually brought convergence in terms of values".

[ 31 ] See also [ edit ] Asian Century Development economics Developmentalism Globalism Mumbai Consensus Seoul Development Consensus Washington Consensus Chinese economic reform Deng Xiaoping § Economic reforms Developmental state Socialist market economy State capitalism References [ edit ] ^ a b Zhang, Jiakun Jack (15 April 2011).

"Seeking the Beijing Consensus in Asia: An Empirical Test of Soft Power" (PDF) . Duke University.

hdl : 10161/5383 . Retrieved 28 January 2014 .

This paper represents a first-cut effort at operationalizing and measuring the so-called Beijing Consensus (or China Model), a form of state capitalism which some see as an ideological alternative to the Washington Consensus and a challenge to American soft power.

^ Zhang Weiwei, "The allure of the Chinese model" Archived 2014-02-03 at the Wayback Machine , International Herald Tribune , 2 November 2006.

^ a b c "Commentator doubts efficacy of "Chinese model" for Iran"| BBC Monitoring Middle East - Political [London] 4 May 2002: 1.

^ a b c Ramo, Joshua Cooper (May 2004).

The Beijing Consensus (PDF) . The Foreign Policy Centre.

ISBN 1903558352 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 August 2013 . Retrieved 28 January 2014 .

^ "International Political Economy Zone: Is There a Beijing Consensus?" ^ Turin, Dustin R. (2010).

"China and the Beijing Consensus: An Alternative Model for Development" .

Student Pulse Academic Journal .

2 (1): 13.

^ Maurits Elen (August 2016).

"Interview: Joshua Cooper Ramo" .

The Diplomat .

^ a b Kurlantzick, Joshua (23 January 2014).

"The Rise of Elected Autocrats Threatens Democracy" .

Bloomberg Businessweek . Retrieved January 28, 2014 .

China's stable, if repressive, politics and high-speed economic growth—the "Beijing Consensus"—have impressed elites in places such as Thailand, where democracy seems to have produced only graft, muddled economic planning, and political strife ^ a b c d e Leonard, Andrew (15 September 2006).

"No consensus on the Beijing Consensus" .

Salon .

^ a b Dirlik, Arif. University of Oregon. " Beijing Consensus: Beijing 'Gongshi.' Archived 2014-02-02 at the Wayback Machine " ^ Michael Keith; Scott Lash; Jakob Arnoldi; Tyler Rooker (2013).

China Constructing Capitalism: Economic Life and Urban Change . Taylor & Francis. p. 16.

ISBN 9781134004522 .

^ a b c d e f g ZHANG, Weiwei (2 November 2006).

"The allure of the Chinese model" (PDF) .

International Herald Tribune . Retrieved 28 January 2014 .

^ a b c Meng, Wenting (2024).

Developmental Piece: Theorizing China's Approach to International Peacebuilding . Ibidem.

Columbia University Press .

ISBN 9783838219073 .

^ Williamson, John (2012).

"Is the "Beijing Consensus" Now Dominant?" .

Asia Policy (13): 1– 16.

ISSN 1559-0968 .

JSTOR 24905162 .

^ a b c d "Beware the Beijing model" .

The Economist . 26 May 2009 . Retrieved October 30, 2014 .

^ 'India should adopt Chinese model' The Statesman [New Delhi] 14 Nov 1999: 1.

^ a b Li, David Daokui (2024).

China's World View: Demystifying China to Prevent Global Conflict . New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0393292398 .

^ Zhang, Chuchu (2025).

China's Changing Role in the Middle East: Filling a Power Vacuum?

. Changing Dynamics in Asia-Middle East Relations series. Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY: Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-032-76275-3 .

^ a b Tsang, Steve ; Cheung, Olivia (2024).

The Political Thought of Xi Jinping .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780197689363 .

^ Bell, Daniel (2 June 2015).

The China model : political meritocracy and the limits of democracy .

ISBN 9781400865505 .

OCLC 1032362345 .

^ Fang, Frank, "Taking the China Model Seriously: One-Party Constitutionalism and Economic Development." ^ Fukuyama, Francis (2012).

The end of history and the last man . Penguin.

ISBN 978-0241960240 .

OCLC 835781870 .

^ "China approves 'president for life' change" . 2018-03-11 . Retrieved 2019-04-15 .

^ Halper, Stefan (2010).

The Beijing consensus : how China's authoritarian model will dominate the twenty-first century . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0465013616 .

^ Nathan, Andrew J. (May–June 2010).

"The Beijing Consensus: How China's Authoritarian Model Will Dominate the Twenty-first Century" (book review) .

Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 28 January 2014 .

^ " Stefan Halper on the Beijing Consensus" .

The Globalist . 2 October 2010.

Note : Not an actual interview, quotations are drawn from book with questions added to provide context.

^ Feng, Zhang, Debating the "Chinese Theory of International Relations": Toward a New Stage in China's International Studies.

^ Liang Shoude, "Zhongguo guoji Zhengzhixue lilun Jianshe de Tansuo" [Explorations into the construction of international political theory in China], Shijie Jingji yu Zhengzhi [World economics and politics] 2 (2005): 16–21.

^ Ren, "Zou Zizhu Fazhan Zhilu," 16.

^ "Doubts cast over China model as growth falters" , The New York Times , 12 May 2012.

^ a b Wildau, Gabriel (30 October 2018).

"Chinese economists blame 'China model' for US trade war" .

Financial Times . Shangai . Retrieved 31 October 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ramo, Joshua The Beijing Consensus ( Foreign Policy Centre , May 2004) Huang, Yasheng, Rethinking the Beijing Consensus ( Asia Policy , January 2011) Williamson, John, Is the "Beijing Consensus" Now Dominant?

( Asia Policy , January 2012) v t e Foreign relations of China Bilateral relations Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of the Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Bahamas Barbados Belize Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Suriname Trinidad and Tobago United States Uruguay Venezuela Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia East Timor Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan history Jordan Kazakhstan Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea History Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore South Korea History Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Northern Domination Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Vatican City Oceania Australia Cook Islands Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Niue Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Former states Soviet Union Yugoslavia Multilateral relations BCIM Economic Corridor BIMSTEC Africa Arab League BRICS Caribbean China–Japan–South Korea European Union Latin America Oceania Third World United Nations Arctic policy of China China and the Antarctic Diplomacy Central Foreign Affairs Commission ( General Secretary ) Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( Foreign Minister ) Diplomatic missions of China / in China Belt and Road Initiative China's core interests China's peaceful rise Chinese Century Chinese sanctions Confucius Institute Dates of diplomatic recognition Foreign policy of China Foreign Relations Law Foreign relations of Hong Kong Nine-dash line Panda diplomacy Political status of Taiwan Chinese unification One China principle Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Stadium diplomacy String of Pearls Major historical splits Soviet Albania Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Treaties Theater diplomacy Wolf warrior diplomacy Xi Jinping Thought on Diplomacy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Beijing_Consensus&oldid=1305484838 " Categories : Economic development policy Development economics Political-economic models Economy of China Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2022 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 09:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Beijing Consensus 8 languages Add topic

