Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usages Toggle Usages subsection 1.1 1st century 1.2 4th century 1.3 16th century 1.4 18th century 1.5 19th century 1.6 20th century 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Sapere aude 33 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Latin phrase meaning "dare to know" Sapere aude is the Latin phrase meaning "Dare to know"; and also is loosely translated as "Have courage to use your own reason", "Dare to know things through reason". Originally used in the First Book of Letters (20 BC), by the Roman poet Horace , the phrase Sapere aude became associated with the Age of Enlightenment , during the 17th and 18th centuries, after Immanuel Kant used it in the essay " Answering the Question: What Is Enlightenment?

" (1784). As a philosopher, Kant claimed the phrase Sapere aude as the motto for the entire period of the Enlightenment, and used it to develop his theories of the application of reason in the public sphere of human affairs.

In 1984, Michel Foucault 's essay "What is Enlightenment?" took up Kant's formulation of "dare to know" in an attempt to find a place for the individual man and woman in post-structuralist philosophy, and so come to terms with what he alleges is the problematic legacy of the Enlightenment. Moreover, in the essay The Baroque Episteme: The Word and the Thing (2013) Jean-Claude Vuillemin proposed that the Latin phrase Sapere aude be the motto of the Baroque episteme .

[ 1 ] The phrase is widely used as a motto , especially by educational institutions.

Usages [ edit ] 1st century [ edit ] Horace The original use of the phrase Sapere aude appears in the First Book of Letters (20 BC), by the Roman poet Horace ; in the second letter, addressed to Lolius, in line 40, the passage is: Dimidium facti, qui coepit, habet; sapere aude, incipe.

("He who has begun is half done; dare to know; begin!") The phrase is the moral to a story in which a fool waits for a stream to cease flowing, before attempting to cross it. In saying, "He who begins is half done. Dare to know, begin!", Horace suggests the value of human endeavour, of persistence in reaching a goal, of the need for effort to overcome obstacles. Moreover, the laconic Latin of Sapere aude also can be loosely translated as the English phrase "Dare to be wise".

4th century [ edit ] Augustine Augustine of Hippo quotes Horace's maxim in his early philosophical dialogue De quantitate animae , [ 2 ] 23.41, telling his interlocutor Evodius not to be afraid of questioning his teaching on the capabilities of the soul: Noli nimis ex auctoritate pendere, praesertim mea quae nulla est; et quod ait Horatius: 'Sapere aude', ne non te ratio subiuget priusquam metus.

"Don't rely so much on authority, especially on mine, which is null. There is also that saying from Horace: 'Dare to be wise!', so that fear may not subdue you more than reason does." 16th century [ edit ] Philip Melanchthon In his inaugural address as Professor of Greek in Wittenberg on August 29, 1518, Philip Melanchthon quoted Horace's letter.

[ 3 ] 18th century [ edit ] Immanuel Kant Answering the Question: What is Enlightenment?

, by Immanuel Kant In the essay, " Answering the Question: What Is Enlightenment?

" (1784), Immanuel Kant describes the Age of Enlightenment as "Man's release from his self-incurred immaturity"; and, with the phrase Sapere aude , the philosopher charges the reader to follow such a program of intellectual self-liberation, by means of Reason . The essay is Kant's shrewd, political challenge to men and women, suggesting that the mass of "domestic cattle" have been bred, by unfaithful stewards, to not question what they have been told about the world and its ways.

Kant classifies the uses of reason as public and private . The public use of reason is discourse in the public sphere , such as political discourse (argument and analysis); the private use of reason is rational argument, such as that used by a person entrusted with a duty, either official or organizational. Skillfully praising King Frederick II of Prussia (r. 1740–86) for his intellectual receptiveness to the political, social, and cultural ideas of the Enlightenment, the philosopher Kant proposes that an enlightened prince is one who instructs his subjects to: "Argue as much as you will, and about what you will, only obey!" It is the courage of the individual man to abide the advice Sapere aude that will break the shackles of despotism , and reveal, through public discourse, for the benefit of the mass population and of the State, better methods of governance, and of legitimate complaint.

[ 4 ] 19th century [ edit ] The founder of homeopathy , Samuel Hahnemann , used the phrase on the cover of his Organon of Medicine (various editions in 1810, 1819, 1824, 1829, 1833 and 1922).

In 1869 the newly-founded University of Otago [ 5 ] in Dunedin chose the phrase as their motto.

20th century [ edit ] Michel Foucault In response to Immanuel Kant's Age of Enlightenment propositions for intellectual courage, in the essay "What is Enlightenment?" (1984), Michel Foucault rejected much of the hopeful politics proposed by Kant: a people ruled by just rulers; ethical leaders inspired by the existential dare advised in the phrase Sapere aude . Instead, Foucault applied ontology to examine the innate resources for critical thinking of a person's faculty of Reason . With the analytical value of Sapere aude reinforced by the concept of "Faithful betrayal" to impracticable beliefs, Foucault disputed the Enlightenment-era arguments that Kant presents in the essay " Answering the Question: What is Enlightenment?

" (1784).

Like his 18th-century predecessor, Foucault also based his philosophic interpretation of Sapere aude upon a definite practice of critical thinking that is an "attitude, an ethos, a philosophical life in which [is found] the critique of what we are". Such an enlightened, intellectual attitude applies reason to experience, and so effects a historical criticism of "the limits that are imposed on us". The criticism is "an experiment with the possibility of going beyond" imposed limits, in order to reach the limit-experience , which simultaneously is an individual, personal act, and an act that breaks the concept of the individual person.

[ 6 ] Vincent Massey Vincent Massey choose the phrase Sapere aude as the motto of Massey College in Toronto that the Massey foundation established in 1963 as residential college , a self-governing unit of the University of Toronto .

See also [ edit ] Liberal Arts and Science Academy , Austin, Texas, has this as its motto.

Ghent University , founded in 1817, has Sapere Aude as its motto.

Wesley College Melbourne , founded in 1866, has Sapere Aude as its motto.

[ 7 ] Durham Johnston Comprehensive School , founded in 1901, has Sapere Aude as its motto.

Epistularum liber primus , Horace 's work containing the original phrase.

Lutterworth College , founded in 1880 (as Lutterworth Grammar School), has Sapere Aude as its motto.

Manchester Grammar School , founded in 1515, has Sapere Aude as its motto.

Miguel de Cervantes European University , founded in 2002, has Sapere Aude as its motto.

Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology , has the motto highlight the school's tradition in groundbreaking fundamental research.

Staffordshire University , adopted Sapere Aude as its motto in 2019.

University of Otago , New Zealand: the phrase serves as its motto; the students' association replies in kind with its motto "Audeamus" (let us dare) Richmond Hill High School , Ontario, Canada, has this as its motto.

West London Free School , London, UK, has this as its motto.

The Tiffin Girls' School , London, UK, has this as its motto.

Oldham Athletic Football Club, Oldham, UK, has this as its motto.

The School of Advanced Warfighting , Marine Corps University, Quantico, VA, USA has this as its motto.

St. Columba's School, Delhi uses Sapere Aude as its motto.

Vilnius TECH , Vilnius, Lithuania uses Sapere Aude as its motto.

Crompton House Church of England School, Oldham, has this as its motto.

References [ edit ] ^ Jean-Claude Vuillemin, Epistémè baroque: le mot et la chose , Paris, Hermann, coll. "Savoir Lettres," 2013.

^ of Hippo, Augustine.

Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum latinorum .

^ Thaidigsmann, Edgar (2014). " "Sapere aude!" ".

Zeitschrift für Theologie und Kirche .

111 (4): 389.

doi : 10.1628/004435414X14135326005951 .

^ "An Answer to the Question: "What is Enlightenment?" " . Archived from the original on 9 February 2008.

^ "University of Otago founded" .

^ "Foucault's Essay, What is Enlightenment?" . Foucault.info . Retrieved 2012-03-08 .

^ website, Wesley (2019-01-01).

"Wesley symbols" .

Wesley website . Retrieved 2021-09-12 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of sapere aude at Wiktionary v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Michel Foucault Books Mental Illness and Psychology (1954) Madness and Civilization (1961) The Birth of the Clinic (1963) Death and the Labyrinth (1963) The Order of Things (1966) This Is Not a Pipe (1968) The Archaeology of Knowledge (1969) Discipline and Punish (1975) The History of Sexuality (1976–2018) Essays, lectures, dialogues and anthologies Introduction to Kant's Anthropology (1964) " What Is an Author?

" (1969) Foucault's lectures at the Collège de France I, Pierre Riviere, Having Slaughtered My Mother, My Sister and My Brother (1973) Language, Counter-Memory, Practice (1977) Herculine Barbin (1978) Power/Knowledge (1980) Remarks on Marx (1980) Le Désordre des familles (1982) The Foucault Reader (1984) " What Is Enlightenment?

" (1984) Politics, Philosophy, Culture (1988) Foucault Live (1996) The Politics of Truth (1997) Society Must Be Defended (1997) Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth (Essential Works Volume 1) (1997) Aesthetics, Method, Epistemology (Essential Works Volume 2) (1998) Abnormal (1999) Power (Essential Works Volume 3) (2000) Fearless Speech (2001) The Hermeneutics of the Subject (2001) The Essential Foucault (2003) Psychiatric Power (2003) Security, Territory, Population (2004) The Birth of Biopolitics (2004) The Government of Self and Others (2008) The Courage of Truth (2009) Lectures on the Will to Know (2011) On the Government of the Living (2012) Subjectivity and Truth (2012) Wrong-Doing, Truth-Telling (2013) On the Punitive Society (2015) Concepts Anti-psychiatry Author function Biopolitics Biopower Carceral archipelago Cultural imperialism Disciplinary institution Discontinuity Discourse analysis Dispositif Episteme Genealogy Governmentality Ecogovernmentality Heterotopia Interdiscourse Limit-experience Parrhesia Power (social and political) Postsexualism Sapere aude Influence " Cogito and the History of Madness " (Derrida) Foucauldian discourse analysis Foucault (Deleuze) The Passion of Michel Foucault (Miller) Giorgio Agamben Gary Gutting Thomas Lemke James Miller Paul Rabinow Claude Raffestin Nikolas Rose Foucault in Iran Related articles Bibliography Foucault–Habermas debate Chomsky–Foucault debate Daniel Defert François Ewald Alan Sheridan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sapere_aude&oldid=1289090804 " Categories : Latin words and phrases Latin mottos Enlightened absolutism Horace Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text This page was last edited on 6 May 2025, at 12:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sapere aude 33 languages Add topic

