Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Program 2 History 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Droemer Knaur 3 languages Deutsch Français Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Publishing group based in Munich Droemer Knaur Industry Publishing house Founded 1846 ; 179 years ago ( 1846 ) Founder Theodor Knaur Headquarters Munich , Germany Key people Bernhard Fetsch [ 1 ] Hans-Peter Uebleis Josef Röckl Owner Holtzbrinck Publishing Group Website www.droemer-knaur.de Droemer Knaur is a publishing group based in Munich . The group consists of the book publishers Droemer, Knaur, the Pattloch Publisher and O.W. Barth. Droemer Knaur belongs to the Georg von Holtzbrinck Publishing Group .

Program [ edit ] Droemer Knaur Publishing publishes novels and nonfiction from German and international authors. Through the broad ranged publishing program and the publication of bestselling authors like Johannes Mario Simmel , Droemer Knaur became one of the most prestigious publishing houses for fiction in Germany. In the category of popular fiction, historical novels, detective stories, thrillers, fantasy and romantic literature are published. In the category non-fiction are among others, biographies, guides, esotericism and conspiracy theories are published. They also publish international bestselling authors for the German market and sell licenses to German authors all over the world.

History [ edit ] The origins of the publishing house lie in the Leipzig steam bookbinding Theodor Knaur, which dates back to 1846. After many individual publications, the Theodor Knaur publishing house had its first regular program in 1884. The publishing house was sold to the Berlin bookseller Gabriel Hendelsohn in 1901, and renamed the Theodor Knaur Nachf. Verlag.

In 1902 Adalbert Droemer came to the publisher as publishing representative. In 1934 the Jewish Hendelsohn brothers fled Nazi persecution and emigrated to the United States and Droemer took over the publishing house. Two years later, Droemer's son Willy Droemer, became part of the publisher's management and succeeded his father after Adalbert Droemer's death in 1939. In October 1939 Theodor Knaur Nachf. published its Knaurs Welt-Atlas with maps that represented the greater German Reich and the lands recently annexed and conquered by the Nazis. In 1943, the company offices and printing presses were destroyed by Allied bombing.

After the end of World War II , Willy Droemer founded the publisher as the new Droemersche Verlagsanstalt, in Schloss Wiesentheid (Unterfranken), which soon after moved to Munich.

Starting in 1970, Willy Droemer and Georg von Holtzbrinck worked together and exchanged company shares. In 1980, the publishing group Georg von Holtzbrinck took over the publishing completely and Droemer withdrew from the management. In 1982, the publishing house took over the Kindler Verlag.

Since 1999, the Droemer Knaur Publishing group was owned as joint venture half by the Georg von Holtzbrinck publishing group and half by Weltbild . 2013 Holtzbrinck group took ownership completely.

[ 2 ] In the same year, the Pattloch Publisher was integrated into the Droemer Knaur publishing group. The Pattloch-Verlag was founded in 1946 in Aschaffenburg and was part of Weltbild publishing group since 1987.

[ 3 ] In the Pattloch publishing, nonfiction books appear from renowned scientists and journalists on social issues. With the authors Manfred Lütz and Raphael M. Bonelli began a tradition of psychotherapeutic bestsellers.

The Droemer Knaur publishing group was no. 1 among the best-selling publishers in 2005 and 2006, according to the bestseller list of Der Spiegel / book report.

Since 2008 Droemer Knaur also publishes e-books. In 2009, the PAN-Verlag was founded, which existed until 2012.

[ 4 ] In 2010, O. W. Barth Verlag (previously S. Fischer Verlag ) was taken over. O.W. Barth was founded in 1924 in Munich and was sold to the Scherz Verlag in Bern in 1973. With this, it was acquired by S. Fischer in 2002.

[ 5 ] The O.W. Barth Verlag describes itself as a publisher of spiritual literature focusing on Eastern wisdom teachings, holistic healing systems and nonfiction, at the intersection between science and spirituality.

[ 6 ] Also in 2010, the online platform neobooks.com was founded and in 2011 the Droemer Paperback .

In October 2024, Droemer Knaur founded the romantasy and romance label Bramble Germany, which publishes German editions of the American Bramble publishing house as well as translated light novels from East Asia.

[ 7 ] The program includes romance and romantasy bestsellers alongside discoveries from China, Japan, and Korea.

[ 8 ] Among the best-known fiction authors of the publishing group include Iny Lorentz, Sebastian Fitzek , Anne Hertz, Sabine Ebert and Andreas Franz. Also known international writers like Karen Rose , Val McDermid , John Katzenbach or Michael Connelly are part of the program.

References [ edit ] ^ "Bernhard Fetsch wird dritter Geschäftsführer" .

boersenblatt.de (in German). 27 January 2015. Archived from the original on 6 October 2016 . Retrieved 10 August 2016 .

^ "Droemer Knaur bald im Alleinbesitz von Holtzbrinck" .

www.boersenblatt.net (in German). 3 July 2013 . Retrieved 14 December 2019 .

^ "Verlagsgruppe Droemer Knaur" .

wer-zu-wem.de (in German) . Retrieved 10 August 2016 .

^ Patricia Keßler (9 September 2009).

"Neuer Verlag für Phantastische Unterhaltung - Verlagsgruppe Droemer Knaur startet PAN" (in German). openPR . Retrieved 10 August 2016 .

^ "Droemer Knaur übernimmt den O.W. Barth Verlag" (in German). Droemer Knaur. 20 January 2010 . Retrieved 10 August 2016 .

^ "Unsere Verlage" (in German). Droemer Knaur. Archived from the original on 8 April 2016 . Retrieved 10 August 2016 .

^ "Knaur bringt Bramble nach Deutschland" .

Börsenblatt . Retrieved 20 August 2024 .

^ "Bramble Verlag - Über uns" .

bramblebooks .

External links [ edit ] Official website History of the publishing house PDF Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine v t e Holtzbrinck Publishing Group Holtzbrinck DIE ZEIT Verlagsgruppe Die Zeit (50%) Zeit Wissen Spotlight Verlag Digital & Services Digital Science Altmetric Gutefrage.net Macmillan United States Trade Farrar, Straus and Giroux First Second Henry Holt Macmillan Audio Picador Quick and Dirty Tips St. Martin's Press Tor/Forge Tor.com Macmillan Learning Bedford-St. Martin's W. H. Freeman Worth Publishers i>clicker Hayden-McNeil Children's FSG Books for Young Readers Feiwel and Friends Holt Books for Young Readers Kingfisher Roaring Brook Priddy Square Fish United Kingdom Macmillan Pan Picador Tor Macmillan Children's Books Campbell Young Picador Sidgwick & Jackson Mantle Macmillan Audio Books Macmillan New Writing The Collector's Library Germany S. Fischer Rowohlt Kiepenheuer & Witsch (85%) Droemer Knaur (50%) Springer Nature (53%) Apress BioMed Central Birkhäuser Macmillan Education Nature Research Journals Palgrave Macmillan Journals Scientific American Springer Journals Springer Gabler Springer Medizin Ärzte-Zeitung Springer Vieweg Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Droemer_Knaur&oldid=1291442863 " Categories : Book publishing companies of Germany Companies based in Munich Holtzbrinck Publishing Group Mass media in Munich 1846 establishments in the German Confederation Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 21 May 2025, at 07:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Droemer Knaur 3 languages Add topic

