Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Timeline 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents The Topeka Capital-Journal Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Topeka Capital-Journal ) Newspaper in Topeka, Kansas "The Capital-Journal" redirects here. For the South Dakota paper, see Capital Journal . For the Salem, Oregon, newspaper, see Capital Journal (Oregon) .

The Topeka Capital-Journal Type Daily newspaper Format Broadsheet Owner(s) Gannett Publisher Stephen Wade Editor Tomari Quinn Founded Topeka Daily Capital: 1879 (with heritage dating to 1858) Topeka State Journal: 1873 Topeka Capital-Journal: 1981 Headquarters 100 SE 9th Street, Suite 500 Topeka, Kansas 66612 USA Circulation 18,388 [ 1 ] Website www .cjonline .com The Topeka Capital-Journal is a daily newspaper in Topeka, Kansas , owned by Gannett .

History [ edit ] The paper was formed following numerous name changes and mergers, including the merger of The Topeka Daily Capital and The Topeka State Journal .

Timeline [ edit ] Capital-Journal newsroom, 1961 1858: The Kansas State Record starts publishing.

1873: The Topeka Blade is founded by J. Clarke Swayze.

1879: George W. Reed buys the Blade and changes its name to The Kansas State Journal .

1879: The Topeka Daily Capital is founded by Major J.K. Hudson as an evening paper but changes to morning in 1881.

1885: Frank P. MacLennan buys the Journal and renames it The Topeka State Journal .

1888: The Capital absorbs the Commonwealth , owned by Floyd Perry Baker and his sons, who had earlier bought the Kansas State Record .

1899: Frederick Oliver Popenoe buys a 51 percent controlling interest in the Capital .

1900: Charles M. Sheldon , saying " Newspapers should be operated as Christ would operate them ," sends the Capital circulation skyrocketing from 12,000 to 387,000, forcing it to print papers in New York and Chicago.

1901: Arthur Capper buys the Capital and becomes sole owner in 1904.

1940: Oscar S. Stauffer buys the Journal .

1951: Capper dies, and the Capital become employee-owned.

1956: Stauffer Communications buys Capper Publications, including the Capital .

1962: Former MacLennan home Cedar Crest becomes the Kansas governor's mansion.

1973: Brian Lanker wins the 1973 Pulitzer Prize for Feature Photography for a series of photos of a childbirth, as exemplified by the image titled " Moment of Life ".

1975: Susan Ford (daughter of Gerald Ford ) and Chris Johns (future editor of National Geographic magazine) intern at paper during the summer.

[ 2 ] 1981: Stauffer Communications merges the Capital and the Journal into The Topeka Capital-Journal , distributed in the morning.

1982: Former owner Oscar S. Stauffer dies at 95.

1994: Stauffer Communications merges with Morris Communications .

[ 3 ] 2017: Morris Communications sells its newspapers to GateHouse Media .

[ 4 ] 2019: GateHouse Media's corporate parent company, New Media Investment Group, announces that it will acquire Gannett and assume its name.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] 2023: The paper announces it's switching from carrier to mail delivery via the U.S. Postal Service.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Kansas portal Journalism portal List of newspapers in Kansas References [ edit ] ^ "Browse Full Member Database | Kansas Press Association" .

kspress.com . Retrieved April 10, 2023 .

^ Hall, Mike (December 28, 2006).

"Ford's Daughter Susan Interned at C-J" .

Topeka Capital-Journal .

^ Morris buys Stauffer , Fort Scott Tribune , July 27, 1994 ^ "Morris Announces Sale of Publications to Gatehouse Media" .

Morris Communications . August 9, 2017 . Retrieved February 19, 2018 .

^ Lombardo, Cara; Trachtenberg, Jeffrey A. (August 5, 2019).

"GateHouse Media Parent to Buy Gannett for $1.4 Billion" .

The Wall Street Journal .

^ "GateHouse Media enters into agreement to acquire Gannett, forming largest U.S. publishing company" .

The Topeka Capital-Journal . September 5, 2019.

Archived from the original on October 31, 2020 . Retrieved October 31, 2020 .

^ "The Topeka Capital-Journal is transitioning to postal delivery in late January" .

The Topeka Capital-Journal . December 29, 2023 . Retrieved December 29, 2023 .

"The Capital-Journal's roots run deep" , The Topeka Capital-Journal , June 1, 2003 External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Gannett People John Jeffry Louis III (chairman) National assets USA Today Golfweek MMA Junkie Reviewed USA Today Sports Weekly v t e Gannett regional daily newspapers in the United States Abilene Reporter-News The Advocate Akron Beacon Journal Alice Echo-News Journal The Alliance Review Amarillo Globe-News The American News Ames Tribune Anderson Independent-Mail Alamogordo Daily News The Ardmoreite Argus Leader The Arizona Republic La Voz Arizona Asbury Park Press Asheville Citizen-Times Athens Banner-Herald The Augusta Chronicle Battle Creek Enquirer The Barnstable Patriot Bartlesville Examiner-Enterprise Bastrop Daily Enterprise The Baxter Bulletin Beauregard Daily News The Beaver County Times Boone News-Republican Boonville Daily News Brownwood Bulletin Bucks County Courier Times The Bulletin Burlington County Times The Burlington Free Press Cambridge Chronicle Cape Cod Times The Carmi Times Charlevoix Courier Cheboygan Daily Tribune Chillicothe Constitution-Tribune Chillicothe Gazette The Cincinnati Enquirer The Clarion-Ledger The Columbus Dispatch Commercial Appeal Corpus Christi Caller-Times Coshocton Tribune Courier Journal Courier News Courier-Post Crookston Daily Times The Daily Advertiser Daily American (IL) Daily American (PA) The Daily Comet Daily Commercial The Daily Herald The Daily Independent The Daily Jeffersonian The Daily Journal The Daily Leader The Daily Ledger Daily Messenger The Daily News Journal Daily Press Daily Record The Daily Reporter The Daily Republican Daily Review Atlas The Daily Telegram The Daily Times (Salisbury) Daily World The Daytona Beach News-Journal Deming Headlight Democrat and Chronicle The Des Moines Register Desert Dispatch The Desert Sun Detroit Free Press Devils Lake Journal The Dispatch Dodge City Daily Globe Du Quoin Evening Call El Paso Times The Enterprise Evansville Courier & Press The Evening News The Evening Tribune The Examiner The Fayetteville Observer The Florida Times-Union Florida Today Fort Collins Coloradoan Foster's Daily Democrat The Gadsden Times The Gainesville Sun Garden City Telegram The Gaston Gazette Gaylord Herald Times Great Falls Tribune Green Bay Press-Gazette The Greenville News Hattiesburg American The Hawk Eye Hays Daily News Henderson Gleaner The Herald Democrat The Herald-Mail The Herald News The Herald-Times The Herald Times Reporter Hillsdale Daily News The Holland Sentinel Home News Tribune The Houma Courier The Independent The Indianapolis Star The Inquirer and Mirror The Intelligencer Ionia Sentinel-Standard Iowa City Press-Citizen The Ithaca Journal The Jackson Sun Jacksonville Daily News Journal & Courier The Journal News The Journal Standard Journal Star Kinston Free Press Kitsap Sun Kirksville Daily Express Knoxville News Sentinel Lancaster Eagle-Gazette Lansing State Journal Las Cruces Sun-News The Leader The Leaf-Chronicle Leavenworth Times Lebanon Daily News The Ledger Leesville Daily Leader Lincoln Courier Lubbock Avalanche-Journal Mansfield News Journal The Marion Star Marshfield News-Herald The McDonough County Voice McPherson Sentinel The MetroWest Daily News Milwaukee Journal Sentinel CNI Community Newspapers Miami News Record The Milford Daily News Mineral Daily News-Tribune Montgomery Advertiser The Morning Sun Naples Daily News The Neosho Daily News New Jersey Herald News Chief The News Herald The News Leader The News Journal The News-Press The Newton Kansan Northwest Florida Daily News The Oak Ridger Observer-Dispatch The Oklahoman Olney Daily Mail Old Colony Memorial Oshkosh Northwestern Palladium-Item Palm Beach Daily News The Palm Beach Post The Patriot Ledger Pekin Daily Times Pensacola News Journal Petoskey News-Review Pocono Record The Portsmouth Herald The Post-Crescent Poughkeepsie Journal Press & Sun-Bulletin The Progress-Index The Providence Journal Public Opinion The Pueblo Chieftain The Record Redding Record Searchlight The Register-Mail Reno Gazette-Journal Record-Courier The Record Herald The Reporter The Repository Rockford Register Star The Rolla Daily News The St. Augustine Record St. Cloud Times The Salina Journal The Salinas Californian San Angelo Standard-Times Sarasota Herald-Tribune Savannah Morning News The Shawnee News-Star The Sheboygan Press The Shelby Star Siskiyou Daily News South Bend Tribune Southwest Times Record Spartanburg Herald-Journal The Spectrum Springfield News-Leader The Standard-Times Star-Banner Star Courier Star-Gazette Star-News The Star Press The State Journal-Register Statesman Journal Stuart News Sturgis Journal Sun Journal (New Bern, North Carolina) Tallahassee Democrat Taunton Daily Gazette Telegram & Gazette The Tennessean The Times (Shreveport) The Times Herald Times Herald-Record Times-News (Hendersonville) The Times-News (Burlington) Times Record News Times Recorder The Times-Reporter The Times Telegram The Topeka Capital-Journal Treasure Coast Newspapers The Tribune-Democrat The Tuscaloosa News Ventura County Star Vero Beach Press Journal Watertown Public Opinion Wausau Daily Herald The Wayne Independent The Wellington Daily News Wellsville Daily Reporter Wisconsin Rapids Daily Tribune York Daily Record v t e BridgeTower Media business publications in the United States Arizona Capitol Times Casual Living Central Penn Business Journal Charleston Regional Business Journal Columbia Regional Business Report The Countian – Jefferson County The Countian – St. Louis Daily Journal of Commerce (Oregon) Daily Journal of Commerce (Louisiana) Daily Record (Baltimore) The Daily Record (Rochester) The Daily Record – Kansas City The Daily Reporter Designers Today Finance & Commerce Furniture Today GSA Business Gifts & Decorative Accessories Home Accents Today Home Furnishings News Home Textiles Today Idaho Business Review The Journal Record Lehigh Valley Business Long Island Business News Massachusetts Lawyers Weekly The Mecklenburg Times Michigan Lawyers Weekly Minnesota Lawyer Missouri Lawyers Weekly NJBIZ New Orleans CityBusiness North Carolina Lawyers Weekly Pet Age Rhode Island Lawyers Weekly Rochester Business Journal SCBIZ South Carolina Lawyers Weekly St. Charles County Business Record St. Louis Daily Record Virginia Lawyers Weekly Wisconsin Law Journal v t e Newsquest Newsquest daily newspapers in the United Kingdom The Argus , Brighton The Bolton News Telegraph & Argus , Bradford Borehamwood & Elstree Times Brent & Kilburn Times Chard & Ilminster News Craven Herald & Pioneer Daily Gazette , Colchester Bournemouth Daily Echo Dorset Echo Echo , Basildon, Essex Evening Times Greenock Telegraph The Herald , Glasgow News Shopper , South East London & North West Kent Lancashire Telegraph Oxford Mail The National , Scotland The National , Wales The Northern Echo Darlington & Stockton Times The Press , York Southern Daily Echo , Southampton South Wales Argus Swindon Advertiser Worcester News Dudley Times Hampshire Chronicle Halesowen News Harrow Times Hereford Times Keighley News Malvern Gazette The Oxford Times Penarth Times Pontypool Free Press St Helens Star Sale & Altrincham Messenger The Shuttle , Worcestershire Stourbridge News Stretford & Urmston Messenger Stroud News & Journal Sutton & Croydon Guardian Times Series , North London Watford Observer Wharfedale & Airedale Observer Wiltshire Times Newsquest magazines and websites in the United Kingdom Exchange & Mart The Strad Predecessors Archant GateHouse Media American Consolidated Media Calkins Media Community Newspaper Company Halifax Media Group Hathaway Publishing Local Media Group Schurz Communications Stephens Media Journal Media Group This article about a Kansas newspaper is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Topeka_Capital-Journal&oldid=1283649980 " Categories : 1858 establishments in Kansas Territory Gannett publications Mass media in Topeka, Kansas Newspapers published in Kansas Newspapers established in 1858 Pulitzer Prize–winning newspapers Newspapers published in the Midwestern United States stubs Kansas stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 All stub articles This page was last edited on 2 April 2025, at 20:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Topeka Capital-Journal Add languages Add topic

