Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 Measurement 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Exothermic reaction 57 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia עברית Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Seeltersk Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chemical reaction that releases energy as light or heat The thermite reaction is famously exothermic. The reduction of iron(III) oxide by aluminium releases sufficient heat to yield molten iron.

In thermochemistry , an exothermic reaction is a "reaction for which the overall standard enthalpy change Δ H ⚬ is negative." [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Exothermic reactions usually release heat . The term is often confused with exergonic reaction , which IUPAC defines as "... a reaction for which the overall standard Gibbs energy change Δ G ⚬ is negative." [ 2 ] A strongly exothermic reaction will usually also be exergonic because Δ H ⚬ makes a major contribution to Δ G ⚬ . Most of the spectacular chemical reactions that are demonstrated in classrooms are exothermic and exergonic. The opposite is an endothermic reaction , which usually takes up heat and is driven by an entropy increase in the system.

Examples Examples are numerous: combustion , the thermite reaction , combining strong acids and bases, polymerizations . As an example in everyday life, hand warmers make use of the oxidation of iron to achieve an exothermic reaction: 4Fe  + 3O 2 → 2Fe 2 O 3 Δ H ⚬ = - 1648 kJ/mol A particularly important class of exothermic reactions is combustion of a hydrocarbon fuel, e.g. the burning of natural gas: CH 4 + 2O 2 → CO 2 + 2H 2 O      Δ H ⚬ = - 890 kJ/mol Video of an exothermic reaction.  Ethanol vapor is ignited inside a bottle, causing combustion.

These sample reactions are strongly exothermic.

Uncontrolled exothermic reactions, those leading to fires and explosions , are wasteful because it is difficult to capture the released energy.  Nature effects combustion reactions under highly controlled conditions, avoiding fires and explosions, in aerobic respiration so as to capture the released energy, e.g. for the formation of ATP .

Measurement The enthalpy of a chemical system is essentially its energy. The enthalpy change Δ H for a reaction is equal to the heat q transferred out of (or into) a closed system at constant pressure without in- or output of electrical energy. Heat production or absorption in a chemical reaction is measured using calorimetry , e.g. with a bomb calorimeter . One common laboratory instrument is the reaction calorimeter , where the heat flow from or into the reaction vessel is monitored. The heat release and corresponding energy change, Δ H , of a combustion reaction can be measured particularly accurately.

The measured heat energy released in an exothermic reaction is converted to Δ H ⚬ in Joule per mole (formerly cal/mol ). The standard enthalpy change Δ H ⚬ is essentially the enthalpy change when the stoichiometric coefficients in the reaction are considered as the amounts of reactants and products (in mole); usually, the initial and final temperature is assumed to be 25 °C. For gas-phase reactions, Δ H ⚬ values are related to bond energies to a good approximation by: Δ H ⚬ = total bond energy of reactants − total bond energy of products An energy profile of an exothermic reaction In an exothermic reaction, by definition, the enthalpy change has a negative value: Δ H = H products - H reactants < 0 where a larger value (the higher energy of the reactants) is subtracted from a smaller value (the lower energy of the products). For example, when hydrogen burns: 2H 2 (g) + O 2 (g) → 2H 2 O (g) Δ H ⚬ =  −483.6 kJ/mol [ 3 ] See also Chemical thermodynamics Differential scanning calorimetry Endergonic Exergonic Endergonic reaction Exergonic reaction Exothermic process Endothermic reaction Endotherm References ^ "Exothermic reaction" .

The IUPAC Compendium of Chemical Terminology . IUPAC. 2014.

doi : 10.1351/goldbook.E02269 .

^ a b Laidler, K. J. (1996).

"A glossary of terms used in chemical kinetics, including reaction dynamics (IUPAC Recommendations 1996)" .

Pure and Applied Chemistry .

68 : 149– 192.

doi : 10.1351/pac199668010149 .

S2CID 98267946 .

^ "Enthalpy (Chapter 5)" . Archived from the original on 2013-07-08 . Retrieved 2013-07-20 .

External links Portal : Chemistry Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Exothermic_reaction&oldid=1214487916 " Category : Thermochemistry Hidden categories: Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 March 2024, at 07:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Exothermic reaction 57 languages Add topic

