Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Research 3 Applications 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Geoinformatics 33 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Hrvatski עברית Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Application of information science methods in geography and geosciences Not to be confused with Geomatics .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Geoinformatics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Leaflet library is often used in geoinformatics for the development of web map applications Geoinformatics is a scientific field primarily within the domains of Computer Science and technical geography .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It focuses on the programming of applications, spatial data structures , and the analysis of objects and space-time phenomena related to the surface and underneath of Earth and other celestial bodies. The field develops software and web services to model and analyse spatial data , serving the needs of geosciences and related scientific and engineering disciplines. The term is often used interchangeably with Geomatics , although they are not exactly same. The field of geomatics is a comprehensive discipline encompassing both geodesy and geoinformatics, thus offering a more extensive scope.

Overview [ edit ] In a general sense, geoinformatics can be understood as "a variety of efforts to promote collaboration between computer scientists and geoscientists to solve complex scientific questions".

[ 3 ] More technically, geoinformatics has been described as "the science and technology dealing with the structure and character of spatial information, its capture, its classification and qualification, its storage, processing, portrayal and dissemination, including the infrastructure necessary to secure optimal use of this information" [ 4 ] or "the art, science or technology dealing with the acquisition, storage, processing production, presentation and dissemination of geoinformation".

[ 5 ] Along with the thriving of data science and artificial intelligence since the 2010s, the field of geoinformatics has also incorporated the latest methodology and technical progress from the cyberinfrastructure ecosystem.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Geoinformatics has at its core the technologies supporting the processes of acquisition, analysis and visualization of spatial data. Both geomatics and geoinformatics include and rely heavily upon the theory and practical implications of geodesy and cartography .  Geography and earth science increasingly rely on digital spatial data acquired from remotely sensed images analyzed by geographical information systems (GIS), [ 8 ] photo interpretation of aerial photographs, and Web mining .

[ 9 ] Geoinformatics combines geospatial analysis and modeling, development of geospatial databases, information systems design, human-computer interaction and both wired and wireless networking technologies. Geoinformatics uses geocomputation and geovisualization for analyzing geoinformation .

Areas related to geoinformatics include: Cartography Geodesy Satellite navigation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Spatial analysis Web mapping Navigation Research [ edit ] Research in this field is used to support global and local environmental, energy and security programs. The Geographic Information Science and Technology group of Oak Ridge National Laboratory is supported by various government departments and agencies including the United States Department of Energy . It is currently the only group in the United States Department of Energy National Laboratory System to focus on advanced theory and application research in this field. A lot of interdisciplinary research exists that involves geoinformatics fields including computer science, information technology, software engineering, biogeography, geography, conservation, architecture, spatial analysis and reinforcement learning.

Applications [ edit ] Many fields benefit from geoinformatics, including urban planning and land use management, in-car navigation systems, virtual globes, land surveying, public health, local and national gazetteer management, environmental modeling and analysis, military, transport network planning and management, agriculture, meteorology and climate change , oceanography and coupled ocean and atmosphere modelling, business location planning, architecture and archeological reconstruction, telecommunications, criminology and crime simulation, aviation, biodiversity conservation and maritime transport.
The importance of the spatial dimension in assessing, monitoring and modelling various issues and problems related to sustainable management of natural resources is recognized all over the world.

Geoinformatics becomes very important technology to decision-makers across a wide range of disciplines, industries, commercial sector, environmental agencies, local and national government, research, and academia, national survey and mapping organisations, International organisations, United Nations, emergency services, public health and epidemiology, crime mapping, transportation and infrastructure, information technology industries, GIS consulting firms, environmental management agencies), tourist industry, utility companies, market analysis and e-commerce, mineral exploration, Seismology etc. Many government and non government agencies started to use spatial data for managing their day-to-day activities.

See also [ edit ] Cyberinfrastructure Data science Informatics Geographic information science Geomathematics Organizations Earth Science Information Partners Open Geospatial Consortium American Geophysical Union European Geosciences Union Geological Society of America International Association for Mathematical Geosciences International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics International Cartographic Association References [ edit ] ^ Bello, Innocent E. (October 2023).

"Critical Issues in the Methods of Data Collection in Geoinformatics and Environmental Sciences" .

International Journal of Social Sciences and Management Research .

9 (8): 18– 28.

doi : 10.56201/ijssmr.v9.no8.2023.pg18.28 .

^ Krawczyk, Artur (9 November 2022).

"Proposal of Redefinition of the Terms Geomatics and Geoinformatics on the Basis of Terminological Postulates" .

ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information .

11 (11): Krawczyk.

Bibcode : 2022IJGI...11..557K .

doi : 10.3390/ijgi11110557 .

^ G.R. Keller, C. Baru, eds. (2011) Geoinformatics: Cyberinfrastructure for the Solid Earth Sciences, Cambridge University Press, 1st edition, 593pp.

^ P.L.N. Raju, Fundamentals of Geographic Information Systems ^ Ehlers, M. (2008).

"Geoinformatics and digital earth initiatives: A German perspective" .

International Journal of Digital Earth .

1 (1): 17– 30.

Bibcode : 2008IJDE....1...17E .

doi : 10.1080/17538940701781975 .

^ Ma, Xiaogang; Mookerjee, Matty; Hsu, Leslie; Hills, Denise, eds. (2023).

Recent Advancement in Geoinformatics and Data Science .

doi : 10.1130/SPE558 .

ISBN 978-0-8137-2558-1 .

^ Z. Sun, N. Cristea, P. Rivas, eds. (2023) Artificial Intelligence in Earth Science, Elsevier, ISBN 9780323917377 ^ Bouloucos and Brown, ITC Courses in Remote Sensing, GIS and Photogrammetry ^ Annamoradnejad, R.; Annamoradnejad, I.; Safarrad, T.; Habibi, J. (2019-04-20).

"Using Web Mining in the Analysis of Housing Prices: A Case study of Tehran" .

2019 5th International Conference on Web Research (ICWR) . pp.

55– 60.

doi : 10.1109/ICWR.2019.8765250 .

ISBN 978-1-7281-1431-6 .

S2CID 198146435 .

External links [ edit ] Geoinformatics Jobs Portal v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject v t e Information processing Information processes information processes by function perception attention influence operating communication reasoning learning storing decision-making information processing abstractions event processing sign processesing signal processing data processing stream processing agent processing state processing Information processors natural nature as information processing humans as information processing systems society as information processing system mixed mixed reality brain–computer interface physical computing human–computer interaction artificial processors and processes bio-inspired computing ubiquitous computing artificial brain and mind uploading virtual reality virtual world Information processing theories and concepts in biology computational and systems biology genetic informatics and cellular computing computational neuroscience and neurocomputing in cognitive psychology information processing theory mind and intelligence cognitive informatics and neuroinformatics behavior informatics in computer science neural computation computation theory algorithms and information structures computational circuits artificial intelligence in philosophy computational theory of mind philosophy of information philosophy of artificial intelligence interdisciplinary information theory decision theory systems theory other infosphere inforg Decoding the Universe information overload Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geoinformatics&oldid=1303856061 " Categories : Earth sciences Geographical technology Information science by discipline Computational fields of study Geographic data and information fields of study Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2015 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 12:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geoinformatics 33 languages Add topic

