Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Pledge 3 General Assembly 4 Member organizations Toggle Member organizations subsection 4.1 Africa 4.2 Asia and the Pacific 4.3 Europe and North America 4.4 Latin America and Caribbean 4.5 North Africa and Middle East 4.6 Former members 4.7 Observers 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents World Federation of Democratic Youth 33 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International left-wing youth organisation This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "World Federation of Democratic Youth" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) World Federation of Democratic Youth Formation 10 November 1945 ; 79 years ago ( 1945-11-10 ) , London , United Kingdom Headquarters Budapest , Hungary President Luís Hidalgo Cano ( UJCE ) Secretary General Suniel Sosa ( UJC ) Vice Presidents Adnan Al Mokdad Amb. Naftal Kambungu< SWAPO Party Youth League />Samrat Gauchan Website www .wfdy .org Youth rights Activities Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co.

Child Labor Deterrence Act Children's Online Privacy Protection Act Kids Online Safety Act Convention on the Rights of the Child Fair Labor Standards Act Hammer v. Dagenhart History of youth rights in the United States Morse v. Frederick Newsboys' strike of 1899 Prez Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms Wild in the Streets Theory / concepts Adultcentrism Adultism Ageism Criminalization Democracy Ephebiphobia Fear of children Free-range parenting Intergenerational equity Future generations Paternalism Social class Suffrage Taking Children Seriously Universal suffrage Unschooling Youth activism Youth detention center Youth empowerment Youth exclusion Youth suffrage Youth voice Issues Adolescent sexuality Age of candidacy Age of consent Age-of-consent reform Age of majority Age of marriage Behavior modification facility Child labour Children in the military Child marriage Compulsory education Conscription Corporal punishment at home at school in law Curfew Child abuse Emancipation of minors Gambling age Human rights and youth sport In loco parentis Juvenile delinquency Juvenile court Juvenile law Legal drinking age ( U.S. history ) Legal working age Minimum driving age Marriageable age Minor (law) Minors and abortion Restavec School leaving age Smoking age ( U.S. history ) Status offense Underage drinking in the US Voting age Youth-adult partnership Youth participation Youth politics Youth unemployment Youth voting Organizations United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child Akt Americans for a Society Free from Age Restrictions Canadian Youth for Choice Human Rights and Youth Rights Commission Common Cents Community Alliance for the Ethical Treatment of Youth DoSomething Future Coalition Global Youth Action Network High School Democrats of America Indian Youth Climate Network International Falcon Movement – Socialist Educational International Mermaids National Union of Students LGBT+ Campaign National Youth Rights Association One World Youth Project Queer Youth Network Students for a Democratic Society Freechild Project Three O'Clock Lobby UK Youth Parliament Youth International Party Youth Liberation of Ann Arbor The Youth Cafe Young Communist League of Canada Young Democrats of America World Federation of Democratic Youth People Fletcher Hanson Henry Holt Koroknay-Palicz Duff Males Postman Yaco Related Ages of consent in Asia Ages of consent in Europe Ages of consent in North America Ages of consent in Oceania Ages of consent in South America Ages of consent in the United States Animal rights Anti-racism Direct democracy Egalitarianism Feminism French petitions against age-of-consent laws Legal status of tattooing in European countries Legal status of tattooing in the United States Libertarianism Students' rights Youth Olympic Games Youth sports Youth wing Liberation theology Communism Socialism Marxism Youth rights Society portal v t e Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e The World Federation of Democratic Youth ( WFDY ) is an international youth organization, and has historically characterized itself as left-wing and anti-imperialist . WFDY was founded in London , United Kingdom, in 1945 as a broad international youth movement, organized in the context of the end of World War II with the aim of uniting youth from the Allies behind an anti-fascist platform that was broadly pro-peace, anti-nuclear war, expressing friendship between youth of the capitalist and socialist nations. The WFDY Headquarters are in Budapest , Hungary.

[ 1 ] The main event of WFDY is the World Festival of Youth and Students . The last festival was held in Sochi , Russia, in October 2017. It was one of the first organizations granted general consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council .

History [ edit ] On 10 November 1945, the World Youth Conference, organized in London, founded the World Federation of Democratic Youth. This historic conference was convened at the initiative of the World Youth Council which was formed during the Second World War to bring together the youth movements of the allied nations in an anti-fascist front. The conference was attended by over 600 delegates from 63 nations, it was at the time the largest and most diverse gathering of international youth.

[ 2 ] The conference adopted a pledge for peace. The WFDY was an indirect successor of the World Youth Congress Movement of the 1930s, a popular front of youth of a broad range of political tendencies, from religious to secular, liberal, socialist, and communist, which attempted to advocate a progressive programme and promote world peace.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Shortly after the 1945 World Youth Conference, with the onset of the Cold War and Winston Churchill 's Iron Curtain speech, the organization was accused by the US State Department of being a "Moscow front". Many of the founding organizations quit, leaving mostly youth from socialist nations, national liberation movements, and communist youth.

[ 5 ] Like the International Union of Students (IUS) and other pro-Soviet organizations, the WFDY became a target and victim of CIA espionage as well as part of active measures conducted by the Soviet state security.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] The WFDY's first General Secretary, Alexander Shelepin , was a former leader of the Young Communist International which had been dissolved in 1943. Shelepin had been a guerilla fighter during World War II (after his work with the WFDY, he was appointed head of Soviet State Security).

[ 6 ] Both the WFDY and IUS vocally criticized the Marshall Plan , supported the Czechoslovak coup d'état of 1948 and the new People's republics in eastern Europe. They opposed the Korean War .

[ 6 ] The main event of the WFDY became the World Festival of Youth and Students, a large-scale political and cultural celebration which aimed to promote peace and friendship between the youth of the world. Most, but not all, of the early festivals were held in socialist nations in Europe. During the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s the WFDY's festivals were one of the few places where young people from the western bloc could meet youth involved in the campaign against apartheid from South Africa , or militant youth from Vietnam, Palestine, Cuba and other nations. Famous people who participated in festivals included Angela Davis , Yuri Gagarin , Yasser Arafat , Fidel Castro , Vladimir Putin , Ruth First , Jan Myrdal and Nelson Mandela .

When the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc collapsed, the WFDY entered a crisis. With the power vacuum left by the collapse of the most important member organization, the Soviet Komsomol , there were conflicting views of the future character of the organization. Some wanted a more apolitical structure, whereas others were more inclined to an openly leftist federation. The WFDY, however, survived this crisis, and is today an active international youth organization that holds regular activities.

Pledge [ edit ] Guy de Boisson, President of the World Federation of Democratic Youth, speaks at the opening of the 2nd World Festival of Youth and Students (Budapest, 1949).

We pledge that we shall remember this unity, forged in this month, November 1945 Not only today, not only this week, this year, but always
Until we have built the world we have dreamed of and fought for
We pledge ourselves to build the unity of youth of the world
All races, all colors, all nationalities, all beliefs
To eliminate all traces of fascism from the earth
To build a deep and sincere international friendship among the peoples of the world
To keep a just lasting peace
To eliminate want, frustration and enforced idleness We have come to confirm the unity of all youth salute our comrades who have died-and pledge our word that skilful hands, keen brains and young enthusiasm shall never more be wasted in war — Pledge of the World Federation of Democratic Youth General Assembly [ edit ] The WFDY conducts a General Assembly every four years, the last taking place in Nicosia in 2019.

[ 10 ] During the Assembly, leadership and a General Council are elected and an organizational declaration is approved.

[ 11 ] Member organizations [ edit ] Africa [ edit ] Country Name Notes Ref Angola Juventude do Movimento Popular da Libertação de Angola Youth wing of MPLA [ 12 ] Benin Organization of Revolutionary Youth (OJRB) [ 13 ] Independent Socialist Youth Union (USJIB) [ 13 ] Burundi JRR Burundi [ 13 ] Cape Verde Youth of PAICV Youth wing of PAICV [ 13 ] Comoros Front of Socialist Youth (FSY) [ 13 ] Congo UJS Congo [ 13 ] Congo, Dem. Rep.

PPRD Youth League Youth wing of the People's Party for Reconstruction and Democracy [ 13 ] Eritrea National Union of Eritrean Youth and Students [ 12 ] Ethiopia Ethiopian Youth League [ 12 ] Ghana Democratic Youth League of Ghana [ 13 ] African Youth Command [ 13 ] Guinea Bissau African Youth Amílcar Cabral Youth wing of PAICG [ 13 ] Lesotho LYF Lesotho [ 13 ] Madagascar KDTM Madagascar [ 13 ] Malawi LYM Malawi [ 13 ] YASED Malawi [ 13 ] Mozambique Mozambican Youth Organisation Youth wing of FRELIMO [ 12 ] Namibia SWAPO Party Youth League Youth wing of SWAPO Namibia National Students Organisation (NANSO) Nigeria National Youth Council of Nigeria [ 13 ] National Youth Council of the Ogoni People (NYCOP) [ 13 ] Sao Tome JML São Tomé and Príncipe [ 13 ] Senegal Mouvement de la Jeunesse Démocratique Youth wing of the Democratic League/Movement for the Labour Party [ 13 ] Democratic Youth Union Alboury Ndiaye Youth wing of the Party of Independence and Work [ 13 ] Sierra Leone SFYO Sierra Leone [ 13 ] South Africa African National Congress Youth League Youth wing of the African National Congress [ 12 ] South African Students Congress [ 13 ] Young Communist League of South Africa Youth wing of the South African Communist Party Sudan Sudanese Youth Union Youth wing of the Sudanese Communist Party [ 13 ] Tanzania Umoja Wa Vijana Youth wing of Chama Cha Mapinduzi [ 12 ] Zambia United National Independence Party Youth League Youth wing of the United National Independence Party [ 13 ] Zimbabwe ZANU-PF Youth League Youth wing of ZANU-PF [ 12 ] Zimbabwe Congress of Students Union (ZICOSU) Asia and the Pacific [ edit ] Map of countries which have or had a youth organization in the World Federation of Democratic Youth. Countries with active member organizations of WFDY are shown in dark green. Countries with former member organizations of WFDY are shown in light green.

Country Name Notes Ref Armenia Young Communist League Armenia Youth wing of the Armenian Communist Party [ 14 ] Australia Resistance: Young Socialist Alliance Youth wing of the Socialist Alliance Azerbaijan Young Communist League Azerbaijan Youth wing of the Azerbaijan Communist Party [ 14 ] Bangladesh Socialist Students' Front Student wing of the Socialist Party of Bangladesh Bangladesh Students Union Mass organization of Communist Party of Bangladesh [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Bangladesh Youth Union Youth wing of the Communist Party of Bangladesh [ 12 ] Bhutan Democratic Youth of Bhutan Youth wing of the Bhutan National Democratic Party [ 16 ] Students Union of Bhutan [ 16 ] Cambodia Youth Association of Cambodia [ 16 ] Georgia Young Communist League of Georgia [ 14 ] India All India Students Federation Student wing of the Communist Party of India [ 16 ] All India Youth Federation Youth wing of the Communist Party of India [ 12 ] Students Federation of India Student Wing of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) Democratic Youth Federation of India Youth Wing of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) [ 16 ] All India Youth League Youth wing of the All India Forward Bloc [ 16 ] Iran Tudeh Youth Youth wing of the Tudeh Party of Iran [ 17 ] Japan Japan League of Socialist Youth [ 12 ] Korean Youth League in Japan (Chochong) [ eja ] [ a ] Youth wing of Chongryon [ 16 ] Korea, DPR Socialist Patriotic Youth League Youth wing of the Workers' Party of Korea [ 12 ] Korea, Rep.

7th-term Hanchongryun [ 16 ] Laos Lao People's Revolutionary Youth Union Youth wing of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party [ 16 ] Mongolia Mongolian Youth Federation [ 16 ] Myanmar All Burma Students' Democratic Front [ 16 ] All Burma Students League [ 16 ] Nepal All Nepal National Free Students Union Student wing of the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist) [ 16 ] Youth Federation Nepal Youth wing of the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Socialist) [ 12 ] Nepal National Federation of Students Student wing of the Nepal Communist Party (United) [ 16 ] Nepal National Youth Federation Youth wing of the Nepal Communist Party (United) [ 16 ] Pakistan Democratic Students Federation student wing of the Communist Party of Pakistan Philippines Anakbayan [ 16 ] Bukluran sa Ikauunlad ng Sosyalistang Isip at Gawa (BISIG) [ 16 ] SIKAP Philippines [ 16 ] YDM Philippines [ 16 ] Sri Lanka Communist Youth Federation Youth wing of the Communist Party of Sri Lanka [ 16 ] Sri Lanka National Union Of Students Student wing of the Communist Party of Sri Lanka Federation of All Lanka (Ceylon) Youth League Youth wing of Mahajana Eksath Peramuna Socialist Students Union Student wing of Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna [ 12 ] Socialist Youth Union Youth wing of Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna [ 16 ] Vietnam Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union Youth wing of the Communist Party of Vietnam [ 12 ] Vietnam Youth Federation [ 16 ] Europe and North America [ edit ] Country Name Notes Ref Austria Communist Youth of Austria [ 14 ] Belgium COMAC Youth wing of the Workers' Party of Belgium Bulgaria Bulgarian Socialist Youth Union [ 14 ] Canada Young Communist League of Canada Affiliated with the Communist Party of Canada Croatia Young Socialists of Croatia Youth wing of the Socialist Labour Party of Croatia Czech Republic Communist Youth Union [ 12 ] Cyprus United Democratic Youth Organisation Youth wing of the Progressive Party of Working People [ 12 ] Denmark Communist Youth of Denmark [ 18 ] Finland Communist Youth League [ 14 ] France Mouvement Jeunes Communistes de France [ 14 ] Germany Free German Youth [ 14 ] Socialist German Workers Youth Youth wing of the German Communist Party [ 12 ] Greece Communist Youth of Greece Youth wing of the Communist Party of Greece [ 12 ] Hungary Baloldali Front Youth wing of the Hungarian Workers' Party [ 14 ] Ireland Connolly Youth Movement [ 14 ] Workers Party Youth Youth wing of the Workers' Party [ 14 ] Italy Front of the Communist Youth Youth wing of the Communist Front [ 14 ] Giovani Comuniste e Comunisti Youth wing of the Communist Refoundation Party Republic of Moldova Young Communist League of the Republic of Moldova Youth wing of the Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova Netherlands Communist Youth Movement of the Netherlands Youth wing of the New Communist Party of the Netherlands [ 19 ] Norway Young Communists in Norway Youth wing of the Communist Party of Norway [ 14 ] Young Communist League of Norway [ 14 ] Portugal Portuguese Communist Youth Youth wing of the Portuguese Communist Party [ 12 ] Romania Union of Socialist Youth Youth wing of the Romanian Socialist Party [ 14 ] Russia Leninist Communist Youth Union of the Russian Federation Youth wing of the Communist Party of the Russian Federation [ 14 ] Revolutionary Communist Youth League (b) Youth wing of the Russian Communist Workers' Party of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union [ 14 ] Russian Young Communist League [ 14 ] Serbia Young Communist League of Yugoslavia Youth wing of the New Communist Party of Yugoslavia [ 14 ] Slovakia Socialistický Zväz Mladých Youth wing of the Communist Party of Slovakia [ 14 ] Spain Collectives of Communist Youth Youth wing of the Communist Party of the Workers of Spain [ 14 ] Communist Youth Union of Spain Youth wing of the Communist Party of Spain [ 12 ] Communist Youth of Catalonia Youth wing of the Communists of Catalonia [ 14 ] Sweden Communist Youth of Sweden Youth wing of the Communist Party of Sweden [ 14 ] Switzerland Communist Youth of Switzerland Youth wing of the Swiss Party of Labour United Kingdom Young Communist League Youth wing of the Communist Party of Britain [ 14 ] United States Young Communist League Youth wing of the Communist Party USA [ 20 ] Young Socialists Youth wing of the Socialist Workers Party (United States) Latin America and Caribbean [ edit ] Country Name Notes Ref Argentina Federación Juvenil Comunista [ es ] Youth wing of the Communist Party of Argentina [ 12 ] Barbados League of Progressive Youth Bolivia Juventud Comunista de Bolivia Youth wing of the Communist Party of Bolivia Brazil Juventude Comunista Avançando Youth wing of the Polo Comunista Luiz Carlos Prestes União da Juventude Comunista Youth wing of the Brazilian Communist Party [ 12 ] União da Juventude Socialista Youth wing of the Communist Party of Brazil [ 12 ] Chile Juventudes Comunistas de Chile Youth wing of the Communist Party of Chile [ 12 ] Colombia Colombian Communist Youth Youth wing of the Colombian Communist Party [ 12 ] Costa Rica Juventud Frente Amplio Youth wing of the Broad Front (Costa Rica) [ 12 ] Cuba Unión de Jóvenes Comunistas Youth wing of the Communist Party of Cuba [ 12 ] Ecuador Juventud Comunista del Ecuador Youth wing of the Communist Party of Ecuador [ 21 ] Juventud Socialista Ecuatoriana Youth wing of the Socialist Party of Ecuador [ 21 ] El Salvador Farabundo Martí Youth Youth wing of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front [ 21 ] Guatemala Juventud URNG Youth wing of the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity [ 21 ] Guyana Guyana Youth and Students Movement Walter Rodney Youth Movement Mexico Federation of Young Communists Youth wing of the Communist Party of Mexico [ 21 ] Juventud Popular Socialista Youth wing of the Popular Socialist Party [ 12 ] Nicaragua Juventud Sandinista 19 de Julio Youth wing of the Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional Panama JPR Panama [ 21 ] Paraguay Casa de la Juventud del Paraguay Peru Juventud Comunista Peruana Youth wing of the Peruvian Communist Party [ 21 ] Uruguay Juventud del Movimiento 26 de Marzo Youth wing of the 26 March Movement Venezuela Juventud Comunista de Venezuela Youth wing of the Communist Party of Venezuela [ 12 ] United Socialist Party of Venezuela Youth Youth wing of the United Socialist Party of Venezuela North Africa and Middle East [ edit ] Country Name Notes Ref Algeria Union de la Jeunesse Algérienne Youth wing of the National Liberation Front [ 22 ] National Union of Algerian Students Students of the National Liberation Front [ 22 ] Bahrain Shabeeba Society of Bahrain Youth wing of the Progressive Democratic Tribune [ 12 ] Egypt Union of Progressive Youth of Egypt Youth wing of the National Progressive Unionist Rally Party [ 12 ] Iraq Iraqi Democratic Youth Federation Youth wing of the Iraqi Communist Party [ 12 ] General Union of Students in Iraqi Republic [ 22 ] Israel Young Communist League of Israel Youth wing of the Communist Party of Israel , affiliated with Hadash and the Joint List [ 12 ] Jordan Union of Democratic Youth Youth wing of the Jordanian Communist Party [ 22 ] Kuwait Democratic Youth Union Youth wing of the Kuwaiti Progressive Movement Lebanon Union of Lebanese Democratic Youth Youth wing of the Lebanese Communist Party [ 12 ] Libya National Youth Organization of Libya [ 22 ] Morocco USFP Jeunesse Ittihadiya Youth wing of the Socialist Union of Popular Forces [ 22 ] Jeunesse Socialiste Youth wing of the Party of Progress and Socialism [ 22 ] Palestine General Union of Palestine Students [ 12 ] Palestinian Democratic Youth Union Youth wing of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine [ 12 ] Sahrawi Republic Sahrawi Youth Union Youth wing of the Polisario Front [ 12 ] [ 23 ] Turkey Communist Youth of Turkey Youth wing of the Communist Party of Turkey [ 12 ] Yemen ASHEED Yemen [ 22 ] Yemen Youth General Union [ 22 ] Former members [ edit ] Afghanistan - Democratic Youth Organization of Afghanistan People's Socialist Republic of Albania - Bashkimi i Rinisë së Punës së Shqipërisë Argentina - Juventud Intrasigente Argentina Argentina - Juventud Socialista Auténtica Australia - Eureka Youth League Belgium - Graffiti Jeugendsdienst Belgium - Jeunesse Communiste de Belgique Bolivia - Confederación Universitaria Boliviana Brazil - Juventude do PCB Bulgaria - Dimitrov Communist Youth Union Byelorussian SSR - Leninist Communist Youth Union of Belarus Cambodia - People's Revolutionary Youth Union of Kampuchea Chile - Juventud de la Izquierda Cristiana de Chile Chile - Juventud del MIR Chile - Juventud Rebelde Miguel Enríquez Chile - Unión de Jóvenes Socialistas China - Communist Youth League of China China - All-China Youth Federation Colombia - Federación Juvenil Obrera Colombia - Juventud de la Alianza Nacional Popular Colombia - Juventud del Poder Popular Colombia - Unión Nacional de los Estudiantes Secundarios Colombia - Unión de Jóvenes Patriotas Congo - Union de la jeunesse congolaise , Republic of Congo Costa Rica - Juventud del Pueblo Costarriquense Costa Rica - Juventudes Patrióticas Costa Rica - Juventud Vanguardista Costarriquense Czechoslovakia - Union of Czech Youth Czechoslovakia - Union of Slovak Youth Czechoslovakia - Czechoslovak Youth Union Czechoslovakia - Czechoslovak Socialist Youth Union Dominican Republic - Juventud Revolucionaria Dominicana Dominican Republic - Unión Democrática Orlando Martínez Ecuador - Departamento Juvenil del Central de Trabajadores de Ecuador Ecuador - Juventud Comunista de Ecuador El Salvador - Asociación General de Estudiantes Universitarios de El Salvador Faroe Islands - Føroyskir Sosialistar Finland - Democratic Youth League of Finland Finland - Finnish Union of Democratic Pioneers Germany - Socialist Youth League Karl Liebknecht Greece - Greek Communist Youth (Internal) Grenada - Maurice Bishop Youth Movement Guadeloupe - Union de la Jeunesse Communiste Guadeloupe France - Union nationale des étudiants de france -Solidarité Etudiante Guatemala - Juventud Patriótica del Trabajo Guyana - Young Socialist Movement Haiti - Jeunesse Communiste de Haiti Honduras - Federación de la Juventud Comunista Iceland - Revolutionary Communist Youth League Indonesia - People's Youth (Indonesia) Italy - Italian Communist Youth Federation Jamaica - Young Communist League of the Workers' Party ( Workers Party of Jamaica ) Japan - Democratic Youth League of Japan Luxembourg - Jeunesse Communiste Luxembourgoise Martinique - Union de la Jeunesse Communiste Martinique Mexico - Frente Juvenil Revolucionario Mexico - Juventud Socialista de los Trabajadores Mongolia - Revolutionary Youth League (REVSOMOL) Morocco - Istiqlal Party Youth Netherlands - Algemeen Nederlands Jeugd Verbond Hungary - Kommunista Ifjúsági Szövetség Panama - Juventud del PRD Panama - Juventud Popular Revolucionaria Paraguay - Federación Juvenil Comunista de Paraguay Peru - CGTP Sección Juvenil Peru - Juventud Aprista Peruana Peru - Juventud Mariateguista Poland - Związek Socjalistycznej Młodzieży Polskiej Puerto Rico - Federación Universitaria para la Indpendencia Puerto Rico - Juventud Comunista de Puerto Rico Puerto Rico - Juventud Socialista de Puerto Rico San Marino - Federazione Giovanile Comunista San Marino Saudi Arabia - Union of Democratic Youth in Saudi [ 24 ] Sri Lanka - Congress of Sama Samaja Youth Leagues Sri Lanka - Federation of Communist and Progressive Youth Saint Vincent and the Grenadines - Vanguard Youth Organization Surinam - National Youth Movement Sweden - Ung Vänster (1975–1992) Switzerland - Jeunesse Communiste Suisse Ba'athist Syria - Revolutionary Youth Union Ba'athist Syria - Union of Democratic Youth of Syria-Khaled Baghdash Ba'athist Syria - Syrian Democratic Youth Union Tunisia - Destourian Youth Turkey - İlerici Gençler Derneği Ukraine - Komsomol of Ukraine United States - Young Socialist Alliance Uruguay - Juventud Socialista del Uruguay Soviet Union - Committee of Youth Organizations of the USSR Soviet Union - All-Union Leninist Young Communist League (Komsomol) Venezuela - Juventud Socialista-MEP Yugoslavia - League of Socialist Youth of Yugoslavia Observers [ edit ] Youth for Communist Rebirth In France (Youth of the Pole of Communist Rebirth in France ) Communist Youth of Luxemburg (Refounded youth organisation of the Communist Party of Luxembourg ), Luxembourg Revolutionary Communist Youth (Youth organization of the Communist Party ), Sweden See also [ edit ] Christian Peace Conference International Association of Democratic Lawyers International Federation of Resistance Fighters – Association of Anti-Fascists International Organization of Journalists International Union of Students Women's International Democratic Federation World Federation of Scientific Workers World Federation of Trade Unions World Peace Council World Youth Congress Movement - the 1930s precursor to the WFDY Notes [ edit ] ^ Not confused with Korean Youth League in Japan (Hancheong) [ ja ] , the youth wing of the Union for Korean Democratic Reunification in Japan [ ja ] .

References [ edit ] ^ Choi, Charles Hongseok (2021).

"Preferential Refugee Policies in Postwar Canada" .

Undergraduate Review .

16 . Bridgewater State University: 113.

^ McDuffie, Erik S (2011).

Sojourning for freedom . Duke University Press. p. 247.

ISBN 978-0-8223-9440-2 .

^ Kotek, Joël (1996).

Students and the Cold War . St. Martin's Press. pp.

48– 85.

ISBN 0312158777 .

^ Kotek, J., Blumenau, t. R. (2015). Students and the Cold War. United Kingdom: Palgrave Macmillan UK ^ Richard Felix Staar, Foreign policies of the Soviet Union , Hoover Press, 1991, ISBN 0-8179-9102-6 , p.84 ^ a b c The cultural Cold War in Western Europe, 1945-1960.

Giles Scott-Smith , Hans Krabbendam. p. 169 ^ A century of spies: intelligence in the twentieth century. Jeffrey T. Richelson. p. 252 ^ Soviet foreign policy in a changing world, Volume 1986. Robbin Frederick Laird, Erik P. Hoffmann. p. 211 ^ Europe since 1945: an encyclopedia, Volume 1. Bernard A. Cook. p. 212 ^ "ΡΙΚ και υπόλοιπα κανάλια "δεν είδαν" την 20η Συνέλευση της ΠΟΔΝ" .

Dialogos . 4 December 2019.

^ "Approved Political Declaration Of the 19th Assembly of WFDY (1).pdf" .

Google Docs . Retrieved 2020-02-11 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al "Members" .

wfdy.org . Archived from the original on 11 November 2016.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w "African Member Organizations" .

World Federation of Democratic Youth . 13 June 2015. Archived from the original on 2 January 2016 . Retrieved 3 January 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x "WFDY - CENA Member Organizations" .

World Federation of Democratic Youth . June 2015. Archived from the original on 2 August 2016 . Retrieved 3 January 2022 .

^ "শৃঙ্খলা ভঙ্গের অভিযোগে ছাত্র ইউনিয়নের ১৭ নেতা-কর্মী বহিষ্কার | খবরের কাগজ" .

Khaborer Kagoj-খবরের কাগজ (in Bengali) . Retrieved 2025-05-28 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w "Asia & Pacific Member Organizations" .

World Federation of Democratic Youth . 13 June 2015. Archived from the original on 2 January 2016 . Retrieved 3 January 2022 .

^ United States Congress, House Committee on Un-American Activities (1956), Soviet Total War: "Historic Mission" of Violence and Deceit , vol.

1– 2, U.S. Government Printing Office, pp.

589– 90 ^ "DKU's vedtægter" .

DKU - Danmarks Kommunistiske Ungdom (in Danish). 2022-05-11 . Retrieved 2024-05-10 .

^ "The CJB is a member of the World Federation of Democratic Youth" .

Website of the Communist Youth Movement of the Netherlands . 20 November 2022.

^ Lynch, Maicol David (4 December 2019).

"CPUSA youth leader greets WFDY meeting in Cyprus" .

Communist Party USA .

^ a b c d e f g "Latin American & Caribbean Member Organizations" .

World Federation of Democratic Youth . 13 June 2015. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 January 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h i "Middle East Member Organizations" .

World Federation of Democratic Youth . 13 June 2015. Archived from the original on 2 January 2016 . Retrieved 3 January 2022 .

^ Kalicka-Mikołajczyk, Adrianna (23 February 2021).

"The international legal status of Western Sahara" .

Opole Studies in Administration and Law .

18 (4): 44.

doi : 10.25167/osap.3429 .

^ Matthiesen, Toby (August 2020).

"The Cold War and the Communist Party of Saudi Arabia, 1975–1991" .

Journal of Cold War Studies .

22 (3). MIT Press: 42.

doi : 10.1162/jcws_a_00950 .

ISSN 1531-3298 .

S2CID 221118100 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e International political youth organisations Global Young Greens International Federation of Liberal Youth International Union of Socialist Youth International Young Democrat Union World Federation of Democratic Youth Related articles: v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Communist youth wings Current Communist Youth League of China Ho Chi Minh Communist Youth Union Young Communist League (Cuba) Lao People's Revolutionary Youth Union Socialist Patriotic Youth League (North Korea) Former Komsomol (Soviet Union) Free German Youth (East Germany) 1 Mongolian Revolutionary Youth League 1 Polish Socialist Youth Union 1 Labour Youth Union of Albania Hungarian Young Communist League 1 Dimitrov Communist Youth Union (Bulgaria) Union of Communist Youth (Romania) Czechoslovak Socialist Youth Union League of Socialist Youth of Yugoslavia Democratic Youth Organisation of Afghanistan Youth of MPLA (Angola) 2 Mozambican Youth Organisation 2 People's Revolutionary Youth Union of Kampuchea Congolese Socialist Youth Union National Youth Organisation (Grenada) Seychelles People's Progressive Front Youth League (Seychelles) Related Young Communist International World Federation of Democratic Youth Pioneer movement 1 Re-organized after the dissolution 2 Still active but no longer identified with communism v t e Pioneer movement Current Young Pioneers of China ( People's Republic of China ) Korean Children's Union ( North Korea ) Ho Chi Minh Young Pioneer Organization ( Vietnam ) José Martí Pioneer Organization ( Cuba ) 2nd December Young Pioneer Brigade ( Laos ) Agostinho Neto Pioneer Organization ( Angola ) Historical Vladimir Lenin All-Union Pioneer Organization ( Soviet Union ) Ernst Thälmann Pioneer Organisation ( East Germany ) Sükhbaatar Mongolian Pioneers Organization ( Mongolia ) Pioneer Organization of the Socialist Youth Union ( Czechoslovakia ) Pioneers of Enver ( Albania ) Hungarian Pioneers' Association [ hu ] ( Hungary ) Dimitrovist Pioneer Organization "Septemberists" ( Bulgaria ) Scouting Organization of the Association of Polish Youth [ pl ] ( Poland ) Pioneer Organization ( Romania ) Union of Pioneers of Yugoslavia ( Yugoslavia ) Finnish Union of Democratic Pioneers [ fi ] ( Finland ) Young children Miao Miao Children's Regiment (People's Republic of China) Little Octobrists (Soviet Union) Little Heroes (Mongolia) Little Drummers [ hu ] (Hungary) Chavdarche [ bg ] (Bulgaria) Șoimii Patriei (Romania) Related Red scarf " Always prepared !" Pioneers Palace Children's Palace Mangyongdae Children's Palace Children's railway Timurite movement Malawi Young Pioneers Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_Federation_of_Democratic_Youth&oldid=1297381088 " Categories : World Federation of Democratic Youth Youth wings of political parties Youth wings of communist parties Foreign relations of the Soviet Union Propaganda in the Soviet Union Cold War espionage Communist front organizations Youth organizations established in 1945 International socialist organizations Hidden categories: CS1 Bengali-language sources (bn) CS1 Danish-language sources (da) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2007 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 21:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents World Federation of Democratic Youth 33 languages Add topic

