Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life and education 1.2 Priesthood 1.3 Episcopate in Sasima and Nazianzus 1.4 Gregory at Constantinople 1.5 Second Ecumenical Council and retirement to Nazianzus 2 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 2.1 Theological and other works 2.2 Influence 2.3 Relics 2.4 Death 3 Feast days 4 Notes and references 5 See also Toggle See also subsection 5.1 Bibliography 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Gregory of Nazianzus 67 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Boarisch Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Archbishop of Constantinople from 379 to 381 For his father, see Gregory of Nazianzus the Elder .

Saint Gregory of Nazianzus Fresco from The Chora , 14th cent.

[ 1 ] Theologian Doctor of the Church Great Hierarch Cappadocian Father Ecumenical Teacher Born c.

329 Arianzus , Cappadocia , Roman Empire Died 25 January 390 (aged c.

61) Arianzus, Cappadocia, Roman Empire Venerated in Eastern Orthodox Church Eastern Catholic Churches Catholic Church Oriental Orthodoxy Anglican Communion Lutheranism Canonized Pre-Congregation Major shrine Patriarchal Cathedral of St. George in the Fanar Feast Catholic Church : General Roman Calendar : 2 January [ 2 ] General Roman Calendar of 1960 : 9 May Eastern Catholic and Orthodox Churches : 25 January (primary feast day) 30 January ( Three Great Hierarchs ) Anglican Communion : 2 January [ 3 ] Lutheran Church : 10 January ( LCMS ); 14 June ( ELCA ) Armenian Apostolic Church : Saturday before the fourth Sunday of the Transfiguration or Saturday before the third Sunday of the Nativity [ 4 ] Attributes Vested as a bishop, wearing an omophorion ; holding a Gospel Book or scroll .

Iconographically , he is depicted as balding with a bushy white beard.

Theological work Era Patristic age Language Greek language Tradition or movement Nicene Christianity cataphatic theology pneumatology Notable ideas Trinity Homoousia consubstantiality theosis hypostasis Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Part of a series on the Eastern Orthodox Church Mosaic of Christ Pantocrator , Hagia Sophia Overview Structure Theology ( History of theology ) Liturgy Church history Holy Mysteries View of Salvation View of Mary View of icons Background Crucifixion / Resurrection / Ascension of Jesus Christianity Christian Church Apostolic succession Four Marks of the Church Orthodoxy Organization Autonomy Autocephaly Patriarchate Ecumenical Patriarch Episcopal polity Canon law Clergy Bishops Priests Deacons Monasticism Degrees Bratstvo Autocephalous jurisdictions Autocephalous Churches who are officially part of the communion: Constantinople Alexandria Antioch Jerusalem Russia Serbia Romania Bulgaria Georgia Cyprus Greece Poland Albania Czech Lands and Slovakia Autocephaly recognized by some autocephalous Churches de jure : America North Macedonia Autocephaly and canonicity recognized by Constantinople and 3 other autocephalous Churches: Ukraine (OCU) Spiritual independence recognized by Georgian Orthodox Church: Ukraine (UOC) Autonomous jurisdictions Sinai (JP) Finland (EP) Estonia (EP) Japan (MP) China (MP) Americas (RP) Bessarabia (RP) Moldova (MP) Semi-Autonomous: Crete (EP) Estonia (MP) ROCOR (MP) Episcopal assemblies Australia, New Zealand, and Oceania Austria Belgium, Holland, and Luxembourg Canada France Germany Great Britain and Ireland Italy and Malta Latin America Scandinavia Spain and Portugal Switzerland and Liechtenstein United States of America Noncanonical jurisdictions Old Believers Spiritual Christianity True Orthodoxy Catacomb Church Old Calendarists American Orthodox Catholic Church American World Patriarchs National churches: Abkhazia Belarus Italy Latvia Montenegro Turkey UOC–KP Evangelical Orthodox Ecumenical councils First Seven Ecumenical Councils : Nicaea I Constantinople I Ephesus Chalcedon Constantinople II Constantinople III Nicaea II Other possible ecumenical councils: Constantinople IV Constantinople V Other important councils: Quinisext Council Jassy Moscow Jerusalem Constantinople (1872) History Church Fathers Pentarchy Byzantine Empire Christianization of Georgia Christianization of Bulgaria Christianization of Kievan Rus' Great Schism Russia Ottoman Empire North America Moscow–Constantinople schism 15th–16th c.

1996 2018 Theology History of Eastern Orthodox theology ( 20th century (Neo-Palamism) ) Apophaticism Chrismation Contemplative prayer Essence vs. Energies Hesychasm Holy Trinity Hypostatic union Icons Metousiosis Mystical theology Nicene Creed Nepsis Oikonomia vs Akribeia Ousia Palamism Philokalia Phronema Sin Theosis Theotokos Differences from the Catholic Church Opposition to the Filioque Opposition to papal supremacy Liturgy and worship Divine Liturgy Divine Services Akathist Apolytikion Artos Ectenia Euchologion Holy Water Iconostasis Jesus Prayer Aprakos Kontakion Liturgical entrances Liturgical fans Lity Memorial service Memory Eternal Omophorion Eastern Orthodox bowing Eastern Orthodox marriage Praxis Paraklesis Paschal greeting Paschal Homily Paschal troparion Prayer rope Prosphora Russian bell ringing Semantron Sign of the cross Sticheron Troparion Vestments Use of incense Liturgical calendar Paschal cycle 12 Great Feasts Other feasts: Feast of Orthodoxy Intercession of the Theotokos The four fasting periods: Nativity Fast Great Lent Apostles' Fast Dormition Fast Major figures Saints ( Russian (until 15th century) , Russian (post-15th century) , Serbian , American ) Justin Martyr Athanasius of Alexandria Ephraim the Syrian Basil of Caesarea Cyril of Jerusalem Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa John Chrysostom Cyril of Alexandria John Climacus Maximus the Confessor John of Damascus Theodore the Studite Kassia Cyril and Methodius Photius I of Constantinople Vladimir the Great Sava I of Serbia Gregory Palamas Innocent of Alaska Other topics Architecture Folk Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs Cross Saint titles Statistics by country v t e Gregory of Nazianzus ( Greek : Γρηγόριος ὁ Ναζιανζηνός , romanized : Grēgorios ho Nazianzēnos ; c.

329 [ 5 ] – 25 January 390), [ 5 ] [ 6 ] also known as Gregory the Theologian or Gregory Nazianzen , was an early Roman Christian theologian and prelate who served as Archbishop of Constantinople from 380 to 381. He is widely considered the most accomplished rhetorical stylist of the patristic age .

[ 7 ] As a classically trained orator and philosopher, he infused Hellenism into the early Church , establishing the paradigm of Byzantine theologians and church officials.

[ 7 ] Gregory made a significant impact on the shape of Trinitarian theology among both Greek and Latin -speaking theologians, and he is remembered as the "Trinitarian Theologian". Much of his theological work continues to influence modern theologians, especially in regard to the relationship among the three Persons of the Trinity. Along with the brothers Basil of Caesarea and Gregory of Nyssa , he is known as one of the Cappadocian Fathers .

Gregory of Nazianzus is a saint in both Eastern and Western Christianity . In the Catholic Church he is numbered among the Doctors of the Church ; in the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Eastern Catholic Churches he is revered as one of the Three Holy Hierarchs , along with Basil of Caesarea and John Chrysostom . He is considered one of the Great Fathers in both Eastern and Western Christianity. He was considered the patron saint of Kotromanić dynasty and medieval Bosnia during the first half of the 15th century, while Saint George , the miracle-worker, has been the patron saint since at least mid-13th century, although confirmed by the papacy much later in 1461.

Saint Gregory the Great was also considered the patron of both the state and dynasty in the late 15th century.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] He is also one of only three men in the life of the Orthodox Church who have been officially designated "Theologian" by epithet, [ 10 ] the other two being John of Patmos (the Evangelist), and Symeon the New Theologian .

Biography [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] Gregory was born to Greek parents [ 11 ] in the family estate of Karbala outside the village of Arianzus , near Nazianzus , in southwest Cappadocia .

[ 12 ] : 18 His parents, Gregory of Nazianzus the Elder and Nonna of Nazianzus , were wealthy land-owners. In 325, Nonna converted her husband, a Hypsistarian , to Christianity; he was subsequently ordained as bishop of Nazianzus in 328 or 329.

[ 7 ] : vii The young Gregory and his brother, Caesarius of Nazianzus , first studied at home with their uncle Amphylokhios. Gregory went on to study advanced rhetoric and philosophy in Nazianzus, Caesarea , Alexandria , and Athens . On the way to Athens, his ship encountered a violent storm, and the terrified Gregory prayed to Christ that if He would deliver him, he would dedicate his life to His service.

[ 7 ] : 28 While at Athens, he developed a close friendship with his fellow student Basil of Caesarea , and also made the acquaintance of Flavius Claudius Julianus , who would later become the Roman emperor known as Julian .

[ 12 ] : 19, 25 In Athens, Gregory studied under the famous rhetoricians Himerius and Proaeresius .

[ 13 ] He may have been baptized there, or shortly after his return to Cappadocia.

[ 14 ] Priesthood [ edit ] In 361, Gregory returned to Nazianzus and was ordained a presbyter by his father's wish, who wanted him to assist with caring for local Christians.

[ 7 ] : 99–102 The younger Gregory, who had been considering a monastic existence, resented his father's decision to force him to choose between priestly services and a solitary existence, calling it an "act of tyranny".

[ 12 ] : 32 [ 15 ] Leaving home after a few days, he met his friend Basil at Annesoi, where the two lived as ascetics.

[ 7 ] : 102 However, Basil urged him to return home to assist his father, which he did for the next year. Arriving at Nazianzus, Gregory found the local Christian community split by theological differences and his father accused of heresy by local monks.

[ 7 ] : 107 Gregory helped to heal the division through a combination of personal diplomacy and oratory.

[ citation needed ] By this time, Emperor Julian had publicly declared himself in opposition to Christianity.

[ 7 ] : 115 In response to the emperor's rejection of the Christian faith, Gregory composed his Invectives Against Julian between 362 and 363.

Invectives asserts that Christianity will overcome imperfect rulers such as Julian through love and patience. This process as described by Gregory is the public manifestation of the process of deification ( theosis ), which leads to a spiritual elevation and mystical union with God.

[ 7 ] : 121 Julian resolved, in late 362, to vigorously prosecute Gregory and his other Christian critics; however, the emperor perished the following year during a campaign against the Persians.

[ 7 ] : 125–126 With the death of the emperor, Gregory and the Eastern churches were no longer under the threat of persecution, as the new Roman emperor Jovian was an avowed Christian and supporter of the church.

[ 7 ] : 130 Gregory spent the next few years combating Arianism , which threatened to divide the region of Cappadocia . In this tense environment, Gregory interceded on behalf of his friend Basil with Bishop Eusebius ( Mazaca ).

[ 7 ] : 138–142 The two friends then entered a period of close fraternal cooperation as they participated in a great rhetorical contest of the Caesarean church precipitated by the arrival of accomplished Arian theologians and rhetors.

[ 7 ] : 143 In the subsequent public debates, presided over by agents of the Emperor Valens , Gregory and Basil emerged triumphant. This success confirmed for both Gregory and Basil that their futures lay in administration of the Church.

[ 7 ] : 143 Basil, who had long displayed inclinations to the episcopacy, was elected bishop of the see of Caesarea in Cappadocia in 370.

[ citation needed ] Episcopate in Sasima and Nazianzus [ edit ] Gregory was ordained Bishop of Sasima in 372 by Basil.

[ 7 ] : 190–195 Basil created this see in order to strengthen his position in his dispute with Anthimus , bishop of Tyana .

[ 13 ] The ambitions of Gregory's father to have his son rise in the Church hierarchy and the insistence of his friend Basil convinced Gregory to accept this position despite his reservations. Gregory would later refer to his episcopal ordination as forced upon him by his strong-willed father and Basil.

[ 7 ] : 187–192 Describing his new bishopric, Gregory lamented how it was nothing more than an "utterly dreadful, pokey little hole; a paltry horse-stop on the main road... devoid of water, vegetation, or the company of gentlemen... this was my Church of Sasima!" [ 16 ] He made little effort to administer his new diocese, complaining to Basil that he preferred instead to pursue a contemplative life.

[ 12 ] : 38–39 By late 372, Gregory returned to Nazianzus to assist his dying father with the administration of his diocese.

[ 7 ] : 199 This strained his relationship with Basil, who insisted that Gregory resume his post at Sasima. Gregory retorted that he had no intention to continue to play the role of pawn to advance Basil's interests.

[ 17 ] He instead focused his attention on his new duties as coadjutor of Nazianzus.

It was around this time that his sister, Saint Gorgonia , died, and he preached a eulogy at her funeral.

Following the deaths of his mother and father in 374, Gregory continued to administer the Diocese of Nazianzus but refused to be named bishop. Donating most of his inheritance to the needy, he lived an austere existence.

[ 13 ] At the end of 375, he withdrew to a monastery at Seleukia , living there for three years. Near the end of this period, his friend Basil died. Although Gregory's health did not permit him to attend the funeral, he wrote a heartfelt letter of condolence to Basil's brother, Gregory of Nyssa , and composed twelve memorial poems dedicated to the memory of his departed friend. (The Greek Anthology, book I epigram 86 and book VIII epigrams 2–11).

Gregory at Constantinople [ edit ] Upon the death of Emperor Valens in 378, the accession of Theodosius I , a steadfast supporter of Nicene orthodoxy, was good news to those who wished to purge Constantinople of Arian and Apollinarian domination.

[ 7 ] : 235 The exiled Nicene party gradually returned to the city. From his deathbed, Basil reminded them of Gregory's capabilities and likely recommended his friend to champion the Trinitarian cause in Constantinople.

[ 7 ] : 235–236 [ 18 ] In 379, the Antioch synod and its archbishop, Meletius , asked Gregory to go to Constantinople to lead a theological campaign to win over that city to Nicene orthodoxy.

[ 12 ] : 42 After much hesitation, Gregory agreed. His cousin Theodosia offered him a villa for his residence; Gregory immediately transformed much of it into a church, naming it Anastasia, "a scene for the resurrection of the faith".

[ 7 ] : 241 [ 19 ] From this little chapel he delivered five powerful discourses on Nicene doctrine, explaining the nature of the Trinity and the unity of the Godhead.

[ 13 ] Refuting the Eunomian denial of the Holy Spirit's divinity, Gregory offered this argument: Look at these facts: Christ is born, the Holy Spirit is His Forerunner. Christ is baptized, the Spirit bears witness to this ... Christ works miracles, the Spirit accompanies them. Christ ascends, the Spirit takes His place. What great things are there in the idea of God which are not in His power? What titles appertaining to God do not apply also to Him, except for Unbegotten and Begotten? I tremble when I think of such an abundance of titles, and how many Names they blaspheme, those who revolt against the Spirit!

[ 20 ] Gregory's homilies were well received and attracted ever-growing crowds to Anastasia. Fearing his popularity, his opponents decided to strike. On the vigil of Easter in 379, an Arian mob burst into his church during worship services, wounding Gregory and killing another bishop. Escaping the mob, Gregory next found himself betrayed by his erstwhile friend, the philosopher Maximus I of Constantinople . Maximus I, who was in secret alliance with Peter II of Alexandria , attempted to seize Gregory's position and have himself ordained bishop of Constantinople.

[ 12 ] : 43 Shocked, Gregory decided to resign his office, but the faction faithful to him induced him to stay and ejected Maximus I. This episode left Gregory embarrassed, and exposed him to criticism as a provincial simpleton unable to cope with the intrigues of the imperial city.

[ 12 ] : 43 Affairs in Constantinople remained confused as Gregory's position was still unofficial, and Arian priests yet occupied many important churches. The arrival of the emperor Theodosius in 380 settled matters in Gregory's favor. The emperor, determined to eliminate Arianism, expelled Demophilus of Constantinople . Gregory was subsequently enthroned as bishop of Constantinople at the Basilica of the Apostles, replacing Demophilus.

[ 12 ] : 45 Second Ecumenical Council and retirement to Nazianzus [ edit ] A Byzantine-style icon depicting the Three Holy Hierarchs : (left to right:) Basil of Caesarea , John Chrysostom and Gregory of Nazianzus.

Theodosius wanted to further unify the entire empire behind the orthodox position and decided to convene a church council to resolve matters of faith and discipline.

[ 12 ] : 45 Gregory was of similar mind in wishing to unify Christianity. In the spring of 381, they convened the First Council of Constantinople , which was attended by 150 Eastern bishops. After the death of the presiding bishop, Meletius of Antioch , Gregory was selected to lead the council. Hoping to reconcile the West with the East, he offered to recognize Paulinus II as Patriarch of Antioch . The Egyptian and Macedonian bishops who had supported Maximus's ordination arrived late for the council. Once there, they refused to recognise Gregory's position as head of the church of Constantinople, arguing that his transfer from the See of Sasima was canonically illegitimate.

[ 7 ] : 358–359 Gregory was physically exhausted and worried that he was losing the confidence of the bishops and the emperor.

[ 7 ] : 359 Rather than press his case and risk further division, he decided to resign his office: "Let me be as the Prophet Jonah! I was responsible for the storm, but I would sacrifice myself for the salvation of the ship. Seize me and throw me ... I was not happy when I ascended the throne, and gladly would I descend it".

[ 21 ] He shocked the council with his surprise resignation and then delivered a dramatic speech to Theodosius asking to be released from his offices. The emperor, moved by his words, applauded, commended his labor, and granted his resignation. The Council asked him to appear once more for a farewell ritual and celebratory orations. Gregory used this occasion to deliver a final address ( Or.

42) and then departed.

[ 7 ] : 361 Returning to his homeland of Cappadocia, Gregory once again resumed his position as bishop of Nazianzus. He spent the next year combating the local Apollinarian heretics and struggling with periodic illness. He also began composing De Vita Sua , his autobiographical poem.

[ 12 ] : 50 By the end of 383 he found his health too feeble to cope with episcopal duties. Gregory established Eulalius as bishop of Nazianzus and then withdrew into the solitude of Arianzus . After enjoying six peaceful years in retirement at his family estate, he died on 25 January 390.

[ citation needed ] Gregory faced stark choices throughout his life: Should he pursue studies as a rhetor or philosopher? Would a monastic life be more appropriate than public ministry? Was it better to blaze his own path or follow the course mapped for him by his father and Basil? Gregory's writings illuminate the conflicts which both tormented and motivated him. Biographers suggest that it was this dialectic which defined him, forged his character, and inspired his search for meaning and truth.

[ 12 ] : 54 Legacy [ edit ] Andrei Rublev , Gregory of Nazianzus , (1408), Dormition Cathedral, Vladimir .

Theological and other works [ edit ] Gregory's most significant theological contributions arose from his defense of the doctrine of the Trinity . He is especially noted for his contributions to the field of pneumatology — that is, theology concerning the nature of the Holy Spirit .

[ 22 ] In this regard, Gregory is the first to use the idea of procession to describe the relationship between the Spirit and the Godhead: "The Holy Spirit is truly Spirit, coming forth from the Father indeed but not after the manner of the Son, for it is not by generation but by procession , since I must coin a word for the sake of clearness." [ 23 ] Although Gregory does not fully develop the concept, the idea of procession would shape most later thought about the Holy Spirit.

[ 24 ] He emphasized that Jesus did not cease to be God when he became a man, nor did he lose any of his divine attributes when he took on human nature. Furthermore, Gregory asserted that Christ was fully human, including a full human soul. He also proclaimed the eternality of the Holy Spirit, saying that the Holy Spirit's actions were somewhat hidden in the Old Testament but much clearer since the ascension of Jesus into Heaven and the descent of the Holy Spirit at the feast of Pentecost.

[ 25 ] In contrast to the Neo-Arian belief that the Son is anomoios , or "unlike" the Father, and with the Semi-Arian assertion that the Son is homoiousios , or "like" the Father, Gregory and his fellow Cappadocians maintained the Nicaean doctrine of homoousia , or consubstantiality of the Son with the Father.

[ 26 ] : 9–10 The Cappadocian Fathers asserted that God's nature is unknowable to man; helped to develop the framework of hypostases , or three persons united in a single Godhead; illustrated how Jesus is the eikon of the Father; and explained the concept of theosis , the belief that all Christians can be assimilated with God in "imitation of the incarnate Son as the divine model".

[ 26 ] : 10 Some of Gregory's theological writings suggest that, like his friend Gregory of Nyssa , he may have supported some form of the doctrine of Apokatastasis , the belief that God will bring all of creation into harmony with the Kingdom of Heaven .

[ 27 ] This led Philip Schaff and late-nineteenth century Christian universalists such as John Wesley Hanson to describe Gregory's theology as universalist.

[ 28 ] This view of Gregory is also held by some modern theologians such as John Sachs, who said that Gregory had "leanings" toward apokatastasis, but in a "cautious, undogmatic" way.

[ 29 ] However, it is not clear or universally accepted that Gregory held to the doctrine of Apokatastasis.

[ 30 ] Apart from the several theological discourses, Gregory was also one of the most important early Christian men of letters, a very accomplished orator, even perhaps one of the greatest of his time.

[ 26 ] : 21 Gregory was also a very prolific poet who wrote theological, moral, and biographical poems.

[ 31 ] The book VIII of the Greek Anthology contains exclusively 254 epigrams of his.

[ 32 ] Influence [ edit ] Gregory's great nephew Nichobulos served as his literary executor, preserving and editing many of his writings. A cousin, Eulalios, published several of Gregory's more noteworthy works in 391.

[ 7 ] : xi By 400, Rufinius began translating his orations into Latin. As Gregory's works circulated throughout the empire they influenced theological thought. His orations were cited as authoritative by the Council of Ephesus in 431. By 451 he was designated Theologus , or Theologian by the Council of Chalcedon [ 7 ] : xi – a title held by no others save John the Apostle [ 13 ] and Symeon the New Theologian (949–1022). He is widely quoted by Eastern Orthodox theologians and highly regarded as a defender of the Christian faith. His contributions to Trinitarian theology are also influential and often cited in the Western churches.

[ 33 ] Paul Tillich credits Gregory of Nazianzus for having "created the definitive formulae for the doctrine of the trinity".

[ 34 ] Additionally, the Liturgy of Saint Gregory the Theologian in use by the Coptic Church is named after him.

[ 35 ] Relics [ edit ] Following his death, Gregory was buried at Nazianzus . His relics, consisting of portions of his body and clothing, were transferred to Constantinople in 950, into the Church of the Holy Apostles . Part of the relics were taken from Constantinople by Crusaders during the Fourth Crusade , in 1204, and ended up in Rome . On 27 November 2004, those relics, along with those of John Chrysostom , were returned to Istanbul by Pope John Paul II , with the Vatican retaining a small portion of both. The relics are now enshrined in the Patriarchal St. George's Cathedral, Istanbul in the Fanar .

[ 36 ] Death [ edit ] During the six years of life which remained to him after his final retirement to his birthplace, Gregory composed the greater part of his copious poetical works. These include a valuable autobiographical poem of nearly 2000 lines; about one hundred other shorter poems relating to his past career; and a large number of epitaphs, epigrams, and epistles to well-known people during that era. The poems that he wrote that dealt with his personal affairs refer to the continuous illness and severe sufferings (physical and spiritual) which assailed him during his last years. In the tiny plot of ground at Arianzus , all that remained to him of his rich inheritance was by a fountain near which there was a shady walk. Gregory retired here to spend his days as a hermit. It was during this time that he decided to write theological discourses and poetry of both a religious and an autobiographical nature.

[ 37 ] He would receive occasional visits from intimate friends, as well as visits from strangers who were attracted to his retreat by his large reputation for sanctity and learning. He died about 25 January 390, although the exact date of his death is unknown.

[ 38 ] Feast days [ edit ] Gregory of Nazianzus is celebrated on different days across Christianity: 2 January: The Catholic Church and the Church of England celebrate Gregory's feast on 2 January; [ 2 ] [ 39 ] 10 January: The Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod commemorates Gregory, along with Basil of Caesarea and Gregory of Nyssa (the Cappadocian Fathers ) on 10 January; [ 40 ] 19, 25 and 30 January: The Eastern Orthodox Church and the Eastern Catholic Churches celebrate two major feast days in Gregory's honor. 25 January is his primary feast; 30 January, known as the feast of the Three Great Hierarchs , commemorates him along with John Chrysostom and Basil of Caesarea.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] There is also a minor feast day on 19 January which commemorates the transfer of his relics ; [ 43 ] 9 May: The Episcopal Church celebrates Gregory's feast on 9 May; [ 44 ] 14 June: The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America commemorates Gregory of Nazianzus together with his friends Basil the Great and Gregory of Nyssa on 14 June; [ citation needed ] Armenian Dates: The Armenian Apostolic Church devotes two days each year to Gregory. He is commemorated together with eleven other doctors of the Church on the Saturday before the feast of the Discovery of the Holy Cross (which is observed on the Sunday closest to 26 October.

[ 45 ] The Armenian Church calendar also has a feast day dedicated solely to Gregory. This falls either on the Saturday before the fourth Sunday of the Transfiguration , or if that day falls during the feast of the Assumption , on the Saturday before the third Sunday after the Nativity .

[ 46 ] Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Underwood 1966 , p. 244.

^ a b Saint Gregory of Nazianzus at the Encyclopædia Britannica ^ "The Calendar" .

Church of England . Retrieved 2 January 2020 .

^ "Commemoration of St. Gregory the Theologian" . Archived from the original on 26 September 2021 . Retrieved 31 July 2021 .

^ a b Liturgy of the Hours Volume I, Proper of Saints, 2 January.

^ "Ορθόδοξος Συναξαριστής :: Άγιος Γρηγόριος ο Θεολόγος" .

Saint.gr . 25 January 2016 . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y McGuckin, John (2001), Saint Gregory of Nazianzus - An Intellectual Biography , Crestwood, N.Y.

^ Lovrenović, Dubravko (2008). "Sv. Grgur čudotvorac – zaštitnik Kotromanića i srednjovjekovne Bosne". In Karamatić, Fra Marko (ed.).

Zbornik o Marku Dobretiću (pdf) (in Serbo-Croatian). Sarajevo: Franjevačka teologija. pp.

9– 32.

ISBN 978-9958-9026-0-4 . Retrieved 17 May 2021 .

^ Housley, Norman (17 June 2016).

The Crusade in the Fifteenth Century - Converging and competing cultures .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-317-03688-3 . Retrieved 3 March 2019 – via Google Books.

^ Great Synaxaristes: (in Greek) Ὁ Ἅγιος Γρηγόριος ὁ Θεολόγος Ἀρχιεπίσκοπος Κωνσταντινουπόλεως , 25 Ιανουαρίου. ΜΕΓΑΣ ΣΥΝΑΞΑΡΙΣΤΗΣ.

^ The Riverside Dictionary of Biography . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. 2005. p. 336.

ISBN 9780618493371 .

Gregory of Nazianzus, St, c. 330 – c. 389 AD • Greek prelate and theologian - Born of Greek parents in Cappadocia, he was educated in Caesarea, Alexandria and Athens ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Ruether, Rosemary Radford (1969), Gregory of Nazianzus - Rhetor and Philosopher , Oxford University Press ^ a b c d e Hunter-Blair, D. O. (1910), "Gregory of Nazianzus", Catholic Encyclopedia , Robert Appleton ^ Daley, Brian (2012).

Gregory of Nazianzus . The Early Church Fathers.

Routledge . pp.

7– 9.

ISBN 9781134807277 .

^ Jacques Paul Migne (ed), Patrologia Graeca (PG), (1857–1866), 37.1053, Carm. de vita sua , l.345 ^ Gregory, as quoted in Patrologia Graeca 37.1059–60, De Vita Sua , vv. 439–446.

^ Gallay, P. (1964), Grégoire de Nazianze (in French), p. 61 ; quoting from Ep. 48, PG 37.97.

^ Oration 43.2, PG 36.497.

^ 2 Kings 4:8 and Orat. 26.17, PG 35.1249.

^ Nazianzus, Gregory of, Oration , The Orthodox Church of America, p. 31:29 , retrieved 2 May 2007 ^ Patrologia Graeca , 37.1157–9, Carm. de vita sua , ll 1828–1855.

^ Michael O'Carroll, "Gregory of Nazianzus" in Trinitas (Wilmington, DE, Michael Glazier, 1987).

^ Gregory of Nazianzus, Five Theological Orations , oration five. This fifth oration deals entirely with the Holy Spirit.

^ HEW Turner and Francis Young, "Procession(s)" in The Westminster Dictionary of Christian Theology , ed. A. Richardson and J. Bowden (Philadelphia, Westminster Press, 1983). Through Augustine, the idea would develop in the West into "double-procession", resulting in the Filioque clause and the split between Eastern and Western Christianity.

^ Meinel, Fabian (2009). "Gregory of Nazianzus' Poemata Arcana : ἄρρητα and Christian Persuasion".

The Cambridge Classical Journal .

55 : 71– 96.

doi : 10.1017/S1750270500000208 .

ISSN 1750-2705 .

JSTOR 44688044 .

S2CID 170730880 .

^ a b c Børtnes (2006), Gregory of Nazianzus - Images and Reflections ^ " Apokatastasis ", New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge, Vol. I .

^ Hanson, J. W.; Universalism - The Prevailing Doctrine Of The Christian Church During Its First Five Hundred Years .

Chapter XV: Gregory Nazianzen , Boston and Chicago Universalist Publishing House , 1899.

^ Sachs, John R.; "Apocatastasis in Patristic Theology", Theological Studies, 54 (December 1993), p. 632.

^ David L. Balas, "Apokatastasis" in The Encyclopedia of Early Christianity , second edition, ed. Everett Ferguson (New York, Garland Publishing , 1997), details Gregory of Nyssa 's adherence to the doctrine, while making no mention of Gregory of Nazianzus.

^ McDonald, James Joseph (2020).

Paideia in the poetry of Gregory Nazianzen (PDF) (PhD thesis). University of Glasgow . Retrieved 31 January 2025 .

^ Storin, Bradley K.

"In a Silent Way: Asceticism and Literature in the Rehabilitation of Gregory of Nazianzus" .

Academia.edu . Retrieved 31 January 2025 .

^ See how the 1992 edition of the Catechism of the Catholic Church cites a variety of Gregory's orations ^ Tillich, Paul; A History of Christian Thought ( Simon & Schuster , 1968), p. 76.

^ Wainwright, Geoffrey; Westerfield Tucker, Karen B.; Chaillot, Christine (2006), "The Ancient Oriental Churches", The Oxford History of Christian Worship , New York: Oxford University Press , p. 139, ISBN 978-0-19-513886-3 ^ Fisher, Ian (28 November 2004), "Pope returns remains of 2 Orthodox patriarchs", San Diego Union-Tribune , archived from the original on 29 August 2007 , retrieved 24 October 2012 ^ "Saint Gregory of Nazianzen" . 3 January 2009.

^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA - St. Gregory of Nazianzus" .

newadvent.org . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ "Join us in Daily Prayer – The Church of England" .

churchofengland.org . 31 May 2018.

^ Lutheranism 101, CPH, St. Louis, 2010, p. 277 ^ "St Gregory the Theologian the Archbishop of Constantinople" .

ocafs.oca.org . Orthodox Church in America . Retrieved 26 September 2009 .

^ "Synaxis of the Ecumenical Teachers and Hierarchs - Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom" .

ocafs.oca.org . Orthodox Church in America . Retrieved 26 September 2009 .

^ "The transfer of the relics of Saint Gregory the Theologian" .

OCA .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2024 . Retrieved 3 November 2024 .

^ Lesser Feasts and Fasts 2018 . Church Publishing, Inc. 1 December 2019.

ISBN 978-1-64065-234-7 .

^ "Commemoration of the Twelve Archimandrites – STS. Retheos, Dionisios, Selbestros, Athanas, Cyril of Jerusalem, Ephrem Khourie Assyrian, Vasil (Barsegh) of Caesaria, Gregory of Nyssa, Gregory of Nazianzus, Epiphan of Cyprus, John Chrysostom and Cyril" .

^ "St. Gregory the Theologian and the Expansive Intellectual World of Armenian Commentaries – VEMKAR" .

See also [ edit ] List of Ecumenical Patriarchs of Constantinople Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople Bibliography [ edit ] Børtnes, Jostein; Hägg, Tomas (2006), Gregory of Nazianzus - Images and Reflections , Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, ISBN 978-87-635-0386-0 .

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"St. Gregory of Nazianzus" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

John Anthony McGuckin , St. Gregory of Nazianzus - An Intellectual Biography , Crestwood, NY, 2001, St. Vladimir's Seminar Press, ISBN 0-88141-222-8 .

Jacques Paul Migne (General Editor), Cursus Completus Patrologiae Graecae , Volumes 35–38, Paris, 1857–1866.

The Orthodox Church of America website article on St. Gregory the Theologian, Retrieved 2 May 2007.

Rosemary Radford Ruether , Gregory of Nazianzus , Oxford, 1969, Oxford University Press.

Turner, H.E.W. and Francis Young, "Procession(s)" in The Westminster Dictionary of Christian Theology , ed. A. Richardson and J. Bowden, Philadelphia, 1983, Westminster Press, 1983.

Underwood, Paul Atkins (1966).

The Kariye Djami . Vol. 1. Bollingen Foundation.

LCCN 65-10404 .

Gregory of Nazianzus, translated by Martha Vinson, Select Orations , Catholic University of America Press, 2003, Link .

Further reading [ edit ] Michael Azkoul, "Saint Gregory the Theologian - Poetry and Faith", Patristic and Byzantine Review , 14.1-3 (1995), 59–68.

Beeley, Christopher A. (2007).

"Divine Causality and the Monarchy of God the Father in Gregory of Nazianzus" .

The Harvard Theological Review .

100 (2): 199– 214.

doi : 10.1017/S001781600700154X .

JSTOR 4495113 .

S2CID 170113325 .

Brian Daley, ed., Gregory Nazianzen, Early Church Fathers , London, Routledge , an imprint of Taylor and Francis Books, 2005 ISBN 0-415-12181-7 p. 192.

K. Demoen, "Biblical vs. Non-Biblical Vocabulary in Gregorius Nazianzenus; a Quantitative Approach", Informatique 2 (1988–1989), 243–253.

Elena Ene D-Vasilescu, "Generation (γενεά) in Gregory Nazianzen's poem on the Son", Akropolis, vol. 1 (2017), pp. 169–184.

J. Egan, "Gregory of Nazianzus and the Logos Doctrine", J. Plevnic, ed., Word and Spirit - Essays in Honor of David Michael Stanley , Willowdale, ON, 1975, pp. 281–322.

Anna-Stina Ellverson, The Dual Nature of Man - A Study in the Theological Anthropology of Gregory of Nazianzus, Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis , 1981 ISBN 91-554-1206-8 {Amazon.com}.

Gerald Fitzpatrick, "St Gregory Nazianzen - Education for Salvation", Patristic and Byzantine Review 10.1-2 (1991), 47–55.

R.C. Gregg, Consolation Philosophy - Greek and Christian Paideia in Basil and the Two Gregories , Washington, D.C., Catholic University of America Press, 1975 ISBN 0-8132-1000-3 {Amazon.com}.

Edward R. Hardy, ed.

Christology of the Later Fathers , J. Baillie et al., eds.

Library of Christian Classics , Vol. 3, Philadelphia, Westminster, 1995, paperback ISBN 0-664-24152-2 .

Carol Harrison and Brian Daley (Editor), Gregory Nazianzen , Routledge , 1999 ISBN 0-415-12181-7 .

V. Harrison, "Some Aspects of Saint Gregory (Nazianzen) the Theologian's Soteriology", Greek Orthodox Theological Review , 34 (1989), 19–43/11-8.

Susan R. Holman, "Healing the Social Leper in Gregory of Nyssa's and Gregory of Nazianzus's peri philoptochias", Harvard Theological Review 92.3 (1999), 283–309.

M. Edmund Hussey, "The Theology of the Holy Spirit in the Writings of St. Gregory of Nazianzus", Diakonia , 14.3 (1979), 224–233.

Anne Karahan, "The Impact of Cappadocian Theology on Byzantine Aesthetics - Gregory of Nazianzus on the Unity and Singularity of Christ", in: The Ecumenical Legacy of the Cappadocians, pp. 159–184, Ed. N. Dumitraşcu, New York, Palgrave Macmillan 2015 ISBN 978-1-137-51394-6 .

George A. Kennedy, Greek Rhetoric Under Christian Emperors , Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1983 ISBN 0-691-03565-2 pp. 215–239 {Amazon.com}.

Vasiliki Limberis, ""Religion" as the Cipher for Identity - The Cases of Emperor Julian, Libanius, and Gregory Nazianzus", Harvard Theological Review 93.4 (2000), 373–400.

N.B. McLynn, "The Other Olympias - Gregory of Nazianzen and the Family of Vitalianus", ZAC 2 (1998), 227–246.

Ruth Majercik, "A Reminiscence of the Chaldean Oracles at Gregory of Nazianzus Or 29,2", Vigiliae Christianae , 52.3 (1998), 286–292.

P.J. Maritz, "Logos Articulation in Gregory of Nazianzus", Acta Patristica et Byzantina , 6 (1995), 99–108.

E.P. Meijuring, "The Doctrine of the Will and the Trinity in the Orations of Gregory of Nazianzus", Nederlands Theologisch Tijdschrift , 27.3 (1973), 224–234.

Celica Milovanovic-Barham, "Gregory of Nazianzus: Ars Poetica (In suos versus: Carmen 2.1.39)," Journal of Early Christian Studies 5.4 (1997), 497–510.

H. Musurillo, "The Poetry of Gregory of Nazianzus", Thought 45 (1970): 45–55.

T.A. Noble, "Gregory Nazianzen's Use of Scripture in Defence of the Deity of the Spirit", Tyndale Bulletin 39 (1988), 101–123.

F.W. Norris, "Of Thorns and Roses: The Logic of Belief in Gregory of Nazianzen", Church History , Vol. 53 (1984), 455–464.

F.W. Norris, "The Tetragrammaton in Gregory Nazianzen (Or. 30.17)", Vigiliae Christianae 43 (1989), 339–344.

F.W. Norris, Faith Gives Fullness to Reasoning - The Five Theological Orations of Gregory Nazianzen, Supplements to Vigiliae Christianae , Vol 13, Leiden: Brill, 1990 ISBN 90-04-09253-6 , p. 314 {Amazon.com}.

Jay Wesley Richards, "Can a Male Savior Save Women? - Gregory of Nazianzus on the Logos' Assumption of Human Nature", Christian Scholar's Review 28.1 (1998), 42–57.

K. Skurat, "St. Gregory of Nazianzus on Philosophy and Knowledge of God", Journal of Moscow Patriarchate , 10 (October 1989), 57–62.

B. K. Storin, Self-Portrait in Three Colors: Gregory of Nazianzus's Epistolary Autobiography , Christianity in Late Antiquity 6 (Oakland, University of California Press, 2019).

B. K. Storin, trans.

Gregory of Nazianzus's Letter Collection - The Complete Translation , Christianity in Late Antiquity 7 (Oakland, University of California Press, 2019).

Frank Thielman, " The Place of the Apocalypse in the Canon of St Gregory Nazianzen ", Tyndale Bulletin , 49.1 (1998), 155–157.

Steven Peter Tsichlis, "The Nature of Theology in the Theological Orations of St. Gregory Nazianzus", Diakonia 16.3 (1981), 238–246.

Raymond Van Dam, "Self-Representation in the Will of Gregory of Nazianzus", Journal of Theological Studies 46.1 (1995), 118–148.

Kenneth Paul Wesche, "The Union of God and Man in Jesus Christ in the Thought of Gregory of Nazianzus", St. Vladimir's Theological Quarterly 28.2 (1984), 83–98.

Donald F. Winslow, "Gregory of Nazianzus and Love for the Poor", Anglican Theological Review 47 (1965), 348–359.

Donald F. Winslow, The Dynamics of Salvation - A Study in Gregory of Nazianzus , Cambridge, MA: North American Patristic Society, 1979 ISBN 0-915646-06-4 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gregory of Nazianzus .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Gregory of Nazianzus .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Gregory of Nazianzus Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Γρηγόριος Ναζιανζηνός "Gregory of Nazianzus" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 563.

Works of Gregory of Nazianzus translated into English NAZIANZOS : Centre for the study of Gregory of Nazianzus at the Université catholique de Louvain Colonnade Statue in St Peter's Square Works by or about Gregory of Nazianzus at the Internet Archive Works by Gregory of Nazianzus at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Titles of the Great Christian Church Preceded by Evagrius Archbishop of Constantinople Disputed by Maximus I 380 – 381 Succeeded by Nectarius v t e Bishops of Byzantium and Patriarchs of Constantinople Bishops of Byzantium ( Roman period, 38–330 AD) Andrew Stachys Onesimus Polycarpus I Plutarch Sedecion Diogenes Eleutherius Felix Polycarpus II Athenodorus Euzois Laurence Alypius Pertinax Olympianus Marcus I Philadelphus Cyriacus I Castinus Eugenius I Titus Dometius Rufinus Probus Metrophanes Alexander Archbishops of Constantinople (Roman period, 330–451 AD) Alexander Paul I Eusebius Macedonius I Eudoxius Evagrius Demophilus Maximus I Gregory I Nectarius John I Chrysostom Arsacius Atticus Sisinnius I Nestorius Maximianus Proclus Flavian Anatolius Patriarchs of Constantinople ( Byzantine period, 451–1453 AD) Anatolius Gennadius I Acacius Fravitta Euphemius Macedonius II Timothy I John II Epiphanius Anthimus I Menas Eutychius John III John IV Cyriacus II Thomas I Sergius I Pyrrhus Paul II Peter Thomas II John V Constantine I Theodore I George I Paul III Callinicus I Cyrus John VI Germanus I Anastasius Constantine II Nicetas I Paul IV Tarasius Nicephorus I Theodotus I Antony I John VII Methodius I Ignatios Photios I Stephen I Antony II Nicholas I Εuthymius I Stephen II Tryphon Theophylact Polyeuctus Βasil I Αntony III Nicholas II Sisinnius II Sergius II Eustathius Alexius Michael I Constantine III John VIII Cosmas I Eustratius Nicholas III John IX Leo Michael II Cosmas II Nicholas IV Theodotus II Neophytus I Constantine IV Luke Michael III Chariton Theodosius I Basil II Nicetas II Leontius Dositheus George II John X Michael IV † Theodore II † Maximus II † Μanuel I † Germanus II † Methodius II † Manuel II † Arsenius † Nicephorus II † Germanus III Joseph I John XI Gregory II Athanasius I John XII Nephon I John XIII Gerasimus I Isaias John XIV Isidore I Callistus I Philotheus Macarius Nilus Antony IV Callistus II Matthew I Euthymius II Joseph II Metrophanes II Gregory III Athanasius II Patriarchs of Constantinople ( Ottoman period, 1453–1923 AD) Gennadius II Isidore II Joasaph I Sophronius I Mark II Symeon I Dionysius I Raphael I Maximus III Nephon II Maximus IV Joachim I Pachomius I Theoleptus I Jeremias I Joannicius I Dionysius II Joasaph II Metrophanes III Jeremias II Pachomius II Theoleptus II Matthew II Gabriel I Theophanes I Meletius I Neophytus II Raphael II Cyril I Timothy II Gregory IV Anthimus II Cyril II Athanasius III Neophytus III Parthenius I Parthenius II Joannicius II Cyril III Paisius I Parthenius III Gabriel II Parthenius IV Dionysius III Clement Methodius III Dionysius IV Gerasimus II Athanasius IV James Callinicus II Neophytus IV Gabriel III Neophytus V Cyprianus Athanasius V Cyril IV Cosmas III Jeremias III ( Callinicus III ) Paisius II Seraphim I Neophytus VI Cyril V Callinicus IV (III) Seraphim II Joannicius III Samuel Meletius II Theodosius II Sophronius II Gabriel IV Procopius Neophytus VII Gerasimus III Gregory V Callinicus V (IV) Jeremias IV Cyril VI Eugenius II Anthimus III Chrysanthus Agathangelus Constantius I Constantius II Gregory VI Anthimus IV Anthimus V Germanus IV Meletius III Anthimus VI Cyril VII Joachim II Sophronius III Joachim III Joachim IV Dionysius V Neophytus VIII Anthimus VII Constantine V Germanus V Meletius IV Patriarchs of Constantinople ( Turkish period, since 1923 AD) Gregory VII Constantine VI Basil III Photius II Benjamin Maximus V Athenagoras Demetrius Bartholomew † in exile at Nicaea Christianity portal v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal v t e Cappadocian Fathers Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa v t e Saints in the Coptic Church Patriarchs Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Prophets Moses Job Samuel David Hosea Amos Micah Joel Obadiah Jonah Nahum Noah Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Isaiah Jeremiah Baruch Ezekiel Daniel John the Baptist Theotokos Mary, Our Lady of Assiut Warraq Zeitoun Seven Archangels Michael Gabriel Raphael Suriel Zedekiel Sarathiel Ananiel Apostles Andrew Bartholomew James, son of Alphaeus James, son of Zebedee John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Disciples Apollos Barnabas Mary Magdalene Phoebe the Deaconess Philemon Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Martyrs 21 Martyrs of Libya Abāmūn Abāmūn Abanoub Abaskhiron Alexandrian Martyrs Arianus Apollonia Barbara Bashnouna Basilides and Potamiana Catherine Chrysanthus and Daria Chiaffredo Colluthus Cosmas and Damian Cyprian and Justina Cyrus and John Dasya Demiana Dismas the Good Thief Dorothea Elias and Companions Epimachus Faustus, Abibus and Dionysius Felix and Regula Gabriel Abdel El-Metgaly Gallicanus George George Bishop of Assiut George El Mozahem Gereon Hor, Besoy, and Daydara Holy Innocents Imbaba Martyrs Isaac of Dafra John of Senhout Kosheh Martyrs Malati Marina the Martyr Maspero Martyrs Maurice Memnon Menas Mohrael Moura Nag Hammadi Otimus Philomena Philotheos Rais Sarah Sidhom Bishay Theban Legion Thecla Theoclia Theodora and Didymus Theodore Stratelates Varus Veronica Wadamoun Wanas Church Fathers Clement of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Papias of Hierapolis Justin Martyr Irenaeus Clement of Alexandria Athanasius of Alexandria Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nyssa Gregory of Nazianzus John Chrysostom Cyprian Hilary of Poitiers Ambrose Jerome Augustine of Hippo Aphrahat Ephrem the Syrian Isaac of Antioch Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Pachomius the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Syncletica of Alexandria John Cassian Alexander of Jerusalem Porphyrius of Gaza Alexander I of Alexandria Dionysius of Alexandria Epiphanius of Salamis Nichola of Myra Popes Mark I Anianus Avilius Kedron Justus Eumenes Markianos Celadion Agrippinus Julian Demetrius I Heraclas Dionysius Theonas Felix of Rome Peter I Alexander I Athanasius I Peter II Timothy I Theophilus I Cyril I Dioscorus I Timothy II Peter III Dioscorus II Timothy III Theodosius I Peter IV Damian Anastasius Andronicus Benjamin I Agathon Simeon I Alexander II Theodore I Michael I John IV Mark II James Simeon II Joseph I Michael II Cosmas II Michael III Gabriel I Cosmas III Abraham Zacharias Cyril II Macarius II Matthew I Gabriel VII John XIV Cyril V Macarius III Cyril VI Patriarchs and Bishops Abadiu of Antinoe Abraam of Faiyum Alexander of Jerusalem Amun of Scetis Basil of Caesarea Bar Hebraeus Cyril of Jerusalem Epiphanius of Cyprus Eusebius of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Gregory of Neocaesarea Ignatius of Antioch Jacob of Nisibis James of Jerusalem John of Nikiû John of Jerusalem Karas of California Mikhaeil of Asyut Narcissus of Jerusalem Nicholas of Myra Paphnutius of Scetis Paphnutius of Thebes Polycarp of Smyrna Porphyrius of Gaza Psote of Ebsay Serapion of Thmuis Severus of Antioch Severian of Gabala Yousab el-Abah of Girga Monks and nuns Abdel Messih El-Makari Abib and Apollo Abraham of Farshut Abraham of Scetis Amun Anthony the Great Awgin Bashnouna Hilarion Horsiesius Hospitius Mother Irini Isaac of Nineveh Isidore of Pelusium John Climacus John the Dwarf Macarius of Alexandria Macarius of Egypt Marina the Monk Moses the Black Nilus of Sinai Pachomius the Great Pambo Parsoma Patapios Paul of Thebes Paul of Tammah Paul the Simple Petronius Pishoy Poemen Samuel the Confessor Sisoes the Great Tekle Haymanot Theodorus of Tabennese Theodora of Alexandria Anchorites Karas Mary Misael Onuphrius Paphnutius Paul Pijimi Shenouda Thomas Zosimas Missionaries Gregory the Illuminator Maurice Nino Frumentius Nine Saints Other saints Ambrose Clement of Alexandria Didymus the Blind Euphrosyne Habib Girgis Candidus Simon the Tanner Three Holy Children Maximus and Domatius Verena Christianity portal Saints portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia 2 3 Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gregory_of_Nazianzus&oldid=1300153187 " Categories : 320s births 390 deaths 4th-century Archbishops of Constantinople 4th-century Christian mystics 4th-century Christian saints 4th-century Christian theologians 4th-century Greek philosophers 4th-century Greek poets 4th-century Romans Cappadocian Greeks Christianity and Hellenistic philosophy Church Fathers Doctors of the Church Epigrammatists of the Greek Anthology Greek Christian mystics Greek male non-fiction writers Greek Roman Catholic writers Opponents of Arianism Patristic mystics Catholic philosophers Roman-era students in Athens Saints from Constantinople Saints from Roman Anatolia People from Aksaray Province Anglican saints Participants in the First Council of Constantinople Eastern Orthodox saints Hidden categories: Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links CS1 Serbo-Croatian-language sources (sh) Articles with Greek-language sources (el) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2025 Pages using infobox theologian with embed equal yes Articles with hCards Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 15:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gregory of Nazianzus 67 languages Add topic

