Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Morphology and functions 2 Evolutionary origin 3 Gallery 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cercus 22 languages العربية Беларуская Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego 한국어 עברית Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Română Русский Slovenščina Svenska Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Paired appendages on the rear-most segments of many arthropods Not to be confused with circus .

Earwig with large cerci (top) Cerci ( sg.

: cercus ) are paired appendages usually on the rear-most segments of many arthropods , including insects and symphylans . Many forms of cerci serve as sensory organs, but some serve as pinching weapons or as organs of copulation .

[ 1 ] In many insects, they simply may be functionless vestigial structures .

In basal arthropods, such as silverfish , the cerci originate from the eleventh abdominal segment. As segment eleven is reduced or absent in the majority of arthropods, in such cases, the cerci emerge from the tenth abdominal segment.

[ 2 ] It is not clear that other structures so named are homologous . In the Symphyla they are associated with spinnerets.

[ 1 ] Morphology and functions [ edit ] Most cerci are segmented and jointed, or filiform (threadlike), but some take very different forms. Some Diplura , in particular Japyx species, have large, stout forcipate (pincer-like) cerci that they use in capturing their prey.

[ 3 ] The Dermaptera , or earwigs , are well known for the forcipate cerci that most of them bear, though species in the suborders Arixeniina and Hemimerina do not. It is not clear how many of the Dermaptera use their cerci for anything but defense, but some definitely feed on prey caught with the cerci, much as the Japygidae do.

[ 3 ] Crickets have particularly long cerci while other insects have cerci that are too small to be noticeable. However, it is not always obvious that small cerci are without function; they are rich in sensory cells and may be of importance in guiding copulation and oviposition .

Cercus of an adult female Gryllus pennsylvanicus In groups such as crickets and cockroaches , cerci play important sensory roles. They have been shown to be sensitive to puffs of air and low-frequency vibration, and thus trigger anti-predatory responses such as escape in response to certain predators. In field crickets , the range of frequency detection by the cerci spans from infrasonic sound to nearly 1 kHz. In crickets, higher-frequency sound such as stridulation and ultrasonic bat calls are picked up by a separate tympanal organ , not the cerci.

[ 4 ] Some hexapods such as mayflies , silverfish and diplurans possess an accompanying third central tail filament which extends from the tip of the abdomen . This is referred to as the terminal filament and is not regarded as a cercus.

[ 2 ] Aphids have tube-like cornicles or siphunculi that are sometimes mistaken for cerci but are not morphologically related to cerci.

Evolutionary origin [ edit ] Like many insect body parts, including mandibles , antennae and stylets , cerci are thought to have evolved from what were legs on the primal insect form, [ 3 ] a creature that may have resembled a velvet worm , Symphylan or a centipede , worm-like with one pair of limbs for each segment behind the head or anterior tagma .

[ 5 ] Gallery [ edit ] Short cerci on abdomen of a species of Pamphagid grasshopper Long sensory cerci on Ctenolepisma , flanking the median cerciform appendage and paired stylets Two forms of Diplura, illustrating cerci with sensory glandular function, as contrasted with forcipate forms of cerci used in predation References [ edit ] ^ a b Tiegs, O. W. (1 March 1945). "Memoirs: The Post-Embryonic Development of Hanseniella Agilis (Symphyla)".

Journal of Cell Science . s2-85 (338): 191– 328.

doi : 10.1242/jcs.s2-85.338.191 .

^ a b "CERCI AND TERMINAL FILAMENT" .

Entomological Glossary . University of Minnesota. Archived from the original on 25 February 2012 . Retrieved 3 June 2014 .

^ a b c Richards, O. W.; Davies, R.G. (1977).

Imms' General Textbook of Entomology: Volume 1: Structure, Physiology and Development Volume 2: Classification and Biology . Berlin: Springer.

ISBN 0-412-61390-5 .

[ page needed ] ^ Hoy, Ronald R.; Pollack, Gerald S.; Moiseff, Andrew (1982).

"Species-Recognition in the Field Cricket, Teleogryllus oceanicus: Behavioral and Neural Mechanisms" .

American Zoologist .

22 (3): 597– 607.

doi : 10.1093/icb/22.3.597 .

JSTOR 3882581 .

^ Grimaldi, David; Engel, Michael S. (2005).

Evolution of the Insects . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-82149-0 .

[ page needed ] University of Sydney Biology Dept Archived 2012-03-22 at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] Media related to Cerci at Wikimedia Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cercus&oldid=1276391266 " Categories : Arachnid anatomy Insect anatomy Sensory organs in animals Myriapod anatomy Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 February 2025, at 16:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cercus 22 languages Add topic

