Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Catholic Church Toggle Catholic Church subsection 1.1 Patriarchs 1.2 Minor Latin patriarchates 1.2.1 Historical Latin patriarchates 1.2.2 Patriarch as title ad personam 1.2.3 Patriarch of the West 1.3 Current and historical Catholic patriarchates 2 Eastern Christianity Toggle Eastern Christianity subsection 2.1 Eastern Orthodox 2.2 Patriarchs outside the Eastern Orthodox Communion 2.3 Oriental Orthodox Churches 2.4 Church of the East 3 Other Christian denominations 4 Manichaeism 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Patriarch 63 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Asturianu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Patriarchs ) Highest-ranking bishop in Christianity This article is about the title in Christianity. For other uses, see Patriarch (disambiguation) .

Patriarchs in different Christian confessions , including Eastern Orthodoxy , Oriental Orthodoxy and Catholicism respectively from left to right: Eastern Orthodox : Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople Bartholomew I , Catholicos-Patriarch of All Georgia Ilia II , Patriarch of All Romania Daniel and Patriarch of Moscow and all Rus' Kirill I Oriental Orthodox : Patriarch of Armenia Garegin II , Coptic Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria Tawadros II , Patriarch-Catholicos of All Ethiopia Mathias I and Syriac Orthodox Patriarch of Antioch Ignatius Aphrem II Catholic : Syriac Catholic Patriarch of Antioch Ignatius Joseph III Yonan , Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem Pierbattista Pizzaballa , Coptic Catholic Patriarch of Alexandria Ibrahim Isaac Sidrak and Maronite Patriarch of Antioch Bechara Boutros al-Rahi Part of a series on the Eastern Orthodox Church Mosaic of Christ Pantocrator , Hagia Sophia Overview Structure Theology ( History of theology ) Liturgy Church history Holy Mysteries View of Salvation View of Mary View of icons Background Crucifixion / Resurrection / Ascension of Jesus Christianity Christian Church Apostolic succession Four Marks of the Church Orthodoxy Organization Autonomy Autocephaly Patriarchate Ecumenical Patriarch Episcopal polity Canon law Clergy Bishops Priests Deacons Monasticism Degrees Bratstvo Autocephalous jurisdictions Autocephalous Churches who are officially part of the communion: Constantinople Alexandria Antioch Jerusalem Russia Serbia Romania Bulgaria Georgia Cyprus Greece Poland Albania Czech Lands and Slovakia Autocephaly recognized by some autocephalous Churches de jure : America North Macedonia Autocephaly and canonicity recognized by Constantinople and 3 other autocephalous Churches: Ukraine (OCU) Spiritual independence recognized by Georgian Orthodox Church: Ukraine (UOC) Autonomous jurisdictions Sinai (JP) Finland (EP) Estonia (EP) Japan (MP) China (MP) Americas (RP) Bessarabia (RP) Moldova (MP) Semi-Autonomous: Crete (EP) Estonia (MP) ROCOR (MP) Episcopal assemblies Australia, New Zealand, and Oceania Austria Belgium, Holland, and Luxembourg Canada France Germany Great Britain and Ireland Italy and Malta Latin America Scandinavia Spain and Portugal Switzerland and Liechtenstein United States of America Noncanonical jurisdictions Old Believers Spiritual Christianity True Orthodoxy Catacomb Church Old Calendarists American Orthodox Catholic Church American World Patriarchs National churches: Abkhazia Belarus Italy Latvia Montenegro Turkey UOC–KP Evangelical Orthodox Ecumenical councils First Seven Ecumenical Councils : Nicaea I Constantinople I Ephesus Chalcedon Constantinople II Constantinople III Nicaea II Other possible ecumenical councils: Constantinople IV Constantinople V Other important councils: Quinisext Council Jassy Moscow Jerusalem Constantinople (1872) History Church Fathers Pentarchy Byzantine Empire Christianization of Georgia Christianization of Bulgaria Christianization of Kievan Rus' Great Schism Russia Ottoman Empire North America Moscow–Constantinople schism 15th–16th c.

1996 2018 Theology History of Eastern Orthodox theology ( 20th century (Neo-Palamism) ) Apophaticism Chrismation Contemplative prayer Essence vs. Energies Hesychasm Holy Trinity Hypostatic union Icons Metousiosis Mystical theology Nicene Creed Nepsis Oikonomia vs Akribeia Ousia Palamism Philokalia Phronema Sin Theosis Theotokos Differences from the Catholic Church Opposition to the Filioque Opposition to papal supremacy Liturgy and worship Divine Liturgy Divine Services Akathist Apolytikion Artos Ectenia Euchologion Holy Water Iconostasis Jesus Prayer Aprakos Kontakion Liturgical entrances Liturgical fans Lity Memorial service Memory Eternal Omophorion Eastern Orthodox bowing Eastern Orthodox marriage Praxis Paraklesis Paschal greeting Paschal Homily Paschal troparion Prayer rope Prosphora Russian bell ringing Semantron Sign of the cross Sticheron Troparion Vestments Use of incense Liturgical calendar Paschal cycle 12 Great Feasts Other feasts: Feast of Orthodoxy Intercession of the Theotokos The four fasting periods: Nativity Fast Great Lent Apostles' Fast Dormition Fast Major figures Saints ( Russian (until 15th century) , Russian (post-15th century) , Serbian , American ) Justin Martyr Athanasius of Alexandria Ephraim the Syrian Basil of Caesarea Cyril of Jerusalem Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa John Chrysostom Cyril of Alexandria John Climacus Maximus the Confessor John of Damascus Theodore the Studite Kassia Cyril and Methodius Photius I of Constantinople Vladimir the Great Sava I of Serbia Gregory Palamas Innocent of Alaska Other topics Architecture Folk Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs Cross Saint titles Statistics by country v t e Part of a series on the Hierarchy of the Catholic Church Saint Peter Ecclesiastical titles ( order of precedence ) Pope Pope emeritus Cardinal Cardinal Vicar Crown Prince Protector Moderator of the curia Chaplain of His Holiness Papal legate Papal majordomo Apostolic nuncio Apostolic delegate Apostolic Syndic Apostolic visitor Vicar apostolic Apostolic exarch Apostolic prefect Assistant to the papal throne Eparch Metropolitan Patriarch Catholicos Bishop Archbishop Bishop emeritus Diocesan bishop Major archbishop Primate Suffragan bishop Titular bishop Coadjutor bishop Auxiliary bishop Prelate Provost Pontiff Territorial prelate Territorial abbot Liturgical titles Acolyte Consecrator Lector Subdeacon Administrative and pastoral titles Auditor Brother Chancellor Chaplain Military chaplain Military ordinary Coarb Confessor Consultor Curate Deacon Archdeacon Defender of the bond Definitor Devil's advocate Diocesan administrator Ecclesiastical judge Exorcist Laity Lay abbot Abthain Commendatory Lay cardinal Minister Major orders Minor orders Missionary Monsignor Officialis Ostiarius Pastor Assistant pastor Palatinus Personal prelate Preacher Prefect Presbyter Elder Priest Principal Protonotary apostolic Reverend Saint Servant of God Blessed Venerable Seminarian Vicar Judicial vicar Vicar general Vicar forane Sub-dean Consecrated and professed titles Abbess Abbot Consecrated virgin Corrector Custos Friar Dean Grand master Hermit Master of novices Monk Novice Nun Postulant Prior Provincial superior Rector Religious Superior general Additional titles Almoner Altar server Archimandrite Archpriest Archdeacon Canon Captain General of the Church Chorbishop Coarb Commissary Apostolic Conclavist Custos Datarius Gonfalonier of the Church Honorary prelate Minor canon Notarius Ostiarius Peritus Postulator Prebendary Precentor Prince-bishop Prince-abbot Prince-primate Prince-provost Promotor Fidei Protopriest Protodeacon Protosyncellus Regionarius Sacristan Sidewalk counselor Usher Associations and organization titles Third orders Oblates Confraternities Pious Unions Grand master Knights Hospitaller Order of the Holy Sepulchre Teutonic Knights Inquisitor Grand Inquisitor Preceptor Catholic Church portal v t e The highest-ranking bishops in Eastern Orthodoxy , Oriental Orthodoxy , the Roman Catholic Church (above major archbishop and primate ), the Hussite Church , Church of the East , and some Independent Catholic Churches are termed patriarchs (and in certain cases also popes – such as the pope of Rome or pope of Alexandria ).

The word is derived from Greek πατριάρχης ( patriarchēs ), [ 1 ] meaning "chief or father of a family", [ 2 ] a compound of πατριά ( patria ), [ 3 ] meaning "family", and ἄρχειν ( archein ), [ 4 ] meaning "to rule".

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Originally, a patriarch was a man who exercised authority as a pater familias over an extended family .

[ 8 ] The system of such rule of families by senior males is termed patriarchy . Historically, a patriarch has often been the logical choice to act as ethnarch of the community identified with his religious confession within a state or empire of a different creed (such as Christians within the Ottoman Empire ). The term developed an ecclesiastical meaning within Christianity . The office and the ecclesiastical circumscription of a Christian patriarch is termed a patriarchate .

Abraham , Isaac , and Jacob are referred to as the three patriarchs of the people of Israel , and the period during which they lived is termed the Patriarchal Age . The word patriarch originally acquired its religious meaning in the Septuagint version of the Bible .

[ 9 ] Catholic Church [ edit ] Catholic Patriarchal (non cardinal ) coat of arms Patriarchs [ edit ] Map of Justinian's Pentarchy In the Catholic Church , the bishop who is head of a particular autonomous church , known in canon law as a church sui iuris , is ordinarily a patriarch, though this responsibility can be entrusted to a major archbishop, metropolitan, or other prelate for a number of reasons.

[ 10 ] Since the Council of Nicaea , the bishop of Rome has been recognized as the first among patriarchs.

[ 11 ] That council designated three bishops with this 'supra-Metropolitan' title: Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch. In the Pentarchy formulated by Justinian I (527–565), the emperor assigned as a patriarchate to the bishop of Rome the whole of Christianized Europe (including almost all of modern Greece ), except for the region of Thrace , the areas near Constantinople , and along the coast of the Black Sea. He included in this patriarchate also the western part of North Africa. The jurisdictions of the other patriarchates extended over Roman Asia, and the rest of Africa. Justinian's system was given formal ecclesiastical recognition by the Quinisext Council of 692, which the see of Rome has, however, not recognized.

There were at the time bishops of other apostolic sees that operated with patriarchal authority beyond the borders of the Roman Empire, such as the catholicos of Selucia-Ctesephon .

Today, the patriarchal heads of Catholic autonomous churches are: [ 12 ] The Patriarch of Rome (Pope) , as head of the Latin Church [ 13 ] The Coptic Catholic Patriarch of Alexandria (Pope) and head of the Coptic Catholic Church , recognised 1824 The Maronite Catholic Patriarch of Antioch and All the East and head of the Maronite Church , recognised 685 The Melkite Greek Catholic Patriarch of Antioch and All the East , of Alexandria and of Jerusalem, head of the Melkite Greek Catholic Church ; in his case, Antioch is the actual and sole patriarchate, Alexandria and Jerusalem are just titular (once residential) patriarchates vested in his see.

The Syriac Catholic Patriarch of Antioch and All the East and head of the Syriac Catholic Church The Chaldean Catholic Patriarch of Baghdad and head of the Chaldean Catholic Church , recognised 1553 The Armenian Catholic Patriarch of Cilicia and head of the Armenian Catholic Church , recognised 1742 Four more of the Eastern Catholic Churches are headed by a prelate known as a " Major Archbishop ," [ 14 ] a title essentially equivalent to that of Patriarch and originally created by Pope Paul VI in 1963 for Josyf Slipyj .

[ 15 ] Minor Latin patriarchates [ edit ] Minor patriarchs do not have jurisdiction over other metropolitan bishops. The title is granted purely as an honour for various historical reasons. They take precedence after the heads of autonomous churches in full communion, whether pope, patriarch, or major archbishop.

The Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem , established 1099.

The Patriarch of the East Indies , a titular patriarchal see, united to Goa and Daman , established 1886.

The Patriarch of Lisbon , established 1716.

The Patriarch of Venice , established 1451.

Historical Latin patriarchates [ edit ] The Patriarch of Aquileia – with rival line of succession moved to Grado – dissolved in 1752.

The Patriarch of Grado – in 1451 merged with the Bishopric of Castello and Venice to form the Metropolitan Archdiocese of Venice (later a residential Patriarchate itself).

The Patriarch of the West Indies – a titular patriarchal see, vacant since 1963.

The Latin Patriarch of Antioch – title abolished in 1964.

The titular Latin Patriarch of Alexandria – title abolished in 1964.

The Latin Patriarch of Constantinople – title abolished in 1964.

The Latin Patriarchate of Ethiopia – 1555 to 1663, never effective, only held by Iberian Jesuits Patriarch as title ad personam [ edit ] The pope can confer the rank of patriarch without any see, upon an individual archbishop, as happened on 24 February 1676 to Alessandro Crescenzi , of the Somascans , former Latin Titular Patriarch of Alexandria (19 January 1671 – retired 27 May 1675), who nevertheless resigned the title on 9 January 1682.

Patriarch of the West [ edit ] Main article: Patriarch of the West One of the pope 's traditional titles in some eras and contexts has been " Patriarch of the West " ( Latin : Patriarcha Occidentis ; Greek : Πατριάρχης τῆς Δύσεως), highlighting the role of the bishop of Rome as the highest authority of the Latin Church .

The title was not included in the 2006 Annuario Pontificio . On 22 March 2006, the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity offered an explanation for the decision to remove the title. It stated that the title "Patriarch of the West" had become "obsolete and practically unusable" when the term the West comprises Australia, New Zealand and North America in addition to Western Europe, and that it was "pointless to insist on maintaining it" given that, since the Second Vatican Council , the Latin Church , for which "the West" is an equivalent, has been organized as a number of episcopal conferences and their international groupings.

[ 16 ] The title was reintroduced in the 2024 edition of Annuario Pontificio . No explanation was provided for its reintroduction.

[ 17 ] Current and historical Catholic patriarchates [ edit ] Current and historical Catholic patriarchates Type Church Patriarchate Patriarch Patriarchs of autonomous particular churches Latin Rome Pope Leo XIV Coptic Alexandria Ibrahim Isaac Sidrak Syrian Antioch Ignatius Joseph III Younan Maronite Antioch Bechara Boutros al-Rahi Greek-Melkite Antioch Youssef Absi Armenian Cilicia Raphaël Bedros XXI Minassian Chaldean Baghdad Louis Raphaël I Sako Titular Latin Church patriarchs Latin Aquileia suppressed in 1751 Latin Grado suppressed in 1451 Latin Jerusalem Pierbattista Pizzaballa Latin Lisbon Rui Valério Latin Venice Francesco Moraglia Latin Alexandria suppressed in 1964 Latin Antioch suppressed in 1964 Latin Constantinople suppressed in 1964 Latin East Indies Filipe Neri Ferrão Latin West Indies vacant since 1963 Eastern Christianity [ edit ] Eastern Orthodox [ edit ] Main article: Eastern Orthodox The five ancient Patriarchates, the Pentarchy , listed in order of preeminence ranked by the Quinisext Council in 692: The five ancient Patriarchates, the Pentarchy Title Church Recognition / Additional notes Patriarch of Rome the Pope of Rome Originally " primus inter pares " according to Eastern Orthodoxy, recognized in 325 by First Council of Nicaea . Currently not an Episcopal or Patriarchal authority in the Eastern Orthodox Church, following the Great Schism in 1054 .

Patriarch of Constantinople the chief of the Orthodox Church of Constantinople The " primus inter pares " of post-Schism Eastern Orthodoxy , recognized in 451 by Council of Chalcedon .

[ 18 ] Patriarch of Alexandria the Pope of All Africa and the chief of the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria Recognized in 325 by First Council of Nicaea .

Patriarch of Antioch the  head of the Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch and All the East in the Near East Recognized in 325 by First Council of Nicaea .

Patriarch of Jerusalem the chief of the Eastern Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem in Israel, Palestine, Jordan and All Arabia Recognized in 451 by Council of Chalcedon .

The five junior Patriarchates created after the consolidation of the Pentarchy, in chronological order of their recognition as Patriarchates by the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople: The five junior Patriarchates created after the consolidation of the Pentarchy Title Church Recognition / Additional notes Patriarch of All Bulgaria the chief of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church in Bulgaria Recognized as a Patriarchate in 918-919/927 [ 19 ] Catholicos-Patriarch of All Georgia the chief of the Georgian Orthodox Church in Georgia Recognized as a Catholicate (Patriarchate) in 1008 [ 20 ] Serbian Patriarch the chief of the Serbian Orthodox Church in Serbia (and the former Yugoslavia ) Recognized as a Patriarchate in 1375 [ 21 ] Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia the chief of the Russian Orthodox Church in Russia Recognized as a Patriarchate in 1593 [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Patriarch of All Romania the chief of the Romanian Orthodox Church in Romania Recognized as a Patriarchate in 1925 [ 24 ] Patriarchs outside the Eastern Orthodox Communion [ edit ] Patriarchs outside the Eastern Orthodox Communion Title Church Patriarch of Moscow and All Russia The chief of the Russian Old-Orthodox Church .

The Patriarch of Kyiv and All Rus-Ukraine The chief of the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church Canonical .

Patriarch of the Autocephalous Turkish Orthodox Patriarchate Oriental Orthodox Churches [ edit ] Main article: Oriental Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodox leaders Church Title Authority Additional notes Coptic Orthodox Church Pope of Alexandria and Patriarch of All Africa The chief of the  Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria in Egypt and All Africa Ethiopian Orthodox Church Archbishop of Axum and Patriarch Catholicos of All Ethiopia Chief of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church in Ethiopia Eritrean Orthodox Church Archbishop of Asmara and Patriarch of All Eritrea Chief of the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church in Eritrea Syriac Orthodox Church Patriarch of Antioch and All the East Supreme Head of Universal Syriac Orthodox Church Syriac Orthodox Patriarch of Antioch and all the east Catholicos of India Maphrian of the East The second highest ecclesiastical authority in the Syriac Orthodox Church. He is also the Malankara Metropolitan of Malankara Jacobite Syrian Orthodox Church The Regional head of the Jacobite Syrian Orthodox Church Indian Orthodox Church Catholicos of the East .

Holds the additional title of Malankara Metropolitan The supreme leader of the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church Armenian Orthodox Church Catholicos of Etchmiadzin, Armenia and of All Armenians Supreme leader of the  Armenian Apostolic Church Supreme Patriarch of the Armenian Apostolic Church Catholicos of Cilicia Chief of the Armenian Apostolic Church of the Great House of Cilicia Chief of Diasporan Armenians of the Armenian Apostolic Church. Headquartered in Antelias , Lebanon --- Armenian Patriarch of Constantinople Chief of the Armenians in Turkey .

--- Armenian Patriarch of Jerusalem and of Holy Zion Chief of Armenians in Jerusalem , Israel, Palestine, Jordan and the Persian Gulf Church of the East [ edit ] Main articles: Nestorianism , List of patriarchs of the Church of the East , and Catholicos of the East (disambiguation) Catholicose of the East is the title that held by the ecclesiastical heads of the Church of the East , which is now divided into: Catholicos-Patriarch of the Assyrian Church of the East .

Catholicos-Patriarchs of the Ancient Church of the East (since 1964) Other Christian denominations [ edit ] The title of "Patriarch" is assumed also by for leaders and church officers of certain Christian denominations , including some of the following: Hussite The Patriarch of the Czechoslovak Hussite Church mainly in the Czech Republic and also some parts of Slovakia .

[ 25 ] Independent Catholic The Patriarch of the Catholic Apostolic Church of Antioch .

[ 26 ] The Patriarch of the Apostolic Catholic Church in the Philippines .

The Patriarch of the Brazilian Catholic Apostolic Church in Brazil (Not officially used, but described in a similarly holy level).

The Patriarch of the Venezuelan Catholic Apostolic Church in Venezuela .

Independent Eastern Catholic The Patriarch of the Ukrainian Orthodox Greek Catholic Church in Ukraine .

Independent Eastern Orthodox The Patriarch of the American Orthodox Catholic Church .

Independent Oriental Orthodox The Patriarch of the British Orthodox Church .

Protestant The Patriarch of the International Communion of the Charismatic Episcopal Church .

Latter Day Saint movement Main article: Patriarch (Latter Day Saints) In the Latter Day Saint movement , a patriarch is one who has been ordained to the office of patriarch in the Melchizedek priesthood . The term is considered synonymous with the term evangelist , a term favored by the Community of Christ . In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , one of the patriarch's primary responsibilities is to give patriarchal blessings , as Jacob did to his twelve sons according to the Old Testament. Patriarchs are typically assigned in each stake and possess the title for life.

Manichaeism [ edit ] The term patriarch has also been used for the leader of the extinct Manichaean religion, initially based at Ctesiphon (near modern-day Baghdad ) and later at Samarkand .

See also [ edit ] Christianity portal List of current patriarchs Lists of Patriarchs Catholicos Patriarchate Patriarchy Matriarchy Lists of popes, patriarchs, primates, archbishops, and bishops Major archbishop List of metropolitans and patriarchs of Moscow Rishama in Mandaeism References [ edit ] ^ πατριάρχης , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus ^ a b Online Etymological Dictionary: "patriarch" ^ πατριά , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus ^ ἄρχω , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus ^ Merriam-Webster: "patriarch" ^ American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language: "patriarch" ^ Oxford Dictionaries: "patriarch" ^ "The Roman Empire: in the First Century. The Roman Empire. Life In Roman Times. Family Life" .

PBS . Retrieved 8 May 2021 .

^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Patriarch" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Code of Canons of Eastern Churches . 1990. pp.

58– 59.

^ "DOCUMENTS FROM THE FIRST COUNCIL OF NICEA" .

History Sourcebooks Project . Fordham university . Retrieved 30 September 2017 .

^ "Patriarchs" .

GCCatholic.org . Retrieved 30 September 2017 .

^ Maloney, G.A.

(2002).

New Catholic Encyclopedia (Revised ed.). Gale. pp. 15 vols.

ISBN 978-0787640040 .

^ Code of Canons of Eastern Churches . Catholic Church. 1990. pp.

151– 154.

^ "CCEO: text - IntraText CT" . Intratext.com. 4 May 2007 . Retrieved 28 February 2011 .

^ "Communiqué on title 'Patriarch of the West' " .

Zenit . 22 March 2006 . Retrieved 20 December 2017 .

^ "Why is Pope Francis embracing the patriarchy (of the West)?" . The Pillar. 10 April 2024 . Retrieved 18 April 2024 .

^ "Правило 28 - IV Вселенский Собор – Халкидонский (451г.) - Церковное право" .

azbyka.ru (in Russian) . Retrieved 2023-10-02 .

^ Catholic Near East Welfare Association, a Papal agency for humanitarian and pastoral assistance Archived 2009-01-15 at the Wayback Machine (ID: 20).

^ Catholic Near East Welfare Association, a Papal agency for humanitarian and pastoral support Archived 2009-01-15 at the Wayback Machine (ID: 21).

^ Catholic Near East Welfare Association, a Papal agency for humanitarian and pastoral assistance Archived 2009-01-15 at the Wayback Machine (ID: 18).

^ Catholic Near East Welfare Association, a Papal agency for humanitarian and pastoral assistance Archived 2009-01-15 at the Wayback Machine (ID: 17).

^ "КОНСТАНТИНОПОЛЬСКИЙ СОБОР 1593 - Древо" .

drevo-info.ru (in Russian) . Retrieved 2023-10-02 .

^ Catholic Near East Welfare Association, a Papal agency for humanitarian and pastoral assistance Archived 2009-01-15 at the Wayback Machine (ID: 19).

^ Hill, Don (7 November 2001).

"Czech Republic: Hussite Church History Mirrors That Of Nation" .

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . Retrieved 8 May 2021 .

^ When a woman was elected head of this church, she was styled Matriarch .

"The Catholic Apostolic Church of Antioch - Directory of Administration" . Archived from the original on 2010-07-05 . Retrieved 2010-03-18 .

Further reading [ edit ] Nedungatt, George , ed. (2002).

A Guide to the Eastern Code: A Commentary on the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches . Rome: Oriental Institute Press.

ISBN 9788872103364 .

External links [ edit ] Current and former patriarchates of the Catholic Church (GCatholic) Current titular patriarchal sees of the Catholic Church (GCatholic) Current patriarchates of the Catholic Church (GCatholic) .

WorldStatesmen - Religious Organisations "Patriarch" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

"Patriarchs" .

Encyclopedia Americana . 1920.

v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e Patriarchates in Christianity Traditional ecclesiastical jurisdictions of primates in Christianity , sorted according to earliest apostolic legacy and branched where multiple denominational claimants: bold blue = Catholic Church , light blue = Eastern Orthodox Church (* unrecognized), bold/ light green = Oriental Orthodoxy , italic blue = Nestorianism , bold italic blue = pre-schism Early Christianity ( Antiquity ) (30–325/476) Pentarchy (five apostolic sees ) Patriarch of Rome ( 1st cent.

) Holy See (since 1st cent.

) Patriarch of Constantinople ( 451 ) Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople (since 330) Latin Patriarchate of Constantinople (1204–1964) Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople (since 1461) Autocephalous Turkish Orthodox Patriarchate (since 1924*) Patriarch of Antioch ( 1st cent.

) Patriarchate of Antioch (1st cent.–518) Syriac Orthodox Patriarchate of Antioch (since 518) Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Antioch (since 519) Maronite Patriarchate (since 685) Latin Patriarchate of Antioch (1099–1964) Syriac Catholic Patriarchate of Antioch (since 1668) Melkite Catholic Patriarchate of Antioch (since 1724) Armenian Catholicosate of Cilicia (since 1058) Patriarchate of Cilicia (since 1740) Patriarch of Alexandria ( 1st cent.

) Patriarchate of Alexandria (1st cent.–451) Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria (since 451 ) Coptic Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria (since 451 ) Latin Patriarchate of Alexandria (1219–1964) Coptic Catholic Patriarchate of Alexandria (since 1824) Patriarch of Jerusalem ( 451 ) Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem (since 451) Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem (since 638) Latin Patriarchate of Jerusalem (since 1099) Other Patriarch of Carthage ( 2nd cent.

) Patriarch of Carthage (2nd cent.–1076) Patriarch of Seleucia-Ctesiphon (280) Patriarch of Seleucia-Ctesiphon (280–1552) Chaldean Catholic Patriarchate of Baghdad (since 1553) Patriarchs of the Church of the East (Eliya line) (1558–1830) Patriarchs of the Church of the East (Shimun line) (1692–1830) Assyrian Church of the East Patriarchate of Seleucia-Ctesiphon (since 1830) Ancient Church of the East Patriarchate of Seleucia-Ctesiphon (since 1968) Patriarch of Armenia (301) Catholicos of All Armenians (Patriarch of Etchmiadzin) (since 301) Armenian Catholicosate of Cilicia (since 1058) Patriarchate of Cilicia (since 1740) Middle Ages (476–1517) Patriarchate of Aquileia (568–1751) Patriarchate of Grado (725–1451) Patriarchate of Bulgaria (919*/927–1018) Patriarchate of Georgia (1010–1811) Patriarchate of Cyprus (1185*–1191) Primate of Bulgaria (1204–1235) Tarnovo Patriarchate of Bulgaria (1235–1394) Serbian Orthodox Patriarchate of Peć (1346*/1375–1463) Patriarchate of Venice (since 1451) Catholicate of Abkhazia (15.*/16. century–1814) Early Modern era (1517–1789) Patriarchate of the West Indies (since 1524) Latin Patriarchate of Ethiopia (1555–1663) Patriarchate of the East Indies (since 1572) Serbian Orthodox Patriarchate of Peć (1557–1766) Patriarchate of Moscow (since 1589) Patriarchate of Lisbon (since 1716) Late Modern era (since 1789) Patriarchate of Karlovci (1848–1920) Patriarchate of Georgia (since 1917*/1990) Serbian Orthodox Patriarchate of Peć (since 1920) Patriarchate of Romania (since 1925) Patriarchate of Croatia (*1942–1945) Patriarchate of Bulgaria (since 1953) Ethiopian Orthodox Patriarchate of Ethiopia (since 1959) Patriarchate of Kyiv (1992*–2018; since 2019*) Eritrean Orthodox Patriarchate of Eritrea (since 1994) Related Apostolic Throne Episcopal see Christianity portal v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Patriarch&oldid=1297134421 " Categories : Church patriarchs Catholic ecclesiastical titles Episcopacy in Eastern Orthodoxy Episcopacy in Oriental Orthodoxy Christian terminology Autocracy Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 09:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Patriarch 63 languages Add topic

