Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Justification and knowledge 2 Conceptions of justification 3 Theories of justification 4 Criticism of theories of justification 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle External links subsection 7.1 Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Toggle the table of contents Justification (epistemology) 22 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Hrvatski Italiano Қазақша Nederlands Polski Português Română Sicilianu Slovenčina کوردی Suomi Tagalog Türkçe Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Theory of justification ) Concept in epistemology This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Justification" epistemology – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Epistemology Outline Category Schools Coherentism Contextualism Dogmatism Empiricism Fallibilism Fideism Foundationalism Infallibilism Infinitism Naturalism Perspectivism Pragmatism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Solipsism Structuralism Concepts Action Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Belief Credence Certainty Data Experience Information Justification Induction Knowledge Meaning Rationality Reason Truth Wisdom Domains Applied epistemology Evolutionary epistemology Formal epistemology Historical epistemology Metaepistemology Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Epistemologists Aristotle Sextus Empiricus Edmund Gettier Wang Yangming René Descartes David Hume Immanuel Kant W. V. O. Quine more...

Related fields Epistemic cognition Epistemic logic Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science v t e Justification (also called epistemic justification ) is a property of beliefs that fulfill certain norms about what a person should believe.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Epistemologists often identify justification as a component of knowledge distinguishing it from mere true opinion.

[ 3 ] They study the reasons why someone holds a belief.

[ 4 ] Epistemologists are concerned with various features of belief, which include the ideas of warrant (a proper justification for holding a belief), knowledge , rationality , and probability , among others.

Debates surrounding epistemic justification often involve the structure of justification, including whether there are foundational justified beliefs or whether mere coherence is sufficient for a system of beliefs to qualify as justified. Another major subject of debate is the sources of justification, which might include perceptual experience (the evidence of the senses), reason , and authoritative testimony , among others.

Justification and knowledge [ edit ] "Justification" involves the reasons why someone holds a belief that one should hold based on one's current evidence.

[ 4 ] Justification is a property of beliefs insofar as they are held blamelessly. In other words, a justified belief is a belief that a person is entitled to hold.

Many philosophers from Plato onward have treated " justified true belief " (JTB) as constituting knowledge. It is particularly associated with a theory discussed in his dialogues Meno and Theaetetus . While in fact Plato seems to disavow justified true belief as constituting knowledge at the end of Theaetetus , the claim that Plato unquestioningly accepted this view of knowledge stuck until the proposal of the Gettier problem .

[ 4 ] The subject of justification has played a major role in the value of knowledge as "justified true belief".

[ citation needed ] Some contemporary epistemologists, such as Jonathan Kvanvig , assert that justification isn't necessary in getting to the truth and avoiding errors. Kvanvig attempts to show that knowledge is no more valuable than true belief, and in the process dismissed the necessity of justification due to justification not being connected to the truth.

[ citation needed ] Conceptions of justification [ edit ] William P. Alston identifies two conceptions of justification.

[ 5 ] : 15–16 One conception is "deontological" justification, which holds that justification evaluates the obligation and responsibility of a person having only true beliefs. This conception implies, for instance, that a person who has made his best effort but is incapable of concluding the correct belief from his evidence is still justified. The deontological conception of justification corresponds to epistemic internalism . Another conception is "truth-conducive" justification, which holds that justification is based on having sufficient evidence or reasons that entails that the belief is at least likely to be true. The truth-conductive conception of justification corresponds to epistemic externalism .

Theories of justification [ edit ] There are several different views as to what entails justification, mostly focusing on the question "How beliefs are justified?". Different theories of justification require different conditions before a belief can be considered justified. Theories of justification generally include other aspects of epistemology, such as defining knowledge.

Notable theories of justification include: Foundationalism – Basic beliefs justify other, non-basic beliefs.

Epistemic coherentism – Beliefs are justified if they cohere with other beliefs a person holds, each belief is justified if it coheres with the overall system of beliefs.

Infinitism – Beliefs are justified by infinite chains of reasons.

Foundherentism – Both fallible foundations and coherence are components of justification—proposed by Susan Haack .

Internalism and externalism – The believer must be able to justify a belief through internal knowledge (internalism), or outside sources of knowledge (externalism).

Reformed epistemology – Beliefs are warranted by proper cognitive function—proposed by Alvin Plantinga .

Evidentialism – Beliefs depend solely on the evidence for them.

Reliabilism – A belief is justified if it is the result of a reliable process.

Infallibilism – Knowledge is incompatible with the possibility of being wrong.

Fallibilism – Claims can be accepted even though they cannot be conclusively proven or justified.

Non-justificationism – Knowledge is produced by attacking claims and refuting them instead of justifying them.

Skepticism – Knowledge is impossible or undecidable.

Criticism of theories of justification [ edit ] Robert Fogelin claims to detect a suspicious resemblance between the theories of justification and Agrippa 's five modes leading to the suspension of belief. He concludes that the modern proponents have made no significant progress in responding to the ancient modes of Pyrrhonian skepticism .

[ 6 ] William P. Alston criticizes the very idea of a theory of justification. He claims: "There isn't any unique, epistemically crucial property of beliefs picked out by 'justified'. Epistemologists who suppose the contrary have been chasing a will-o'-the-wisp. What has really been happening is this. Different epistemologists have been emphasizing, concentrating on, "pushing" different epistemic desiderata, different features of belief that are positively valuable from the standpoint of the aims of cognition." [ 5 ] : 22 See also [ edit ] Dream argument Regress argument (epistemology) Münchhausen trilemma References [ edit ] ^ Blaauw, Martijn; Pritchard, Duncan (2005).

Epistemology A-Z . Edinburgh University Press. pp.

92– 93.

ISBN 978-0-7486-2213-9 .

^ Goldman, Alvin; Bender, John (2005). "Justification, Epistemic". In Honderich, Ted (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford University Press. p. 465.

ISBN 978-0-19-926479-7 .

^ Kvanvig, Jonathan L. (2011). "Epistemic justification". In Bernecker, Sven; Pritchard, Duncan (eds.).

The Routledge Companion to Epistemology . Routledge. pp.

25– 26.

ISBN 978-1-136-88200-5 .

^ a b c "Epistemic Justification" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 6 July 2020 .

^ a b Alston, William P. (2005).

Beyond "Justification": dimensions of epistemic evaluation . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-80-144291-9 .

^ Fogelin, Robert J. (1994).

Pyrrhonian Reflections on Knowledge and Justification . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-508987-5 .

External links [ edit ] Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Foundationalist Theories of Epistemic Justification Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Epistemology, 2. What is Justification?

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Internalist vs. Externalist Conceptions of Epistemic Justification Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Coherentist Theories of Epistemic Justification Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy [ edit ] Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Epistemic Justification Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Epistemic Entitlement Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Internalism and Externalism in Epistemology Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Epistemic Consequentialism Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Coherentism in Epistemology Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Contextualism in Epistemology Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Knowledge-First Theories of Justification v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach C. P. Snow Berlin Circle Vienna Circle Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Justification_(epistemology)&oldid=1288280211#Theories_of_justification " Categories : Metatheory Justification (epistemology) Concepts in epistemology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2016 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 1 May 2025, at 16:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Justification (epistemology) 22 languages Add topic

