Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 1920–1922: The birth of British broadcasting 1.2 1923–1926: From private company to public service corporation 1.3 1927–1939 1.3.1 BBC versus other media 1.4 Second World War 1.5 Later 20th century 1.6 2000–2011 1.6.1 Channel and branding changes 1.6.2 Sale of divisions 1.6.3 Creative Futures 1.6.4 Licence fee frozen 1.7 2011–present 2 Governance Toggle Governance subsection 2.1 Charter and Agreement 2.2 BBC Board 2.3 Executive committee 2.4 Operational divisions 2.5 Commercial divisions 2.6 MI5 vetting policy 3 Finances Toggle Finances subsection 3.1 Revenue 3.2 Assets 3.3 Information technology service management 4 Services Toggle Services subsection 4.1 Television 4.2 BBC Genome Project 4.3 Radio 4.4 News 4.5 Internet 4.6 Interactive television 4.7 Music 4.8 Other 4.9 Ceefax 4.10 BritBox 5 Commercial activities 6 Cultural significance Toggle Cultural significance subsection 6.1 Colloquial terms 7 Logo and symbols Toggle Logo and symbols subsection 7.1 Logos 7.2 Coat of arms 8 Controversies Toggle Controversies subsection 8.1 Claims of liberal and left-wing bias 8.2 Claims of right-wing bias 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Sources 11.2 Works cited 11.3 Primary sources 12 External links Toggle the table of contents BBC 125 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Bamanankan বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Li Niha La .lojban.

Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский سرائیکی Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British public service broadcaster This article is about the public service broadcaster. For its predecessor, see British Broadcasting Company . For other uses, see BBC (disambiguation) .

"The Beeb" redirects here. For other uses, see Beeb .

British Broadcasting Corporation Logo used since 2021 Company type Chartered corporation , public broadcaster Industry Mass media Predecessor British Broadcasting Company Founded 18 October 1922 ; 102 years ago ( 1922-10-18 ) (as British Broadcasting Company) 1 January 1927 ; 98 years ago ( 1927-01-01 ) (as British Broadcasting Corporation) Founder Government of the United Kingdom Headquarters Broadcasting House London , England Area served Worldwide Key people Samir Shah ( Chair ) Tim Davie ( Director-General ) Products Broadcasting Web portals Services Television Radio Online Revenue £ 5.389 billion (2024) [ 1 ] Operating income £199 million (2024) [ 1 ] Net income £229 million (2024) [ 1 ] Total assets £1.976 billion (2024) [ 1 ] Number of employees 21,918 (2024) [ 1 ] Divisions BBC Television BBC Sport BBC Radio BBC News BBC Online BBC Sounds BBC Weather BBC Music BBC English Regions BBC Scotland BBC Cymru Wales BBC Northern Ireland BBC North BBC Bitesize BBC Studios Website bbc.com UK-wide Television stations programmes Radio stations local BBC Online BBC Red Button Ceefax iPlayer BBC Sounds Management Chairman Samir Shah Director-General Tim Davie BBC Board BBC Charter Departments BBC Academy Archives BBC Film BBC World Service ( Timeline ) Television Design & Engineering Monitoring News Radio Sport Weather Nations and regions BBC Cymru Wales BBC Scotland BBC Northern Ireland BBC English Regions Birmingham Bristol East East Midlands London Manchester North East & Cumbria North West South South East South West West West Midlands Yorkshire Yorkshire & Lincolnshire Commercial subsidiaries BBC Studios BBC Studios Productions BBC Studioworks BBC Worldwide History Archives Sound Archive BBC Trust Board of Governors British Broadcasting Company Coat of arms Controversies Criticism First day of TV Logo Radio Times Genome Timeline HD timeline Key properties in London Broadcasting House Lime Grove (former) Maida Vale Studios Television Centre (former) White City & Media Village Birmingham Drama Village Mailbox Birmingham Pebble Mill Studios (former) Cardiff New Broadcasting House, Cardiff Broadcasting House (former) Drama Village (Roath Lock) BBC Hoddinott Hall Other locations Broadcasting House, Belfast Broadcasting House, Bristol BBC Elstree Centre MediaCityUK, Salford Pacific Quay, Glasgow v t e The British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) is a British public service broadcaster headquartered at Broadcasting House in London , England. Originally established in 1922 as the British Broadcasting Company , it evolved into its current state with its current name on New Year's Day 1927. The oldest and largest local and global broadcaster by stature and by number of employees, the BBC employs over 21,000 staff in total, of whom approximately 17,200 are in public-sector broadcasting.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The BBC was established under a royal charter , [ 6 ] and operates under an agreement with the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport .

[ 7 ] Its work is funded principally by an annual television licence fee [ 8 ] which is charged to all British households, companies, and organisations using any type of equipment to receive or record live television broadcasts or to use the BBC's streaming service, iPlayer .

[ 9 ] The fee is set by the British government , agreed by Parliament , [ 10 ] and is used to fund the BBC's radio, TV, and online services covering the nations and regions of the UK. Since 1 April 2014, it has also funded the BBC World Service (launched in 1932 as the BBC Empire Service), which broadcasts in 28 languages and provides comprehensive TV, radio, and online services in Arabic and Persian .

Some of the BBC's revenue comes from its commercial subsidiary BBC Studios (formerly BBC Worldwide ), which sells BBC programmes and services internationally and also distributes the BBC's international 24-hour English-language news services BBC News , and from BBC.com, provided by BBC Global News Ltd.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] In 2009, the company was awarded the Queen's Award for Enterprise in recognition of its international achievements in business.

[ 13 ] Since its formation in 1922, the BBC has played a prominent role in British life and culture.

[ 14 ] It is sometimes informally referred to as the Beeb or Auntie .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In 1923 it launched Radio Times (subtitled "The official organ of the BBC"), the first broadcast listings magazine; the 1988 Christmas edition sold 11 million copies, the biggest-selling edition of any British magazine in history.

[ 17 ] History For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the BBC .

1920–1922: The birth of British broadcasting Britain's first live public broadcast was made from the factory of Marconi Company in Chelmsford in June 1920. It was sponsored by the Daily Mail ' s Alfred Harmsworth, 1st Viscount Northcliffe and featured the famous Australian soprano Dame Nellie Melba . The Melba broadcast caught the people's imagination and marked a turning point in the British public's attitude to radio.

[ 18 ] : 47 However, this public enthusiasm was not shared in official circles where such broadcasts were held to interfere with important military and civil communications. By late 1920, the pressure from these quarters and uneasiness among the staff of the licensing authority, the General Post Office (GPO), was sufficient to lead to a ban on further Chelmsford broadcasts.

[ 18 ] : 50 But by 1922, the GPO had received nearly 100 broadcast licence requests [ 19 ] : 110 and moved to rescind its ban in the wake of a petition by 63 wireless societies with over 3,000 members.

[ 18 ] : 50–97 Anxious to avoid the same chaotic expansion experienced in the United States, the GPO proposed that it would issue a single broadcasting licence to a company jointly owned by a consortium of leading wireless receiver manufacturers, to be known as the British Broadcasting Company Ltd , which was formed on 18 October 1922.

[ 20 ] John Reith , a Scottish Calvinist , was appointed its general manager in December 1922 a few weeks after the company made its first official broadcast.

[ 19 ] : 110 L. Stanton Jefferies was its first director of music.

[ 21 ] The company was to be financed by a royalty on the sale of BBC wireless receiving sets from approved domestic manufacturers.

[ 22 ] To this day, the BBC aims to follow the Reithian directive to "inform, educate and entertain".

[ 23 ] 1923–1926: From private company to public service corporation The first issue of the Radio Times (28 September 1923) The financial arrangements soon proved inadequate. Set sales were disappointing as amateurs made their own receivers and listeners bought rival unlicensed sets.

[ 18 ] : 146 By mid-1923, discussions between the GPO and the BBC had become deadlocked and the Postmaster General commissioned a review of broadcasting by the Sykes Committee.

[ 24 ] The committee recommended a short-term reorganisation of licence fees with improved enforcement in order to address the BBC's immediate financial distress, and an increased share of the licence revenue split between it and the GPO. This was to be followed by a simple 10 shillings licence fee to fund broadcasts.

[ 24 ] The BBC's broadcasting monopoly was made explicit for the duration of its current broadcast licence, as was the prohibition on advertising. To avoid competition with newspapers, Fleet Street persuaded the government to ban news bulletins before 7 pm and the BBC was required to source all news from external wire services.

[ 24 ] The Radio Times , the world's first and longest-running radio and television listings magazine, was launched by Reith in September 1923.

[ 17 ] The first edition, subtitled "The official organ of the BBC", was priced at tuppence (two pence ) on newsstands, and quickly sold out its run of a quarter of a million copies.

[ 25 ] Mid-1925 found the future of broadcasting under further consideration, this time by the Crawford committee. By now, the BBC, under Reith's leadership, had forged a consensus favouring a continuation of the unified (monopoly) broadcasting service, but more money was still required to finance rapid expansion. Wireless manufacturers were anxious to exit the loss-making consortium, and Reith was keen that the BBC be seen as a public service rather than a commercial enterprise. The recommendations of the Crawford Committee were published in March the following year and were still under consideration by the GPO when the 1926 United Kingdom general strike broke out in May. The strike temporarily interrupted newspaper production, and with restrictions on news bulletins waived, the BBC suddenly became the primary source of news for the duration of the crisis.

[ 19 ] : 117 The crisis placed the BBC in a delicate position. On the one hand Reith was acutely aware that the government might exercise its right to commandeer the BBC at any time as a mouthpiece of the government if the BBC were to step out of line, but on the other he was anxious to maintain public trust by appearing to be acting independently. The government was divided on how to handle the BBC, but ended up trusting Reith, whose opposition to the strike mirrored the PM's own. Although Winston Churchill in particular wanted to commandeer the BBC to use it "to the best possible advantage", Reith wrote that Stanley Baldwin 's government wanted to be able to say "that they did not commandeer [the BBC], but they know that they can trust us not to be really impartial".

[ 26 ] Thus the BBC was granted sufficient leeway to pursue the government's objectives largely in a manner of its own choosing. Supporters of the strike nicknamed the BBC the BFC for British Falsehood Company. Reith personally announced the end of the strike which he marked by reciting from Blake's " Jerusalem " signifying that England had been saved.

[ 27 ] While the BBC tends to characterise its coverage of the general strike by emphasising the positive impression created by its balanced coverage of the views of government and strikers, Seaton has characterised the episode as the invention of "modern propaganda in its British form".

[ 19 ] : 117 Reith argued that trust gained by 'authentic impartial news' could then be used. Impartial news was not necessarily an end in itself.

[ 19 ] : 118 The BBC did well out of the crisis, which cemented a national audience for its broadcasting, and it was followed by the Government's acceptance of the recommendation made by the Crawford Committee (1925–26) that the British Broadcasting Company be replaced by a non-commercial, Crown-chartered organisation: the British Broadcasting Corporation.

[ 24 ] 1927–1939 The Radio Times masthead from 25 December 1931, including the BBC motto "Nation shall speak peace unto Nation" Television pioneer John Logie Baird (seen here in 1917) televised the BBC's first drama, The Man with the Flower in His Mouth , on 14 July 1930, and the first live outside broadcast, The Derby , on 2 June 1931.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] The British Broadcasting Corporation came into existence on 1 January 1927, and Reith – newly knighted – was appointed its first director general. To represent its purpose and (stated) values, the new corporation adopted the coat of arms , including the motto "Nation shall speak peace unto Nation".

[ 30 ] British radio audiences had little choice apart from BBC's programming approach. Reith was viewed as taking a moralistic approach as an executive, aiming to broadcast "all that is best in every department of human knowledge, endeavour and achievement", and putting the programming in moral or ethical terms, advocating "a high moral tone" as "obviously of paramount importance".

[ 31 ] Reith succeeded in building a high wall against a more tabloid, free-for-all in radio aimed at merely attracting the largest audience (and advertising revenue). There was no paid advertising on the BBC; all the revenue came from a tax on receiving sets. Highbrow audiences, however, greatly enjoyed it.

[ 32 ] At a time when American, Australian and Canadian stations were drawing huge audiences cheering for their local teams with the broadcast of baseball, rugby and hockey, the BBC emphasised service for a national rather than a regional audience. Boat races were well covered along with tennis and horse racing, but the BBC was reluctant to spend its severely limited air time on long football or cricket games, regardless of their popularity.

[ 33 ] The BBC's radio studio in Birmingham, from the BBC Hand Book 1928, which described it as "Europe's largest studio" John Reith and the BBC, with support from the Crown , determined the universal needs of the people of Britain and broadcast content according to these perceived standards.

[ 34 ] Reith effectively censored anything that he felt would be harmful, directly or indirectly.

[ 35 ] While recounting his time with the BBC in 1935, Raymond Postgate claims that BBC broadcasters were made to submit a draft of their potential broadcast for approval. It was expected that they tailored their content to accommodate the modest, church-going elderly or a member of the Clergy .

[ 36 ] Until 1928, entertainers broadcasting on the BBC, both singers and "talkers" were expected to avoid biblical quotations, Clerical impersonations and references, references to drink or Prohibition in the United States , vulgar and doubtful matter and political allusions.

[ 35 ] The BBC excluded popular foreign music and musicians from its broadcasts, while promoting British alternatives.

[ 37 ] On 5 March 1928, Stanley Baldwin, the Prime Minister, maintained the censorship of editorial opinions on public policy, but allowed the BBC to address matters of religious, political or industrial controversy.

[ 38 ] The resulting political "talk series", designed to inform England on political issues, were criticised by members of parliament, including Winston Churchill, David Lloyd George and Sir Austen Chamberlain . Those who opposed these chats claimed that they silence the opinions of those in Parliament who are not nominated by Party Leaders or Party Whips, thus stifling independent, non-official views.

[ 38 ] In October 1932, the policemen of the Metropolitan Police Federation marched in protest at a proposed pay cut. Fearing dissent within the police force and public support for the movement, the BBC censored its coverage of the events, only broadcasting official statements from the government.

[ 38 ] Throughout the 1930s, political broadcasts had been closely monitored by the BBC.

[ 39 ] In 1935, the BBC censored the broadcasts of Oswald Mosley and Harry Pollitt .

[ 38 ] Mosley was a leader of the British Union of Fascists , and Pollitt a leader of the Communist Party of Great Britain . They had been contracted to provide a series of five broadcasts on their parties' politics. The BBC, in conjunction with The Foreign Office of Britain, first suspended this series and ultimately cancelled it without the notice of the public.

[ 39 ] [ 38 ] Less radical politicians faced similar censorship. In 1938, Winston Churchill proposed a series of talks regarding British domestic and foreign politics and affairs but was similarly censored.

[ 39 ] The censorship of political discourse by the BBC was a precursor to the total shutdown of political debate that manifested over the BBC's wartime airwaves.

[ 39 ] The Foreign Office maintained that the public should not be aware of their role in the censorship.

[ 38 ] From 1935 to 1939, the BBC also attempted to unite the British Empire's radio waves, sending staff to Egypt, Palestine , Newfoundland , Jamaica, India, Canada and South Africa.

[ 40 ] Reith personally visited South Africa, lobbying for state-run radio programmes which was accepted by South African Parliament in 1936.

[ 40 ] A similar programme was adopted in Canada. Through collaboration with these state-run broadcasting centres, Reith left a legacy of cultural influence across the empire of Great Britain with his departure from the corporation in 1938.

[ 40 ] Experimental television broadcasts were started in 1929, using an electromechanical 30-line system developed by John Logie Baird .

[ 41 ] Limited regular broadcasts using this system began in 1932, and an expanded service (now named the BBC Television Service ) started from Alexandra Palace in November 1936, alternating between an improved Baird mechanical 240-line system and the all-electronic 405-line Marconi-EMI system which had been developed by an EMI research team led by Sir Isaac Shoenberg .

[ 42 ] The superiority of the electronic system saw the mechanical system dropped early the following year, with the Marconi-EMI system the first fully electronic television system in the world to be used in regular broadcasting.

[ 43 ] BBC versus other media King George V giving the 1934 Royal Christmas message on BBC Radio. The annual message typically reflects on the year's major events.

The success of broadcasting provoked animosities between the BBC and well-established media such as theatres, concert halls and the recording industry. By 1929, the BBC complained that the agents of many comedians refused to sign contracts for broadcasting, because they feared it harmed the artist "by making his material stale" and that it "reduces the value of the artist as a visible music-hall performer". On the other hand, the BBC was "keenly interested" in a cooperation with the recording companies who "in recent years ... have not been slow to make records of singers, orchestras, dance bands, etc. who have already proved their power to achieve popularity by wireless." Radio plays were so popular that the BBC had received 6,000 manuscripts by 1929, most of them written for stage and of little value for broadcasting: "Day in and day out, manuscripts come in, and nearly all go out again through the post, with a note saying 'We regret, etc.'" [ 44 ] In the 1930s music broadcasts also enjoyed great popularity, for example the friendly and wide-ranging BBC Theatre Organ broadcasts at St George's Hall , London by Reginald Foort , who held the official role of BBC Staff Theatre Organist from 1936 to 1938.

[ 45 ] Second World War Statue of George Orwell outside Broadcasting House , headquarters of the BBC Television broadcasting was suspended from 1 September 1939 to 7 June 1946, during World War II , and it was left to BBC Radio broadcasters such as Reginald Foort to keep the nation's spirits up. The BBC moved most of its radio operations out of London, initially to Bristol , and then to Bedford . Concerts were broadcast from the Bedford Corn Exchange ; the Trinity Chapel in St Paul's Church, Bedford was the studio for the Daily Service (a daily 15 minute religious service first broadcast on the BBC in 1928 which continues today) from 1941 to 1945, and, in the darkest days of the war in 1941, the Archbishops of Canterbury and York came to St Paul's to broadcast to the UK and the world on the National Day of Prayer.

[ 46 ] BBC employees during the war included George Orwell who spent two years with the broadcaster.

[ 47 ] During his role as prime minister during the war, Winston Churchill delivered 33 major wartime speeches by radio, all of which were carried by the BBC within the UK.

[ 48 ] On 18 June 1940, French general Charles de Gaulle , in exile in London as the leader of the Free French, made a speech, broadcast by the BBC, urging the French people not to capitulate to the Nazis.

[ 49 ] In October 1940, Princesses Elizabeth and Margaret made their first radio broadcast for the BBC's Children's Hour , addressing other children who had been evacuated from cities.

[ 50 ] In 1938, John Reith and the Government of the United Kingdom , specifically the Ministry of Information which had been set up for WWII, designed a censorship apparatus for the inevitability of war.

[ 51 ] Due to the BBC's advancements in shortwave radio technology, the corporation could broadcast across the world during the Second World War.

[ 52 ] Within Europe, the BBC European Service would gather intelligence and information regarding the current events of the war in English.

[ 51 ] [ 53 ] Regional BBC workers, based on their regional geo-political climate, would then further censor the material their broadcasts would cover. Nothing was to be added outside the preordained news items.

[ 51 ] [ 53 ] For example, the BBC Polish Service was heavily censored due to fears of jeopardising relations with the Soviet Union . Controversial topics, i.e. the contested Polish and Soviet border, the deportation of Polish citizens, the arrests of Polish Home Army members and the Katyn massacre , were not included in Polish broadcasts.

[ 54 ] American radio broadcasts were broadcast across Europe on BBC channels. This material also passed through the BBC's censorship office, which surveilled and edited American coverage of British affairs.

[ 52 ] By 1940, across all BBC broadcasts, music by composers from enemy nations was censored. In total, 99 German, 38 Austrian and 38 Italian composers were censored. The BBC argued that like the Italian or German languages, listeners would be irritated by the inclusion of enemy composers.

[ 55 ] Any potential broadcasters said to have pacifist, communist or fascist ideologies were not allowed on the BBC's airwaves.

[ 56 ] In 1937, a MI5 security officer was given a permanent office within the organisation. This officer would examine the files of potential political subversives and mark the files of those deemed a security risk to the organisation, blacklisting them. This was often done on spurious grounds; even so, the practice would continue and expand during the years of the Cold War.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Later 20th century Produced between 1934 and 1959, the BBC-Marconi Type A microphone is regarded as an iconic symbol of the BBC, alongside the channel's rotating globe emblem introduced in 1963.

[ 59 ] There was a widely reported urban myth that, upon resumption of the BBC television service after the war, announcer Leslie Mitchell started by saying, "As I was saying before we were so rudely interrupted ..." In fact, the first person to appear when transmission resumed was Jasmine Bligh and the words said were "Good afternoon, everybody. How are you? Do you remember me, Jasmine Bligh ... ?" [ 60 ] The European Broadcasting Union was formed on 12 February 1950, in Torquay with the BBC among the 23 founding broadcasting organisations.

[ 61 ] Competition to the BBC was introduced in 1955, with the commercial and independently operated television network of Independent Television (ITV) . However, the BBC monopoly on radio services would persist until 8 October 1973 when under the control of the newly renamed Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA), the UK's first Independent local radio station, LBC came on-air in the London area. As a result of the Pilkington Committee report of 1962, in which the BBC was praised for the quality and range of its output, and ITV was very heavily criticised for not providing enough quality programming, [ 62 ] the decision was taken to award the BBC a second television channel, BBC2 , in 1964, renaming the existing service BBC1 . BBC2 used the higher resolution 625-line standard which had been standardised across Europe. BBC2 was broadcast in colour from 1 July 1967 and was joined by BBC1 and ITV on 15 November 1969. The 405-line VHF transmissions of BBC1 (and ITV) were continued for compatibility with older television receivers until 1985.

Television Centre at White City , west London (pictured in 2009), headquarters of the BBC from 1960 to 2013. Since being refurbished, the complex is now the home of BBC Studioworks .

Starting in 1964, a series of pirate radio stations (starting with Radio Caroline ) came on the air and forced the British government finally to regulate radio services to permit nationally based advertising-financed services. In response, the BBC reorganised and renamed their radio channels. On 30 September 1967, the Light Programme was split into Radio 1 offering continuous "Popular" music and Radio 2 more "Easy Listening".

[ 63 ] The "Third" programme became Radio 3 offering classical music and cultural programming. The Home Service became Radio 4 offering news, and non-musical content such as quiz shows, readings, dramas and plays. As well as the four national channels, a series of local BBC radio stations were established in 1967, including Radio London .

[ 64 ] In 1969, the BBC Enterprises department was formed to exploit BBC brands and programmes for commercial spin-off products. In 1979, it became a wholly owned limited company, BBC Enterprises Ltd.

[ 65 ] In 1974, the BBC's teletext service, Ceefax , was introduced, created initially to provide subtitling, but developed into a news and information service. In 1978, BBC staff went on strike just before the Christmas, thus blocking out the transmission of both channels and amalgamating all four radio stations into one.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Since the deregulation of the UK television and radio market in the 1980s, the BBC has faced increased competition from the commercial sector (and from the advertiser-funded public service broadcaster Channel 4 ), especially on satellite television, cable television, and digital television services. In the late 1980s, the BBC began a process of divestment by spinning off and selling parts of its organisation. In 1988, it sold off the Hulton Press Library, a photographic archive which had been acquired from the Picture Post magazine by the BBC in 1957. The archive was sold to Brian Deutsch and is now owned by Getty Images .

[ 68 ] In 1987, the BBC decided to centralize its operations by the management team with the radio and television divisions joining forces together for the first time, the activities of the news and currents departments and coordinated jointly under the new directorate.

[ 69 ] During the 1990s, this process continued with the separation of certain operational arms of the corporation into autonomous but wholly owned subsidiaries , with the aim of generating additional revenue for programme-making. BBC Enterprises was reorganised and relaunched in 1995, as BBC Worldwide Ltd.

[ 65 ] In 1998, BBC studios, outside broadcasts, post production, design, costumes and wigs were spun off into BBC Resources Ltd.

[ 70 ] The BBC Research & Development has played a major part in the development of broadcasting and recording techniques. The BBC was also responsible for the development of the NICAM stereo standard. In recent decades, a number of additional channels and radio stations have been launched: Radio 5 was launched in 1990, as a sports and educational station, but was replaced in 1994, with BBC Radio 5 Live to become a live radio station, following the success of the Radio 4 service to cover the 1991 Gulf War . The new station would be a news and sport station. In 1997, BBC News 24 , a rolling news channel, launched on digital television services, and the following year, BBC Choice was launched as the third general entertainment channel from the BBC. The BBC also purchased The Parliamentary Channel, which was renamed BBC Parliament . In 1999, BBC Knowledge launched as a multimedia channel, with services available on the newly launched BBC Text digital teletext service (later rebranded as BBC Red Button), and on BBC Online . The channel had an educational aim, which was modified later on in its life to offer documentaries.

2000–2011 Channel and branding changes A BBC HD outside broadcast van in August 2005 England fans in Manchester during a 2006 FIFA World Cup game shown on the BBC Big Screen BBC Pacific Quay in Glasgow , which was opened in 2007 In 2002, several television and radio channels were reorganised. BBC Knowledge was replaced by BBC Four and became the BBC's arts and documentaries channel.

CBBC , which had been a programming strand as Children's BBC since 1985, was split into CBBC and CBeebies , for younger children, with both new services getting a digital channel: the CBBC Channel and CBeebies Channel.

[ 71 ] In addition to the television channels, new digital radio stations were created: 1Xtra , 6 Music and Radio 4 Extra . BBC 1Xtra was a sister station to Radio 1 and specialised in modern black music, BBC 6 Music specialised in alternative music genres and BBC7 specialised in archive, speech and children's programming.

[ 72 ] The following few years resulted in repositioning of some channels to conform to a larger brand: in 2003, BBC Choice was replaced by BBC Three , with programming for younger adults and shocking real-life documentaries, BBC News 24 became the BBC News Channel in 2008, and BBC Radio 7 became BBC Radio 4 Extra in 2011, with new programmes to supplement those broadcast on Radio 4. In 2008, another channel was launched, BBC Alba , a Scottish Gaelic service.

[ 73 ] In 2006, BBC HD was launched as an experimental service, becoming  official in December 2007. The channel broadcast HD simulcasts of programmes on BBC One , BBC Two , BBC Three and BBC Four as well as repeats of some older programmes in HD. In 2010, an HD simulcast of BBC One launched: BBC One HD . The channel uses HD versions of BBC One's schedule and uses upscaled versions of programmes not currently produced in HD. The BBC HD channel closed in March 2013 and was replaced by BBC Two HD in the same month.

[ 74 ] The 2004 Hutton Inquiry and the subsequent report raised questions about the BBC's journalistic standards and its impartiality. This led to resignations of senior management members at the time including the then Director General, Greg Dyke . In January 2007, the BBC released minutes of the board meeting which led to Greg Dyke's resignation.

[ 75 ] Sale of divisions During this decade, the corporation began to sell off a number of its operational divisions to private owners: BBC Broadcast was spun off as a separate company in 2002, [ 76 ] and in 2005, it was sold off to Australian-based Macquarie Capital Alliance Group and Macquarie Group Limited and rebranded Red Bee Media .

[ 77 ] The BBC's IT , telephony and broadcast technology were brought together as BBC Technology Ltd in 2001, [ 76 ] and the division was later sold to the German company Siemens IT Solutions and Services (SIS).

[ 78 ] SIS was subsequently acquired from Siemens by the French company Atos .

[ 79 ] Further divestments included BBC Books (sold to Random House in 2006); [ 80 ] BBC Outside Broadcasts Ltd (sold in 2008 to Satellite Information Services ); [ 81 ] Costumes and Wigs (stock sold in 2008 to Angels Costumes ); [ 82 ] and BBC Magazines (sold to Immediate Media Company in 2011).

[ 83 ] After the sales of OBs and costumes, the remainder of BBC Resources was reorganised as BBC Studios and Post Production , which continues today as a wholly owned subsidiary of the BBC.

Creative Futures On 7 March 2005 director general Mark Thompson launched the "Creative Futures" project to restructure the organisation.

[ 84 ] A strike in May 2005 by more than 11,000 BBC workers over a proposal to cut 4,000 jobs and to privatise parts of the BBC, disrupted much of the BBC's regular programming.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] The blueprint for the future of the BBC resulting from the project was published ion 25 April 2006.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] On 18 October 2007, Thompson announced a six-year plan, "Delivering Creative Futures", which included merging the television current affairs department into a new "News Programmes" division.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] Thompson's announcement, in response to a £2 billion shortfall in funding, would, he said, deliver "a smaller but fitter BBC" in the digital age, by cutting its payroll and, in 2013, selling Television Centre .

[ 92 ] The plans included a reduction in posts of 2,500; including 1,800 redundancies, consolidating news operations, reducing programming output by 10% and selling off the flagship Television Centre building in London.

[ 93 ] Licence fee frozen On 20 October 2010, the Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne announced that the television licence fee would be frozen at its current level until the end of the current charter in 2016. The same announcement revealed that the BBC would take on the full cost of running the BBC World Service and the BBC Monitoring service from the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office , and partially finance the Welsh broadcaster S4C .

[ 94 ] [ a ] 2011–present The new extension to the BBC's Broadcasting House , completed in 2012 Further cuts were announced on 6 October 2011, so the BBC could reach a total reduction in their budget of 20%, following the licence fee freeze in October 2010, which included cutting staff by 2,000 and sending a further 1,000 to the MediaCityUK development in Salford , with BBC Three moving online only in 2016, the sharing of more programmes between stations and channels, sharing of radio news bulletins, more repeats in schedules, including the whole of BBC Two daytime and for some original programming to be reduced. BBC HD was closed on 26 March 2013, and replaced with an HD simulcast of BBC Two; however, flagship programmes, other channels and full funding for CBBC and CBeebies would be retained.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] Numerous BBC facilities have been sold off, including New Broadcasting House on Wilmslow Road in Manchester. Many major departments have been relocated to Broadcasting House in central London and MediaCityUK in Salford, particularly since the closure of BBC Television Centre in March 2013.

[ 98 ] On 16 February 2016, the BBC Three television service was discontinued and replaced by a digital outlet under the same name, targeting its young adult audience with web series and other content.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] Under the new royal charter instituted in 2017, the corporation must publish an annual report to Ofcom, outlining its plans and public service obligations for the next year. In its 2017–18 report, released July 2017, the BBC announced plans to "re-invent" its output to better compete against commercial streaming services such as Netflix . These plans included increasing the diversity of its content on television and radio, a major increase in investments towards digital children's content, and plans to make larger investments in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland to "rise to the challenge of better reflecting and representing a changing UK".

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] Since 2017, the BBC has also funded the Local Democracy Reporting Service , with up to 165 journalists employed by independent news organisations to report on local democracy issues on a pooled basis.

[ 103 ] In 2016, the BBC Director General Tony Hall announced a savings target of £800 million per year by 2021, which is about 23% of annual licence fee revenue. Having to take on the £700 million cost for free TV licences for the over-75 pensioners, and rapid inflation in drama and sport coverage costs, was given as the reason. Duplication of management and content spending would be reduced, and there would be a review of BBC News .

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] In September 2019, the BBC launched the Trusted News Initiative to work with news and social media companies to combat disinformation about national elections.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] In 2020, the BBC announced a BBC News savings target of £80 million per year by 2022, involving about 520 staff reductions. The BBC's director of news and current affairs Fran Unsworth said there would be further moves toward digital broadcasting, in part to attract back a youth audience, and more pooling of reporters to stop separate teams covering the same news.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] In 2020, the BBC reported a £119 million deficit because of delays to cost reduction plans, and the forthcoming ending of the remaining £253 million funding towards pensioner licence fees would increase financial pressures.

[ 110 ] In March 2023, the BBC was at the centre of a political row with football pundit Gary Lineker , after he criticised the British government's asylum policy on social media. Lineker was suspended from his position on Match of the Day before being re-instated after receiving overwhelming support from his colleagues. The scandal was made worse due to the connections between BBC's chairman, Richard Sharp, and the Conservative Party.

[ 111 ] In April 2023, Richard Sharp resigned as chairman after a report found he did not disclose potential perceived conflicts of interest in his role in the facilitation of a loan to Prime Minister Boris Johnson .

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Dame Elan Closs Stephens was appointed as acting chairwoman on 27 June 2023, and she would lead the BBC board for a year or until a new permanent chair has been appointed.

[ 114 ] Samir Shah was subsequently appointed with effect from 4 March 2024.

[ 115 ] In October 2024 it was announced that the BBC along with Sky Sports signed a deal to broadcast the 2025–26 season of the Women's Super League campaign.

[ 116 ] In May 2025, BBC director general Tim Davie said there were plans to switch off traditional broadcast transmissions in the 2030s in order to transition to a fully online delivery of programmes.

[ 117 ] Governance Main article: BBC independence The BBC is a chartered corporation , independent from direct government intervention, with its activities being overseen from April 2017 by the BBC Board and regulated by Ofcom .

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] The chairman is Samir Shah .

[ 115 ] Charter and Agreement Main article: BBC Charter The BBC is a public broadcasting company that operates under a royal charter . The charter is the constitutional basis for the BBC, and sets out the BBC's object, mission and public purposes.

[ 120 ] It emphasises public service , (limited) [ b ] editorial independence , prohibits advertising on domestic services and proclaims the BBC is to "seek to avoid adverse impacts on competition which are not necessary for the effective fulfilment of the Mission and the promotion of the Public Purposes".

[ 122 ] The charter additionally sets out that the BBC is subject to an additional agreement between it and the Culture Secretary , and that its operating licence is to be set by Ofcom, an external regulatory body . It used to be that the Home Secretary be departmental to both the agreement as well as the licence, and regulatory duties fall to the BBC Trust , but the 2017 charter changed those 2007 arrangements.

[ 123 ] The charter also outlines the BBC's governance and regulatory arrangements as a statutory corporation, including the role and composition of the BBC Board. The current charter took effect on 1 January 2017 and is set to expire on 31 December 2027; the agreement being coterminous.

[ 120 ] BBC Board Main article: BBC Board The BBC Board was formed in April 2017. It replaced the previous governing body, the BBC Trust, which itself had replaced the board of governors in 2007. The board sets the strategy for the corporation, assesses the performance of the BBC's executive board in delivering the BBC's services, and appoints the director-general. Ofcom is responsible for the regulation of the BBC.

Samir Shah has served as the chairman since 4 March 2024.

[ 119 ] [ 124 ] Executive committee The executive committee is responsible for the day-to-day operations of the broadcaster. Consisting of senior managers of the BBC, the committee meets once per month and is responsible for operational management and delivery of services within a framework set by the board, and is chaired by the director-general , currently Tim Davie , who is chief executive and (from 1994) editor-in-chief.

[ 125 ] Name Position Tim Davie Director-general (chair) Kerris Bright Chief Customer Officer Alan Dickson Chief Financial Officer Tom Fussell CEO, BBC Studios Leigh Tavaziva Chief Operating Officer Charlotte Moore Chief Content Officer Uzair Qadeer Chief People Officer Alice Macandrew Group Corporate Affairs Director Rhodri Talfan Davies Director, Nations Gautam Rangarajan Group Director of Strategy and Performance Deborah Turness CEO, BBC News and Current Affairs Operational divisions The corporation has the following in-house divisions covering the BBC's output and operations: [ 126 ] [ 127 ] Content , headed by Charlotte Moore is in charge of the corporation's television channels including the commissioning of programming.

Nations and Regions , headed by Rhodri Talfan Davies is responsible for the corporation's divisions in Scotland , Northern Ireland , Wales , and the English Regions .

Commercial divisions The BBC also operates a number of wholly owned commercial divisions: BBC Studios is the former in-house television production; Entertainment, Music & Events, Factual and Scripted (drama and comedy). Following a merger with BBC Worldwide in April 2018, it also operates international channels and sells programmes and merchandise in the UK and abroad to gain additional income that is returned to BBC programmes. It is kept separate from the corporation due to its commercial nature.

BBC News is in charge of the production and distribution of its commercial global television channel. It works closely with the BBC News division, but is not governed by it, and shares the corporation's facilities and staff. It also works with BBC Studios, the channel's distributor.

BBC Studioworks is also separate and officially owns and operates some of the BBC's studio facilities, such as the BBC Elstree Centre , leasing them out to productions from within and outside of the corporation.

[ 128 ] MI5 vetting policy From as early as the 1930s until the 1990s, MI5 , the British domestic intelligence service, engaged in the vetting of applicants for BBC jobs, a policy designed to keep out persons deemed subversive.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] In 1933, BBC executive Colonel Alan Dawnay began to meet the head of MI5, Sir Vernon Kell , to informally trade information; from 1935, a formal arrangement was made whereby job applicants would be secretly vetted by MI5 for their political views (without their knowledge).

[ 129 ] The BBC took up a policy of denying any suggestion by the press of such a relationship (the very existence of MI5 itself was not officially acknowledged until the Security Service Act 1989 ).

[ 129 ] This relationship garnered wider public attention after an article by David Leigh and Paul Lashmar appeared in The Observer in August 1985, revealing that MI5 had been vetting appointments, running operations from Room 105 in Broadcasting House.

[ 129 ] [ 131 ] At the time of the exposé, the operation was being run by Ronnie Stonham . A memo from 1984 revealed that blacklisted organisations included the far-left Communist Party of Great Britain, the Socialist Workers Party , the Workers Revolutionary Party and the Militant tendency , as well as the far-right National Front and the British National Party . An association with one of these groups could result in a denial of a job application.

[ 129 ] In October 1985, the BBC announced that it would stop the vetting process, except for a few people in top roles, as well as those in charge of Wartime Broadcasting Service emergency broadcasting (in the event of a nuclear war) and staff of the BBC World Service .

[ 129 ] In 1990, following the Security Service Act 1989, vetting was further restricted to those responsible for wartime broadcasting and those with access to secret government information .

[ 129 ] Michael Hodder, who succeeded Stonham, had the MI5 vetting files sent to the BBC Archives in Reading, Berkshire .

[ 129 ] Finances The BBC has the second largest budget of any UK-based broadcaster with an operating expenditure of £4.722 billion in 2013/14 [ 132 ] compared with £6.471 billion for Sky UK in 2013/14 [ 133 ] and £1.843 billion for ITV in the calendar year 2013.

[ 134 ] [ needs update ] Revenue See also: Television licence and Television licensing in the United Kingdom The principal means of funding the BBC is through the television licence, costing £169.50 per year per household since April 2024.

[ 135 ] Such a licence is required to legally receive broadcast television across the UK, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man . No licence is required to own a television used for other means, or for sound only radio sets (though a separate licence for these was also required for non-TV households until 1971). The cost of a television licence is set by the government and enforced by the criminal law. A 50% discount is offered to people who are registered blind or severely visually impaired, [ 136 ] and the licence is completely free for any household containing anyone aged 75 or over. However, from August 2020, the licence fee will only be waived if over 75 and receiving pension credit.

[ 137 ] The BBC pursues its licence fee collection and enforcement under the trading name "TV Licensing". The revenue is collected privately by Capita , an outside agency, and is paid into the central government Consolidated Fund , a process defined in the Communications Act 2003 . Funds are then allocated by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) and the Treasury and approved by Parliament via legislation. Additional revenues are paid by the Department for Work and Pensions to compensate for subsidised licences for eligible over-75-year-olds.

The licence fee is classified as a tax, [ 138 ] and its evasion is a criminal offence. Since 1991, collection and enforcement of the licence fee has been the responsibility of the BBC in its role as TV Licensing Authority.

[ 139 ] The BBC carries out surveillance (mostly using subcontractors) on properties (under the auspices of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 ) and may conduct searches of a property using a search warrant.

[ 140 ] According to TV Licensing, 216,900 people in the UK were caught watching TV without a licence in 2018/19.

[ 141 ] Licence fee evasion makes up around one-tenth of all cases prosecuted in magistrates' courts, representing 0.3% of court time.

[ 142 ] Income from commercial enterprises and from overseas sales of its catalogue of programmes has substantially increased over recent years, [ 143 ] with BBC Worldwide contributing some £243 million to the BBC's core public service business.

[ 144 ] According to the BBC's 2018/19 Annual Report, its total income was £4.889 billion a decrease from £5.062 billion in 2017/18 – partly owing to a 3.7% phased reduction in government funding for free over-75s TV licences, [ 144 ] which can be broken down as follows: £3.690 billion in licence fees collected from householders; £1.199 billion from the BBC's commercial businesses and government grants some of which will cease in 2020 The licence fee has, however, attracted criticism. It has been argued that in an age of multi-stream, multi-channel availability, an obligation to pay a licence fee is no longer appropriate. The BBC's use of private sector company Capita to send letters to premises not paying the licence fee has been criticised, especially as there have been cases where such letters have been sent to premises which are up to date with their payments, or do not require a TV licence.

[ 145 ] The BBC uses advertising campaigns to inform customers of the requirement to pay the licence fee. Past campaigns have been criticised by Conservative MP Boris Johnson and former MP Ann Widdecombe for having a threatening nature and language used to scare evaders into paying.

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] Audio clips and television broadcasts are used to inform listeners of the BBC's comprehensive database.

[ 148 ] There are a number of pressure groups campaigning on the issue of the licence fee.

[ 149 ] In 2023, around half a million UK households cancelled their TV licence, driven by shifting viewing habits and financial pressures. As a result, the BBC saw a decline in revenue, with the number of households paying the licence fee dropping to 23.9 million.

[ 150 ] The majority of the BBC's commercial output comes from its commercial arm BBC Worldwide which sell programmes abroad and exploit key brands for merchandise. Of their 2012/13 sales, 27% were centred on the five key "superbrands" of Doctor Who , Top Gear , Strictly Come Dancing (known as Dancing with the Stars internationally), the BBC's archive of natural history programming (collected under the umbrella of BBC Earth ) and the (now sold) travel guide brand Lonely Planet .

[ 151 ] Assets Main article: List of BBC properties Further information: Broadcasting House ; Broadcasting House, Belfast ; BBC Cymru Wales New Broadcasting House ; and Television Centre, London The headquarters of the BBC at Broadcasting House in Portland Place , central London. This section of the building is called Old Broadcasting House .

The main entrance of the extension to the building ( New Broadcasting House ).

Broadcasting House in Portland Place , central London, is the official headquarters of the BBC. It is home to the BBC's national and international radio networks ( BBC Radio 1 , BBC Radio 1Xtra , BBC Asian Network , BBC Radio 2 , BBC Radio 3 , BBC Radio 4 , BBC Radio 4 Extra , BBC Radio 6 Music and the BBC World Service ), with the exception of BBC Radio 5 Live and BBC Radio 5 Sports Extra which have broadcast from MediaCityUK in Salford since 2011. It is also the home of BBC News , which relocated to the building from BBC Television Centre in 2013. On the front of the building are statues of Prospero and Ariel , characters from William Shakespeare 's play The Tempest , sculpted by Eric Gill . Renovation of Broadcasting House began in 2002, and was completed in 2012.

[ 152 ] Until it closed at the end of March 2013, BBC Television was based at Television Centre , a purpose-built television facility opened in 1960 located in White City , four miles (6 km) west of central London.

[ 153 ] This facility was host to a number of famous guests and programmes through the years, and its name and image is familiar with many British citizens. Nearby, the White City Place complex contains numerous programme offices, housed in Centre House, the Media Centre and Broadcast Centre. It is in this area around Shepherd's Bush that the majority of BBC employees worked.

As part of a major reorganisation of BBC property, the entire BBC News operation relocated from the News Centre at BBC Television Centre to the refurbished Broadcasting House to create what is being described as "one of the world's largest live broadcast centres".

[ 154 ] The BBC News Channel and BBC News International relocated to the premises in early 2013.

[ 155 ] Broadcasting House is now also home to most of the BBC's national radio stations, and the BBC World Service . The major part of this plan involved the demolition of the two post-war extensions to the building and construction of an extension [ 156 ] designed by Sir Richard MacCormac of MJP Architects . This move concentrated the BBC's London operations, allowing them to sell Television Centre.

[ 157 ] In addition to the scheme above, the BBC is in the process of making and producing more programmes outside London, involving production centres such as Belfast , Cardiff , Glasgow , Newcastle and, most notably, in Greater Manchester as part of the "BBC North Project" scheme where several major departments, including BBC North West , BBC Manchester , BBC Sport , BBC Children's , CBeebies , Radio 5 Live, BBC Radio 5 Sports Extra , BBC Breakfast , BBC Learning and the BBC Philharmonic have all moved from their previous locations in either London or New Broadcasting House, Manchester to the new 200-acre (80ha) MediaCityUK production facilities in Salford , that form part of the large BBC North Group division and will therefore become the biggest staffing operation outside London.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] A Dalek prop used in Doctor Who at BBC Birmingham As well as the two main sites in London (Broadcasting House and White City), there are seven other important BBC production centres in the UK, mainly specialising in different productions.

Cardiff is home to BBC Cymru Wales , which specialises in drama production. Open since 2012, and containing 7 new studios, Roath Lock [ 160 ] is notable as the home of productions such as Doctor Who and Casualty .

Broadcasting House Belfast , home to BBC Northern Ireland , specialises in original drama and comedy, and has taken part in many co-productions with independent companies and notably with RTÉ in the Republic of Ireland.

BBC Scotland , based in Pacific Quay, Glasgow is a large producer of programmes for the network, including several quiz shows. In England, the larger regions also produce some programming.

Previously, the largest hub of BBC programming from the regions is BBC North West. At present they produce all religious and ethical programmes on the BBC, as well as other programmes such as A Question of Sport . However, this is to be merged and expanded under the BBC North project, which involved the region moving from New Broadcasting House, Manchester , to MediaCityUK .

BBC Midlands , based at Mailbox Birmingham , also produces drama and contains the headquarters for the English regions and the BBC's daytime output. Other production centres include Broadcasting House Bristol , home of BBC West and famously the BBC Studios Natural History Unit and to a lesser extent, Quarry Hill in Leeds, home of BBC Yorkshire . There are also many smaller local and regional studios throughout the UK, operating the BBC regional television services and the BBC Local Radio stations.

The BBC also operates several news gathering centres in various locations around the world, which provide news coverage of that region to the national and international news operations.

Information technology service management In 2004, the BBC contracted out its former BBC Technology division to the German engineering and electronics company Siemens IT Solutions and Services (SIS), outsourcing its IT , telephony and broadcast technology systems.

[ 78 ] When Atos Origin acquired the SIS division from Siemens in December 2010 for €850 million (£720m), [ 161 ] the BBC support contract also passed to Atos , and in July 2011, the BBC announced to staff that its technology support would become an Atos service.

[ 79 ] Siemens staff working on the BBC contract were transferred to Atos; the BBC's Information Technology systems are now managed by Atos.

[ 162 ] In 2011, the BBC's chief financial officer Zarin Patel stated to the House of Commons Public Accounts Committee that, following criticism of the BBC's management of major IT projects with Siemens (such as the Digital Media Initiative ), the BBC partnership with Atos would be instrumental in achieving cost savings of around £64 million as part of the BBC's "Delivering Quality First" programme.

[ 163 ] In 2012, the BBC's then- chief technology officer John Linwood, expressed confidence in service improvements to the BBC's technology provision brought about by Atos. He also stated that supplier accountability had been strengthened following some high-profile technology failures which had taken place during the partnership with Siemens.

[ 164 ] Services Television Main article: BBC Television Weekly reach of the BBC's domestic services from 2011 to 2012.

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] Reach is the number of people who use the service at any point for more than 15 minutes in a week.

[ 166 ] The BBC operates several television channels nationally and internationally.

BBC One and BBC Two are the flagship television channels. Others include the youth channel BBC Three , [ c ] [ 167 ] cultural and documentary channel BBC Four , the British and international variations of the BBC News channel, parliamentary channel BBC Parliament, and two children's channels, CBBC and CBeebies . Digital television is now entrenched in the UK, with analogue transmission completely phased out as of December 2012 [update] .

[ 168 ] BBC One is a regionalised TV service which provides opt-outs throughout the day for local news and other local programming. These variations are more pronounced in the BBC "Nations", i.e.

Northern Ireland , Scotland and Wales , where the presentation is mostly carried out locally on BBC One and Two, and where programme schedules can vary considerably from that of the network. BBC Two variations exist in the Nations; however, English regions today rarely have the option to opt out as regional programming now exists only on BBC One. In 2019, the Scottish variation of BBC Two ceased operation and was replaced with the networked version in favour of a new BBC Scotland channel . BBC Two was the first channel to be transmitted on 625 lines, in 1964. It then carried a small-scale regular colour service from 1967. BBC One followed in November 1969.

Weekly reach of the BBC's domestic television channels 2011–12 [ 165 ] A new Scottish Gaelic television channel, BBC Alba , was launched in September 2008. It is also the first multi-genre channel to come entirely from Scotland with almost all of its programmes made in Scotland. The service was initially available only via satellite but since June 2011 has been available to viewers in Scotland on Freeview and cable television.

[ 169 ] The BBC currently operates HD simulcasts of all its nationwide channels with the exception of BBC Parliament . Until 26 March 2013, a separate channel called BBC HD was available, in place of BBC Two HD . It launched on 15 May 2006, following a 12-month trial of the broadcasts. It became a proper channel in 2007, and screened HD programmes as simulcasts of the main network, or as repeats. The corporation has been producing programmes in the format for many years, and stated that it hoped to produce 100% of new programmes in HDTV by 2010.

[ 170 ] On 3 November 2010, a high-definition simulcast of BBC One was launched, entitled BBC One HD , and BBC Two HD launched on 26 March 2013, replacing BBC HD. Scotland's new television channel, BBC Scotland, launched in February 2019.

[ 171 ] Filming an episode of BBC One's Sherlock (with Benedict Cumberbatch as Sherlock Holmes pictured) in July 2011 In the Republic of Ireland, Belgium, the Netherlands and Switzerland, the BBC channels are available in a number of ways. In these countries digital and cable operators carry a range of BBC channels. These include BBC One, BBC Two, BBC Four and BBC News, although viewers in the Republic of Ireland may receive BBC services via overspill from transmitters in Northern Ireland or Wales, or via "deflectors"—transmitters in the Republic which rebroadcast broadcasts from the UK, [ 172 ] received off-air, or from digital satellite.

Since 1975, the BBC has also provided its TV programmes to the British Forces Broadcasting Service (BFBS) , allowing members of UK military serving abroad to watch them on four dedicated TV channels. From 27 March 2013, BFBS will carry versions of BBC One and BBC Two, which will include children's programming from CBBC , as well as carrying programming from BBC Three on a new channel called BFBS Extra .

Since 2008, all BBC channels are available to watch online through the BBC iPlayer service. This online streaming ability came about following experiments with live streaming, involving streaming certain channels in the UK.

[ 173 ] In February 2014, Director-General Tony Hall announced that the corporation needed to save £100 million. In March 2014, the BBC confirmed plans for BBC Three to become an internet-only channel.

[ 174 ] BBC Genome Project Main article: BBC Genome Project In December 2012, the BBC completed a digitisation exercise, scanning the listings of all BBC programmes from an entire run of about 4,500 copies of the Radio Times magazine from the first, 1923, issue to 2009 (later listings already being held electronically), the "BBC Genome project", with a view to creating an online database of its programme output.

[ 175 ] An earlier ten months of listings are to be obtained from other sources.

[ 175 ] They identified around five million programmes, involving 8.5 million actors, presenters, writers and technical staff.

[ 175 ] The Genome project was opened to public access on 15 October 2014, with corrections to OCR errors and changes to advertised schedules being crowdsourced .

[ 176 ] Radio Weekly reach of the BBC's national radio stations, on both analogue and digital (2012) [ 166 ] Main articles: BBC Radio and BBC Local Radio The BBC has ten radio stations serving the whole of the UK, a further seven stations in the "national regions" ( Wales , Scotland , and Northern Ireland ), and 39 other local stations serving defined areas of England . Of the ten national stations, five are major stations and are available on FM or AM as well as on DAB and online. These are BBC Radio 1 , offering new music and popular styles and being notable for its chart show; BBC Radio 2 , playing adult contemporary, country and soul music amongst many other genres; BBC Radio 3 , presenting classical and jazz music together with some spoken-word programming of a cultural nature in the evenings; BBC Radio 4 , focusing on news, factual and other speech-based programming, including drama and comedy; and BBC Radio 5 Live , broadcasting 24-hour news, sport and talk programming.

[ 177 ] Swedish actress Ingrid Bergman being interviewed on BBC Radio in October 1954 In addition to these five stations, the BBC runs a further five stations that broadcast on DAB and online only. These stations supplement and expand on the big five stations, and were launched in 2002.

BBC Radio 1Xtra sisters Radio 1, and broadcasts new black music and urban tracks.

BBC Radio 5 Sports Extra sisters 5 Live and offers extra sport analysis, including broadcasting sports that previously were not covered.

BBC Radio 6 Music offers alternative music genres and is notable as a platform for new artists. BBC Radio 7, later renamed BBC Radio 4 Extra , provided archive drama, comedy and children's programming. The final station is the BBC Asian Network , providing music, talk and news to this section of the community. This station evolved out of Local radio stations serving certain areas, and as such this station is available on medium wave frequency in some areas of the Midlands.

As well as the national stations, the BBC also provides 40 BBC Local Radio stations in England and the Channel Islands, each named for and covering a particular city and its surrounding area (e.g.

BBC Radio Bristol ), county or region (e.g.

BBC Three Counties Radio ), or geographical area (e.g.

BBC Radio Solent covering the central south coast). A further six stations broadcast in what the BBC terms "the national regions": Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland. These are BBC Radio Wales (in English), BBC Radio Cymru (in Welsh ), BBC Radio Scotland (in English), BBC Radio nan Gàidheal (in Scottish Gaelic ), BBC Radio Ulster , and BBC Radio Foyle , the latter being an opt-out station from Radio Ulster for the north-west of Northern Ireland.

The BBC's UK national channels are also broadcast in the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man (although these Crown Dependencies are outside the UK), and in the former there are two local stations – BBC Radio Guernsey and BBC Radio Jersey . There is no BBC local radio station, however, in the Isle of Man, partly because the island has long been served by the popular independent commercial station, Manx Radio , which predates the existence of BBC Local Radio. BBC services in the dependencies are financed from television licence fees which are set at the same level as those payable in the UK, although collected locally. This is the subject of some controversy in the Isle of Man since, as well as having no BBC Local Radio service, the island also lacks a local television news service analogous to that provided by BBC Channel Islands .

[ 178 ] BBC World Service , with Jonathan Dimbleby (middle) broadcasting from Budapest, Hungary in 2016 For a worldwide audience, the BBC World Service provides news, current affairs and information in more than 40 languages, including English, around the world, and is available in over 150 capital cities, making it the world's largest external broadcaster in terms of reception area, language selection and audience reach.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] It is broadcast worldwide on shortwave radio , DAB and online and has an estimated weekly audience of 192 million, and its websites have an audience of 38 million people per week.

[ 181 ] Since 2005, it is also available on DAB in the UK, a step not taken before, due to the way it is funded. Following the Government's spending review in 2011, the service was funded for the first time through the Licence fee.

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] In recent years, some services of the World Service have been reduced: the Thai service ended in 2006, [ 184 ] as did the Eastern European languages. Resources were diverted instead into the new BBC News Arabic .

[ 185 ] Historically, the BBC was the only legal radio broadcaster based in the UK mainland until 1967, when University Radio York , then under the name Radio York , was launched as the first, and now oldest, legal independent radio station in the country. However, the BBC did not enjoy a complete monopoly before this, as several Continental stations, such as Radio Luxembourg , had broadcast programmes in English to Britain since the 1930s and the Isle of Man-based Manx Radio began in 1964. Today, despite the advent of commercial broadcasting , BBC radio stations remain among the most listened-to in the country. Radio 2 has the largest audience share (up to 16.8% in 2011–12) and Radios 1 and 4 ranked second and third in terms of weekly reach .

[ 186 ] BBC programming is also available to other services and in other countries. Since 1943, the BBC has provided radio programming to the British Forces Broadcasting Service , which broadcasts in countries where British troops are stationed. BBC Radio 1 is also carried in Canada on Sirius XM (online streaming only). The BBC is a patron of the Radio Academy , a registered UK charity that promotes excellence in broadcasting.

[ 187 ] News Main article: BBC News The new newsroom in Broadcasting House, central London, officially opened by the Queen in 2013 BBC News is the largest broadcast news gathering operation in the world, [ 188 ] providing services to BBC domestic radio as well as television networks such as the BBC News , BBC Parliament and BBC News International . In addition to this, news stories are available on the BBC Red Button service and BBC News Online . In addition to this, the BBC has been developing new ways to access BBC News and as a result, has launched the service on BBC Mobile, making it accessible to mobile phones and PDAs, as well as developing alerts by email, on digital television, and on computers through a desktop alert .

Ratings figures suggest that during major incidents such as the 7 July 2005 London bombings or royal events, the UK audience overwhelmingly turns to the BBC's coverage as opposed to its commercial rivals.

[ 189 ] On 7 July 2005, the day that there were a series of coordinated bomb blasts on London's public transport system, the BBC Online website recorded an all time bandwidth peak of 11 Gb /s at 12.00 on 7 July. BBC News received some 1 billion total hits on the day of the event (including all images, text, and HTML ), serving some 5.5 terabytes of data. At peak times during the day, there were 40,000-page requests per second for the BBC News website. The previous day's announcement of the 2012 Summer Olympics being awarded to London caused a peak of around 5 Gbit/s. The previous all-time high at BBC Online was caused by the announcement of the Michael Jackson verdict, which used 7.2 Gbit/s.

[ 190 ] Internet Main article: BBC Online The BBC's online presence includes a comprehensive news website and archive. The BBC's first official online service was the BBC Networking Club, which was launched on 11 May 1994. The service was subsequently relaunched as BBC Online in 1997, before being renamed BBCi, then bbc.co.uk, before it was rebranded back as BBC Online. The website is funded by the Licence fee, but uses GeoIP technology, allowing advertisements to be carried on the site when viewed outside of the UK.

[ 191 ] The BBC claims the site to be "Europe's most popular content-based site" [ 192 ] and states that 13.2 million people in the UK visit the site's more than two million pages each day.

[ 193 ] The centre of the website is the Homepage, which features a modular layout. Users can choose which modules, and which information, is displayed on their homepage, allowing the user to customise it. This system was first launched in December 2007, becoming permanent in February 2008, and has undergone a few aesthetical changes since then.

[ 194 ] The home page then has links to other micro-sites, such as BBC News Online , Sport , Weather , TV, and Radio. As part of the site, every programme on BBC Television or Radio is given its own page, with bigger programmes getting their own micro-site, and as a result it is often common for viewers and listeners to be told URLs for the programme website.

2008 advertisement for BBC iPlayer at Old Street, London Another large part of the site also allows users to watch and listen to most Television and Radio output live and for seven days after broadcast using the BBC iPlayer platform, which launched on 27 July 2007, and initially used peer-to-peer and DRM technology to deliver both radio and TV content of the last seven days for offline use for up to 30 days, since then video is now streamed directly. Also, through participation in the Creative Archive Licence group, bbc.co.uk allowed legal downloads of selected archive material via the internet.

[ 195 ] The BBC has often included learning as part of its online service, running services such as BBC Jam , Learning Zone Class Clips and also runs services such as BBC WebWise and First Click which are designed to teach people how to use the internet.

BBC Jam was a free online service, delivered through broadband and narrowband connections, providing high-quality interactive resources designed to stimulate learning at home and at school. Initial content was made available in January 2006; however, BBC Jam was suspended on 20 March 2007 due to allegations made to the European Commission that it was damaging the interests of the commercial sector of the industry.

[ 196 ] In recent years, some major on-line companies and politicians have complained that BBC Online receives too much funding from the television licence, meaning that other websites are unable to compete with the vast amount of advertising-free on-line content available on BBC Online.

[ 197 ] Some have proposed that the amount of licence fee money spent on BBC Online should be reduced—either being replaced with funding from advertisements or subscriptions, or a reduction in the amount of content available on the site.

[ 198 ] In response to this the BBC carried out an investigation, and has now set in motion a plan to change the way it provides its online services. BBC Online will now attempt to fill in gaps in the market, and will guide users to other websites for currently existing market provision. (For example, instead of providing local events information and timetables, users will be guided to outside websites already providing that information.)
Part of this plan included the BBC closing some of its websites, and rediverting money to redevelop other parts.

[ 199 ] [ 200 ] On 26 February 2010, The Times claimed that Mark Thompson , Director General of the BBC, proposed that the BBC's web output should be cut by 50%, with online staff numbers and budgets reduced by 25% in a bid to scale back BBC operations and allow commercial rivals more room.

[ 201 ] On 2 March 2010, the BBC reported that it would cut its website spending by 25% and close BBC 6 Music and Asian Network, as part of Mark Thompson's plans to make "a smaller, fitter BBC for the digital age".

[ 202 ] [ 203 ] Interactive television Main article: BBC Red Button BBC Red Button is the brand name for the BBC's interactive television services, which are available through Freeview (digital terrestrial), as well as Freesat , Sky UK (satellite), and Virgin Media (cable). Unlike Ceefax, the service's analogue counterpart, BBC Red Button is able to display full-colour graphics, photographs, and video, as well as programmes and can be accessed from any BBC channel. The service carries News, Weather and Sport 24 hours a day, but also provides extra features related to programmes specific at that time. Examples include viewers to play along at home to gameshows, to give, voice and vote on opinions to issues, as used alongside programmes such as Question Time . At some points in the year, when multiple sporting events occur, some coverage of less mainstream sports or games are frequently placed on the Red Button for viewers to watch. Frequently, other features are added unrelated to programmes being broadcast at that time, such as the broadcast of the Doctor Who animated episode Dreamland in November 2009.

[ 204 ] Music The BBC Big Band The BBC employs 5 staff orchestras, a professional choir, and supports two amateur choruses, based in BBC venues across the UK; [ 205 ] the BBC Symphony Orchestra , the BBC Singers and BBC Symphony Chorus based in London, the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra in Glasgow, the BBC Philharmonic in Salford, the BBC Concert Orchestra based in Watford, and the BBC National Orchestra of Wales in Cardiff. It also buys a selected number of broadcasts from the Ulster Orchestra in Belfast and the BBC Big Band .

BBC Proms at the Royal Albert Hall The BBC Proms have been produced by the BBC every year since 1927, stepping in to fund the popular eight-week summer classical music festival when music publishers Chappell and Co withdrew their support.

[ 206 ] In 1930, the newly formed BBC Symphony Orchestra gave all 49 Proms, and have performed at every Last Night of the Proms since then. The Proms have been held at the Royal Albert Hall since 1941, and the BBC's orchestras and choirs are the backbone of the festival, giving around 40% to 50% of all performances each season.

[ 207 ] Many famous musicians of every genre have played at the BBC, such as The Beatles ( Live at the BBC is one of their many albums). The BBC is also responsible for the broadcast of Glastonbury Festival , Reading and Leeds Festivals and United Kingdom coverage of the Eurovision Song Contest , a show with which the broadcaster has been associated for over 60 years.

[ 208 ] The BBC also operates the division of BBC Audiobooks sometimes found in association with Chivers Audiobooks.

Other Some of the BBC Micro team in 2008. Developed by Acorn , the Micro computer dominated the educational computer market in the UK during the 1980s.

[ 209 ] The BBC operates other ventures as well as its broadcasting arm. In addition to broadcasting output on television and radio, some programmes are also displayed on the BBC Big Screens in several central-city locations. The BBC and the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office also jointly run BBC Monitoring , which monitors radio, television, the press and the internet worldwide. The BBC also developed several computers throughout the 1980s, most notably the BBC Micro (created as part of the BBC Computer Literacy Project , which foreshadowed the coming microcomputer revolution and its effect on the economy, industry, and society of the United Kingdom), which ran alongside the corporation's educational aims and programming, starting with The Computer Programme broadcast in 1982.

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] The National Museum of Computing at Bletchley Park uses BBC Micros as part of a scheme to educate school children about computer programming .

[ 212 ] In 1951, in conjunction with Oxford University Press , the BBC published The BBC Hymn Book , intended to be used by radio listeners to follow hymns being broadcast. The book was published both with and without music, the music edition being entitled The BBC Hymn Book with Music .

[ 213 ] The book contained 542 popular hymns.

Ceefax Main article: Ceefax Ceefax page (showing football news) in 2009. A teletext service provided by the BBC from 1974 to 2012, it was a popular method to check score updates.

[ 214 ] The BBC provided the world's first teletext service called Ceefax (near-homophonous with "See Facts") from 23 September 1974 until 23 October 2012 on the BBC1 analogue channel, then later on BBC2.

[ 215 ] It showed informational pages, such as news, sport, and the weather. From New Year's Eve, 1974, ITV's Oracle tried to compete with Ceefax. Oracle closed on New Year's Eve, 1992. During its lifetime, Ceefax attracted millions of viewers, right up until 2012, prior to the digital switchover in the United Kingdom . Since then, the BBC's Red Button Service has provided a digital information system that replaced Ceefax.

[ 216 ] BritBox Main article: BritBox In 2016 the BBC, in partnership with fellow UK broadcasters ITV and Channel 4 (the latter later withdrew from the project), set up 'project kangaroo' to develop an international online streaming service to rival services such as Netflix and Hulu.

[ 217 ] [ 218 ] During the development stages 'Britflix' was touted as a potential name. However, the service eventually launched as BritBox in March 2017. The online platform shows a catalogue of classic BBC and ITV shows, as well as making a number of programmes available shortly after their UK broadcast. As of 2021 [update] , BritBox is available in the UK, the US, Canada, Australia, and, more recently, South Africa, with the potential availability for new markets in the future.

[ 217 ] [ 219 ] [ 220 ] [ 221 ] [ 222 ] Commercial activities Main article: BBC Studios BBC Studios is headquartered at Television Centre (BBC Television's former headquarters) in west London.

BBC Studios is the wholly owned commercial subsidiary of the BBC, responsible for the commercial exploitation of BBC programmes and other properties, including a number of television stations throughout the world.

[ 223 ] It was formed in 2018 after the merger of the BBC's commercial production arm and the BBC's commercial international distribution arm, BBC Worldwide , with the latter formed in 1995 following the restructuring of its predecessor, BBC Enterprises. Prior to this, the selling of BBC television programmes was at first handled in 1958 with the establishment of a business manager post.

[ 224 ] This expanded until the establishment of the Television Promotions (renamed Television Enterprises) department in 1960 under a general manager.

[ 224 ] The company owns and administers a number of commercial stations around the world operating in a number of territories and on a number of different platforms. These include BBC UKTV for the Australasia region, and formerly BBC America (now fully owned by AMC Networks ). The company airs two channels aimed at children, an international CBeebies channel and BBC Kids , a joint venture with Knowledge Network Corporation . The company also runs BBC Earth , which distributes the BBC's natural history content to countries outside the UK, and BBC Lifestyle , broadcasting programmes based on themes of Food, Style and Wellbeing.

[ 225 ] In addition to this, BBC Studios ran an international version of the channel BBC HD .

The BBC's East Africa bureau in Nairobi, Kenya. It is the broadcaster's biggest bureau outside of the UK.

[ 226 ] BBC Studios also distributes the 24-hour international news channel BBC News . The station is separate from BBC Studios to maintain the station's neutral point of view, but is distributed by BBC Studios. The channel itself is the oldest surviving entity of its kind, and has 50 foreign news bureaus and correspondents in nearly all countries in the world.

[ 227 ] As officially surveyed, it is available to more than 294 million households, significantly more than CNN 's estimated 200 million.

[ 227 ] In addition to these international channels, BBC Studios also owns the UKTV network of seven channels. These channels contain BBC archive programming to be rebroadcast on their respective channels: Alibi , crime dramas; Dave (slogan: "The Home of Witty Banter"); Drama , drama, launched in 2013; Eden , nature; Gold , comedy; W , Entertainment; and Yesterday , history programming.

In addition to these channels, many BBC programmes are sold via BBC Studios to foreign television stations with comedy, documentaries, crime dramas (such as Luther and Peaky Blinders ) and historical drama productions being the most popular. The BBC's most successful reality television show format, Strictly Come Dancing —under the title Dancing with the Stars —has been exported to 60 other countries.

[ 228 ] [ 229 ] Shows commissioned and distributed by the BBC include the Wallace & Gromit animated comedy short films The Wrong Trousers and A Close Shave .

[ 230 ] In addition, BBC television news appears nightly on many PBS stations in the US, as do reruns of BBC programmes such as EastEnders , and in New Zealand on TVNZ 1 .

The 1931 Christmas issue of the Radio Times .

In addition to programming, BBC Studios produces material to accompany programmes. The company maintained the publishing arm of the BBC, BBC Magazines, which published the Radio Times ; first published by the BBC on 28 September 1923, it is the world's first broadcast listings magazine.

[ 231 ] Radio Times covers all British television and radio programming schedules, and the 1988 Christmas edition sold 11,220,666 copies, which the Guinness World Records certified as the biggest-selling edition of any British magazine in history.

[ 232 ] Other magazines that support BBC programming include BBC Top Gear , BBC Good Food , BBC Sky at Night , BBC History , BBC Wildlife and BBC Music . BBC Magazines was sold to Exponent Private Equity in 2011, which merged it with Origin Publishing (previously owned by BBC Worldwide between 2004 and 2006) to form Immediate Media Company .

[ 233 ] BBC Studios also publishes books, to accompany programmes such as Sherlock and Doctor Who under the BBC Books brand, a publishing imprint majority owned by Random House . Soundtrack albums, singles (which include two UK number one singles from BBC children's shows, " Teletubbies say "Eh-oh!" " from Teletubbies and " Can We Fix It?

" from Bob the Builder ), talking books and sections of radio broadcasts are also sold under the brand BBC Records , with DVDs also being sold and licensed in large quantities to consumers both in the UK and abroad under the BBC Studios Home Entertainment brand.

[ 234 ] Archive programming and classical music recordings are sold under the brand BBC Legends.

[ 235 ] Cultural significance Blue plaque at Alexandra Palace , commemorating the launch of the world's first high-definition television service, BBC Television , in 1936 Until the development, popularisation, and domination of television, radio was the broadcast medium upon which people in the United Kingdom relied. It "reached into every home in the land, and simultaneously united the nation, an important factor during the Second World War".

[ 236 ] The BBC introduced the world's first "high-definition" 405-line television service in 1936. It suspended its television service during the Second World War and until 1946, but remained the only television broadcaster in the UK until 1955, when Independent Television (ITV) began operating.

[ 237 ] This heralded the transformation of television into a popular and dominant medium. Nevertheless, "throughout the 1950s radio still remained the dominant source of broadcast comedy".

[ 237 ] Further, the BBC was the only legal radio broadcaster until 1968 (when University Radio York obtained its first licence).

[ 238 ] The nature documentaries of David Attenborough , such as The Blue Planet , Planet Earth and Life on Earth , are produced by the BBC Studios Natural History Unit , the largest wildlife documentary production house in the world.

[ 239 ] Despite the advent of commercial television and radio, with competition from ITV, Channel 4 and Sky , the BBC has remained one of the main elements in British popular culture through its obligation to produce TV and radio programmes for mass audiences.

[ 240 ] [ 241 ] However, the arrival of BBC2 allowed the BBC also to make programmes for minority interests in drama, documentaries, current affairs, entertainment, and sport. Examples cited include the television series Civilisation , Doctor Who , I, Claudius , Monty Python's Flying Circus , Pot Black , and Tonight , but other examples can be given in each of these fields as shown by the BBC's entries in the British Film Institute 's 2000 list of the BFI TV 100 , with the BBC's 1970s sitcom Fawlty Towers (featuring John Cleese as Basil Fawlty ) topping the list.

[ 242 ] Described as television's first "watercooler moment" by The Telegraph , the BBC's 1954 adaptation of Nineteen Eighty-Four made a dramatic impact on a fledgling television audience who were horrified by the graphic depiction of a totalitarian regime controlling the population.

[ 243 ] [ 244 ] Making his BBC debut in 1949, Benny Hill with The Benny Hill Show became the first British comedian to become famous via television.

[ 245 ] Popular comedy duos on the BBC include Morecambe and Wise (whose show debuted in 1968) and The Two Ronnies (debuting in 1971).

[ 246 ] Black comedy sitcom Blackadder , starring Rowan Atkinson as the title character, ran for four series between 1983 and 1989.

[ 247 ] Top of the Pops , the world's longest-running weekly music show, first aired in January 1964, the Rolling Stones being the first group to perform on it.

[ 248 ] On air since 22 August 1964, Match of the Day is broadcast on Saturday nights during the Premier League season.

[ 249 ] Some BBC shows have had a direct impact on society. For example, The Great British Bake Off is credited with reinvigorating interest in baking throughout the UK, with stores reporting sharp rises in sales of baking ingredients and accessories.

[ 250 ] The export of BBC programmes through services like the BBC World Service and BBC News , as well as through the channels operated by BBC Studios , means that audiences can consume BBC productions worldwide. Long-running BBC shows include: Desert Island Discs , broadcast on radio since 1942, [ 251 ] Sports Report , broadcast on radio  from 5pm on Saturday evenings during the football season since January 1948, and featuring the same theme tune by Hubert Bath , is the world's longest-running sports radio programme, [ 252 ] [ 253 ] The Archers , broadcast on radio since 1951, is the world's longest-running drama, [ 254 ] and Panorama , broadcast on BBC television since 1953, is the world's longest-running news television programme.

[ 255 ] Douglas Adams ' 1978 Radio 4 sci-fi comedy series The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy , which spawned a media franchise , was the first radio comedy programme to be produced in stereo, and was innovative in its use of music and sound effects.

[ 256 ] The BBC's broadcast of Wimbledon is the longest-running partnership in sports broadcasting history, starting with radio in 1927 and television in 1937.

[ 257 ] BAFTA (British Academy of Film and Television Arts) mask and the BBC logo. The BBC broadcasts BAFTA's film and television award ceremonies.

The British Academy Film Awards (BAFTAs) was first broadcast on the BBC in 1956, with Vivien Leigh as the host.

[ 258 ] The television equivalent, the British Academy Television Awards , has been screened exclusively on the BBC since a 2007 awards ceremony that included wins for Jim Broadbent (Best actor) and Ricky Gervais (Best comedy performance).

[ 259 ] The term "BBC English" was used as an alternative name for Received Pronunciation , and the English Pronouncing Dictionary uses the term "BBC Pronunciation" to label its recommendations.

[ 260 ] However, the BBC itself now makes more use of regional accents in order to reflect the diversity of the UK, while continuing to expect clarity and fluency of its presenters.

[ 261 ] From its "starchy" beginnings, the BBC has also become more inclusive, and now attempts to accommodate the interests of all strata of society and all minorities, because they all pay the licence fee.

[ 262 ] Colloquial terms Older domestic UK audiences often refer to the BBC as "the Beeb", a nickname coined by Peter Sellers during a 1972 reunion of the 1950s BBC radio comedy The Goon Show , when he referred to the "Beeb Beeb Ceeb".

[ 263 ] It was then shortened and popularised by radio DJ Kenny Everett .

[ 264 ] David Bowie 's recording sessions at the BBC were released as Bowie at the Beeb , while Queen 's BBC recording sessions were released as At the Beeb .

[ 265 ] Another nickname, now less commonly used, is "Auntie", said to originate from the old-fashioned "Auntie knows best" attitude, or the idea of aunties and uncles who are present in the background of one's life (but possibly a reference to the "aunties" and "uncles" who presented children's programmes in the early days) [ 266 ] in the days when John Reith, the BBC's first director general, was in charge. The term "Auntie" for the BBC is often credited to radio disc-jockey Jack Jackson .

[ 15 ] To celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the BBC the song " Auntie " was released in 1972.

[ 267 ] It also featured in the title of the BBC's blooper show, Auntie's Bloomers , which was presented by Terry Wogan from 1991 to 2001.

[ 268 ] The two nicknames have also been used together as "Auntie Beeb".

[ 269 ] Logo and symbols Logos Main article: Logo of the BBC BBC's first three-box logo used from 1958 until 1963 [ 270 ] BBC's second three-box logo used from 1963 until 1971 [ 271 ] BBC's third three-box logo used from 1971 until 1988 [ 271 ] BBC's fourth three-box logo used from 1988 until 1998 [ 272 ] BBC's fifth three-box logo used from 1997 to 2021 [ 272 ] [ 273 ] BBC's sixth and current three-box logo used since 2021 [ 273 ] Coat of arms Main article: Coat of arms of the BBC Coat of arms of the British Broadcasting Corporation Adopted 1927 Crest On a Wreath of the Colours, a Lion passant Or, grasping in the dexter fore-paw a Thunderbolt proper.

[ 274 ] Torse A Wreath of the Colours [ 274 ] Supporters On either side an Eagle, wings addorsed proper collared Azure pendant therefrom a Bugle horn stringed Or.

[ 274 ] Motto Nation shall speak peace unto Nation [ 274 ] Other elements Badge – A Thunderbolt proper thereon a Pellet inscribed with the letters BBC Or.

[ 274 ] Controversies Main articles: Criticism of the BBC and BBC controversies Throughout its existence, the BBC has faced numerous accusations regarding many topics: the Iraq war , politics, ethics and religion, as well as funding and staffing. It also has been involved in numerous controversies because of its coverage of specific news stories and programming. In October 2014, the BBC Trust issued the "BBC complaints framework", [ 275 ] outlining complaints and appeals procedures. However, the regulatory oversight of the BBC may be transferred to Ofcom . The British " House of Commons Select Committee on Culture Media and Sport" recommended in its report "The Future of the BBC", [ 276 ] that OFCOM should become the final arbiter of complaints made about the BBC.

[ 277 ] Claims of liberal and left-wing bias The BBC has long faced accusations of liberal and left-wing bias.

[ 278 ] Accusations of a bias against the Premiership of Margaret Thatcher and the Conservative Party were often made against the BBC by members of that government, with Margaret Thatcher herself considering the broadcaster's news coverage to be biased and irresponsible.

[ 279 ] In 2011, Peter Sissons , a main news presenter at the BBC from 1989 to 2009, said that "at the core of the BBC, in its very DNA, is a way of thinking that is firmly of the Left".

[ 280 ] Another BBC presenter, Andrew Marr , commented that "the BBC is not impartial or neutral. It has a liberal bias, not so much a party-political bias. It is better expressed as a cultural liberal bias." Former BBC director Roger Mosey classified it as "liberal defensive".

[ 281 ] [ 282 ] [ 283 ] In 2022, the BBC chairman, Richard Sharp , acknowledged that "the BBC does have a liberal bias", and added that "the institution is fighting against it".

[ 284 ] Claims of right-wing bias Writing for The Guardian , the left-wing columnist Owen Jones stated "the truth is the BBC is stacked full of rightwingers," [ 285 ] and cited as an example of bias its employment of "ultra- Thatcherite " Andrew Neil as a politics presenter.

[ 286 ] A 2018 opinion poll by BMG Research found that 40% of the British public think that the BBC is politically partisan, with a nearly even split between those that believe it leans to the left or right.

[ 287 ] See also BBC portal Television portal United Kingdom portal Gaelic broadcasting in Scotland The Green Book (BBC) List of BBC television channels and radio stations List of companies based in London List of television programmes broadcast by the BBC List of BBC podcasts Prewar television stations Public service broadcasting in the United Kingdom Quango Television in the United Kingdom All pages with titles beginning with BBC Notes ^ Unlike the other departments of the BBC, the BBC World Service had been funded by the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (aka Foreign Office or the FCO), is the British government department responsible for promoting the interests of the United Kingdom abroad.

[ citation needed ] ^ The BBC itself wrote on the matter (in about 2005) that it can not "express its own editorial opinion about current affairs or matters of public policy", and that that "is not to say, of course, that controversial programmes are never broadcast, but great care is taken to ensure that arguments are well balanced." [ 121 ] ^ BBC Three ceased broadcasting as a linear television channel in February 2016 but returned to television in February 2022.

References ^ a b c d e f "BBC Group Annual Report and Accounts 2023/24" (PDF) . BBC. 24 July 2024 . Retrieved 12 October 2024 .

^ "BBC History – The BBC takes to the Airwaves" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 3 February 2008 . Retrieved 19 July 2007 .

^ "BBC: World's largest broadcaster & Most trusted media brand" .

Media Newsline . 13 August 2009. Archived from the original on 5 October 2010 . Retrieved 23 September 2010 .

^ Lloyd, John (4 July 2009).

"Digital licence" .

Prospect . Archived from the original on 7 November 2011 . Retrieved 23 September 2010 .

^ "About the BBC – What is the BBC" . BBC. Archived from the original on 16 January 2010 . Retrieved 23 September 2010 .

^ Andrews, Leighton (2005). Harris, Phil; Fleisher, Craig S. (eds.). "A UK Case: Lobbying for a new BBC Charter".

The Handbook of Public Affairs . SAGE: 247– 48.

doi : 10.4135/9781848608108.n16 .

ISBN 978-0-7619-4393-8 .

^ "BBC – Governance – Annual Report 2013/14" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 5 July 2019 . Retrieved 20 December 2019 .

^ "BBC Annual Report & Accounts 2008/9: Financial Performance" . BBC. Archived from the original on 10 February 2010 . Retrieved 12 February 2010 .

^ "Legislation and policy" .

TV Licensing . Archived from the original on 29 January 2010 . Retrieved 12 February 2010 .

^ "TV Licence Fee: facts & figures" (Press release). BBC Press Office. 2010. Archived from the original on 7 September 2010 . Retrieved 12 February 2010 .

^ Williams, Christopher (20 December 2016).

"BBC Studios wins go-ahead for commercial production push" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2022.

^ "BBC Global News Ltd to Be Everywhere" (Press release). BBC Media Centre. June 2015.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2023 .

^ Shearman, Sarah (21 April 2009).

"BBC Worldwide wins Queen's Enterprise award" .

MediaWeek .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 27 June 2019 .

^ Potter, Simon J. (2022).

This Is the BBC Entertaining the Nation, Speaking for Britain, 1922–2022 . Oxford University Press.

the significant impact that the BBC has had on the social and cultural history of Britain ^ a b "Jack Jackson: Rhythm And Radio Fun Remembered" (Press release). BBC Media Centre. February 2017.

Archived from the original on 26 June 2019 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ "Top of the Pops 2 – Top 5" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 26 June 2019 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ a b "Longest running TV magazine a collector's favourite" .

Lancashire Evening Post .

Archived from the original on 16 August 2024 . Retrieved 16 August 2024 .

^ a b c d Briggs 1985 .

^ a b c d e Curran & Seaton 2018 .

^ "BBC 100: 1920s" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 18 October 2022 . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

^ Doctor, Jennifer Ruth (1999).

The BBC and Ultra-Modern Music, 1922–1936: Shaping a Nation's Tastes . Cambridge University Press. p. 402.

ISBN 9780521661171 . Retrieved 8 July 2019 .

^ Burns, Tom (1977).

The BBC: Public Institution and Private World . Great Britain: The Macmillan Press LTD. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-333-19720-2 .

^ "No need to change BBC's mission to 'inform, educate and entertain' " . UK Parliament. 24 February 2016.

Archived from the original on 31 October 2016 . Retrieved 7 January 2022 .

^ a b c d "BBC history, profile and history" .

CompaniesHistory.com .

Archived from the original on 18 May 2022 . Retrieved 25 June 2022 .

^ Briggs, Asa (1961).

The History of Broadcasting in the United Kingdom Volume 1 . Oxford University Press. p. 297.

^ Higgins, Charlotte (18 August 2014).

"BBC's long struggle to present the facts without fear or favour" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 18 December 2022 . Retrieved 19 May 2020 .

^ Crook, Tim (2002). "International Radio Journalism". Routledge.

^ "The Man with the Flower in his Mouth" . BBC. 9 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 21 October 2018 . Retrieved 20 December 2019 .

^ "BBC's first television outside broadcast" (PDF) . Prospero.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2017 . Retrieved 9 October 2017 .

^ Knowles, Elizabeth (2008).

The Oxford Dictionary of Modern Quotations (Oxford Reference Online ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199208951 . Retrieved 11 February 2010 .

^ C. L. Mowat , Britain between the Wars 1918–1940 (1955) p 242.

^ David Hendy, "Painting with Sound: The Kaleidoscopic World of Lance Sieveking, a British Radio Modernist," Twentieth Century British History (2013) 24#2 pp 169–200.

^ Mike Huggins, "BBC Radio and Sport 1922–39," Contemporary British History (2007) 21#4 pp 491–515.

^ Hajkowski, Thomas (2010).

The BBC and national identity in Britain, 1922–53 . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 11.

ISBN 9780719079443 .

^ a b Avery, Todd (2006).

Radio Modernism . Ashgate Publishing Limited. p. 21.

ISBN 9780754655176 .

^ Dawkins, Charlie (Spring 2016).

"Harold Nicolson, Ulysses, Reithianism" .

The Review of English Studies .

67 (280): 558– 578.

doi : 10.1093/res/hgv063 .

ISSN 0034-6551 .

Archived from the original on 22 December 2020 . Retrieved 6 September 2020 .

^ Doctor, Jennifer (1999).

The BBC and Ultra-Modern Music, 1922–1936: Shaping a Nation's Taste . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521661171 .

^ a b c d e f Scanell, Paddy; Cardiff, David (1991).

A Social History of British Broadcasting . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Basil Blackwell. p. 75.

ISBN 978-0631175438 .

^ a b c d West, W.J. (1987).

Truth Betrayed . London, England: Redwood Burn Limited, Trowbridge. p. 15.

ISBN 978-0715621820 .

^ a b c Potter, Simon (2012).

Broadcasting Empire . Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. p. 85.

ISBN 9780199568963 .

^ "1920s" .

bbc.com .

Archived from the original on 16 May 2020 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

^ "Sir Isaac Shoenberg, British inventor" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 20 October 2021 . Retrieved 22 July 2021 .

principal inventor of the first high-definition television system ^ Norman, Bruce (1984).

Here's Looking at You: The Story of British Television 1908–1939 . British Broadcasting Corporation. p.

99 .

ISBN 978-0-563-20102-1 .

^ BBC Hand Book (1929), pp. 164, 182, 186 ^ "National Programme Daventry, 31 October 1938 20.10: Farewell to Reginald Foort" .

Radio Times .

61 (787). BBC. 28 October 1938.

Archived from the original on 4 October 2021 . Retrieved 11 September 2021 .

^ "History of the Daily Service" .

BBC Religion & Ethics .

Archived from the original on 6 March 2025 . Retrieved 24 February 2025 .

^ "Orwell statue unveiled" .

About the BBC . 7 November 2017.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2017 . Retrieved 2 December 2017 .

^ Christopher H. Sterling (2004). "Encyclopedia of Radio 3-Volume Set". p. 524. Routledge ^ "How de Gaulle speech changed fate of France" . BBC. 4 January 2018.

Archived from the original on 31 August 2017 . Retrieved 4 January 2018 .

^ "Children's Hour: Princess Elizabeth" , BBC Archive , 13 October 1940, archived from the original on 27 November 2019 , retrieved 17 September 2022 ^ a b c Nicholas, Sian (1996).

The Echo of War . New York, New York: Manchester University Press. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0719046087 .

^ a b Cull, Nicholas (1995).

Selling War: The British Propaganda Campaign Against American "neutrality" in World War II . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 42.

ISBN 978-0195111507 .

^ a b Ribeiro, Nelson (2011).

BBC Broadcasts to Portugal in World War II .

Lewiston, New York : Edwin Mellen Press . p. 63.

ISBN 9780773414877 .

^ Morriss, Agnieszka (2015).

"The BBC Polish Service During the Second World War" .

Special Issue Research Project Reports .

21 (4): 459– 460.

doi : 10.1080/13688804.2015.1077108 .

^ Mackay, Robert (Fall 2000). "Being Beastly to the Germans: music, censorship and the BBC in World War II".

Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television .

20 (4): 517.

doi : 10.1080/713669737 .

S2CID 192078695 .

^ Whittington, Ian (2018).

Writing the Radio War . Edinburgh, Scotland: Edinburgh University Press. p. 19.

ISBN 9781474413596 .

^ Leigh, David; Lashmar, Paul (18 August 1985).

"The Blacklist in Room 105. Revealed: How MI5 vets BBC staff" .

The Observer . p. 9.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2019 . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

^ Mark Hollingsworth and Richard Norton-Taylor Blacklist: The Inside Story of Political Vetting , London: Hogarth, 1988, p. 103. The relevant extract from the book is here Archived 4 October 2002 at the Wayback Machine ^ Sargeant, Paul (2010), Looking Back at the BBC , London: BBC, archived from the original on 22 December 2020 , retrieved 9 November 2010 ^ Graham, Russ J. (31 October 2005).

"Baird: The edit that rewrote history" . Archived from the original on 18 July 2006 . Retrieved 11 August 2006 .

^ "BBC Annual Report and Handbook". p. 215. BBC 1985 ^ "Committees of Enquiry: Pilkington Committee" (PDF) . 1 June 1962. p. 4.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 October 2006 . Retrieved 30 September 2006 .

^ Carter, Imogen (27 September 2007).

"The day we woke up to pop music on Radio 1" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 18 October 2007 . Retrieved 30 September 2007 .

^ Partridge, Rob (13 November 1971).

"Radio in London" .

Billboard .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2016 . Retrieved 2 August 2010 .

^ a b Briggs, Asa (2000).

Competition (Reprinted ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 713.

ISBN 978-0-19-215964-9 .

^ The Guestroom for Mr Cock-up Archived 24 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine Pick of the Continuity Announcers, 6 April 2000 ^ Ratings for 1978 Archived 27 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine Independent Teleweb ^ McDonald, Sarah.

"15 October 2004 Sarah McDonald, Curator Page 1 10/15/04 Hulton|Archive – History in Pictures" (PDF) . Getty Images. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 May 2013 . Retrieved 28 May 2013 .

^ Guider, Elizabeth (22 July 1987). "New BBC Management Team Sees Radio, TV Divisions Joining Forces".

Variety . p. 52.

^ Holmwood, Leigh (15 August 2007).

"BBC Resources sell-off to begin" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 28 May 2013 .

^ "New children's channels from BBC launch" .

Digital Spy . 11 February 2002.

Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 26 December 2020 .

^ "Inside the BBC: BBC Radio stations" .

www.bbc.co.uk . BBC.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2020 .

^ "Launch date for Gaelic TV channel" .

BBC News . 13 August 2008 . Retrieved 23 July 2025 .

^ Pryde, Alix (19 March 2013).

"Hello BBC Two HD; Goodbye BBC HD" .

About the BBC Blog . BBC . Retrieved 26 May 2025 .

^ Wells, Matt (11 January 2007).

"Dyke departure minutes released" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 4 December 2013 . Retrieved 22 March 2010 .

^ a b "BBC to launch new commercial subsidiary following DCMS approval" (Press release). BBC Press Office. 23 January 2002.

Archived from the original on 22 October 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2013 .

^ "BBC Broadcast sell-off approved" .

BBC News . 22 July 2005.

Archived from the original on 13 March 2022 . Retrieved 11 December 2008 .

^ a b "BBC announces Siemens Business Services as Single Preferred Bidder" (Press release). BBC Press Office.

Archived from the original on 16 December 2021 . Retrieved 4 June 2012 .

^ a b "New firm to support BBC IT" .

Ariel . BBC. 4 July 2011.

Archived from the original on 3 July 2013 . Retrieved 27 May 2013 .

^ "The Random House Group acquires majority shareholding in BBC Books" (Press release). BBC Press Office. 22 June 2006.

Archived from the original on 23 November 2018 . Retrieved 20 December 2019 .

^ "BBC announces successful bidder for BBC Outside Broadcasts" (Press release). BBC Press Office. 7 March 2008.

Archived from the original on 22 October 2023 . Retrieved 28 May 2013 .

^ "New home for BBC costume archive" .

BBC News . 30 March 2008.

Archived from the original on 6 December 2008 . Retrieved 28 May 2013 .

^ Sweney, Mark (16 August 2011).

"BBC Worldwide agrees £121m magazine sell-off" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2016 . Retrieved 11 December 2016 .

^ "BBC starts work on editorial blueprint for the future" .

BBC . 7 March 2005 . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ Lyall, Sarah (24 May 2005).

"BBC Employees Stage 24-Hour Strike to Protest Planned Job Cuts" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2022 . Retrieved 4 November 2022 .

^ "BBC strike hits TV, radio output" .

CNN . 23 May 2005.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2022 . Retrieved 4 November 2022 .

^ "Creative Future" .

BBC . 25 April 2006 . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ Dowell, Ben (25 April 2006).

"BBC Creative Future: the key points" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ Bell, Emily (28 April 2006).

"The BBC has laid out its vision of a brave new media world" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ "Radical reform to deliver a more focused BBC" . BBC Press Office. 18 October 2007.

Archived from the original on 20 October 2007.

^ Hewlett, Steve (22 October 2007).

"BBC cuts: look on the bright side" .

The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on 24 October 2007.

^ "BBC cuts back programmes and jobs" .

BBC News . 18 October 2007.

Archived from the original on 20 October 2007 . Retrieved 25 October 2007 .

^ "Radical reform to deliver a more focused BBC" (Press release). BBC Press Office. 18 October 2007.

Archived from the original on 20 October 2007 . Retrieved 18 October 2007 .

^ "Television licence fee to be frozen for the next six years" .

BBC News . 20 October 2010.

Archived from the original on 7 October 2011 . Retrieved 6 October 2011 .

^ "BBC set to cut 2000 jobs by 2017" .

BBC News . 6 October 2011.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2011 . Retrieved 6 October 2011 .

^ "BBC cuts at a glance" .

BBC News . 6 October 2011.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2011 . Retrieved 6 October 2011 .

^ "BBC cuts: in detail" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. 6 October 2011.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2011 . Retrieved 6 October 2011 .

^ "BBC1 to go live for coronation anniversary night in 2013" .

The Guardian . London. 21 September 2010. Archived from the original on 4 December 2017.

^ Goodacre, Kate (26 November 2015).

"BBC Three will move online in March 2016 as BBC Trust approves plans to axe broadcast TV channel" .

Digital Spy .

Archived from the original on 29 December 2015 . Retrieved 27 December 2015 .

^ "BBC Three reveals new logo and switchover date" .

BBC News . 4 January 2016.

Archived from the original on 4 January 2016 . Retrieved 4 January 2016 .

^ "BBC making £34m investment in children's services" .

BBC News . 4 July 2017.

Archived from the original on 7 July 2017 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 .

^ Ruddick, Graham (4 July 2017).

"BBC promises a wider mix than rivals as it seeks to reinvent itself" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 7 July 2017 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 .

^ Linford, Paul.

"Local Democracy Reporting service 'has become template" says Davie – Journalism News from HoldtheFrontPage" .

Hold the Front Page .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2022 . Retrieved 25 June 2022 .

^ Martinson, Jane (8 March 2016).

"BBC increases savings target to £800m a year to pay for drama and sport" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 6 January 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2020 .

^ Midgley, Neil (11 May 2016).

"£800 Million Of BBC Cuts Already Needed? Not Quite, Tony Hall" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2020 .

^ Mar, Leon (7 September 2019).

"CBC/Radio-Canada joins global charter to fight disinformation" .

CBC/Radio-Canada .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2023 . Retrieved 15 October 2023 .

^ "New collaboration steps up fight against disinformation" .

BBC . 7 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 15 October 2023 . Retrieved 15 October 2023 .

^ "BBC News to close 450 posts as part of £80m savings drive" .

BBC News . 29 January 2020.

Archived from the original on 15 December 2020 . Retrieved 14 December 2020 .

^ Waterson, Jim (15 July 2020).

"BBC announces further 70 job cuts in news division" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 1 November 2020 . Retrieved 15 December 2020 .

^ Barker, Alex (15 September 2020).

"BBC faces era of cuts after reporting 'substantial shortfall' " .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2021 . Retrieved 15 December 2020 .

^ "Labour vows to 'secure BBC's independence' after Lineker row" .

The Guardian . 26 March 2023.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 .

^ "Richard Sharp resigns as BBC chairman after Boris Johnson £800,000 loan row" .

Sky News .

Archived from the original on 28 April 2023 . Retrieved 28 April 2023 .

^ Wilkinson, Peter (28 April 2023).

"BBC chairman resigns after controversy involving loan deal for former PM Boris Johnson | CNN Business" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 28 April 2023 . Retrieved 28 April 2023 .

^ "Dame Elan Closs Stephens appointed acting BBC chairwoman" .

BBC News . 2 June 2023.

Archived from the original on 19 June 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2023 .

^ a b "Dr Samir Shah CBE" . BBC.com.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2024 . Retrieved 4 March 2024 .

^ Garry, Tom (30 October 2024).

"WSL agrees record £65m domestic five-year TV deal with Sky Sports and BBC" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 30 October 2024 .

^ "BBC boss vows to tackle Britain's 'crisis of trust' " . BBC . Retrieved 22 May 2025 .

^ "BBC regulation" .

Ofcom . 29 March 2017.

Archived from the original on 29 April 2017 . Retrieved 27 April 2017 .

^ a b "BBC Board Appointments" .

BBC Media Centre . 23 March 2017.

Archived from the original on 21 August 2019 . Retrieved 20 December 2019 .

^ a b "Charter and Agreement" .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2019 . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ "The BBC on funding, and the charter" .

BBC World Service .

Archived from the original on 19 February 2024 . Retrieved 19 February 2024 .

^ "ECopy of Royal Charter for the continuance of the British Broadcasting Corporation" (PDF) .

BBC . December 2016.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 July 2017 . Retrieved 16 February 2024 .

^ "BBC World Service – Institutional – How is the World Service funded?" . BBC World Service.

Archived from the original on 8 October 2012 . Retrieved 20 December 2019 .

The BBC, including World Service, operates under two constitutional documents – its Royal Charter and the Licence and Agreement. The Charter gives the Corporation legal existence, sets out its objectives and constitution, and also deals with such matters as advisory bodies. Under the Royal Charter, the BBC must obtain a licence from the Home Secretary. The Licence, which is coupled with an Agreement between the Minister and the Corporation, lays down the terms and conditions under which the BBC is allowed to broadcast.

^ "Who we are" .

About the BBC . 1 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2019 . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ "Executive committee" .

About the BBC .

Archived from the original on 22 December 2020 . Retrieved 3 September 2020 .

^ "Charlotte Moore appointed to BBC Board" . BBC Media Centre. 3 September 2020.

Archived from the original on 9 April 2021 . Retrieved 3 September 2020 .

^ "BBC Radio and Education moves to new division" .

Radio Today .

Archived from the original on 25 June 2022 . Retrieved 25 June 2022 .

^ bbc.co.uk About The BBC section Archived 15 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 9 July 2011 ^ a b c d e f g h "The vetting files: How the BBC kept out 'subversives' " .

BBC News . 22 April 2018.

Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 22 April 2018 .

^ Hastings, Chris (2 July 2006).

"Revealed: how the BBC used MI5 to vet thousands of staff" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 26 April 2018 . Retrieved 22 April 2018 .

^ "The Blacklist in Room 105" .

The Observer . London. 18 August 1985.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2019 . Retrieved 22 April 2018 .

^ "BBC Full Financial Statements 2013/14" (PDF) .

BBC Annual Report and Accounts 2013/14 . BBC. July 2014. p. 20.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 November 2014 . Retrieved 1 March 2015 .

^ "Annual Report 2014" (PDF) . British Sky Broadcasting. July 2014. p. 86.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 March 2015 . Retrieved 1 March 2015 .

^ "ITV plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2013" (PDF) . ITV. 2014. p. 109. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2014 . Retrieved 1 March 2015 .

^ "How much does a TV Licence cost? – TV Licensing ™" .

www.tvlicensing.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 17 July 2019 . Retrieved 17 July 2019 .

^ "Blind/severely sight impaired" . TV Licensing. 1 April 2000.

Archived from the original on 22 November 2011 . Retrieved 15 November 2011 .

^ "Important information about over 75 TV Licences" . TV Licensing.

Archived from the original on 23 September 2020 . Retrieved 5 April 2020 .

^ "Further Issues for BBC Charter Review" (PDF) .

House of Lords Session Report . The Stationery Office Limited. 3 March 2006.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 March 2009 . Retrieved 15 August 2008 .

^ "Key Facts, The TV Licence Fee" .

BBC Web Site . BBC Press Office. April 2008. Archived from the original on 8 July 2007 . Retrieved 31 July 2008 .

^ "BBC response to Freedom of Information request – RFI 2006000476" (PDF) .

bbc.co.uk/foi . 25 August 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 April 2008.

^ "TV Licensing Annual Review 2018/19" . Tvlicensing.co.uk.

Archived from the original on 30 July 2019 . Retrieved 5 April 2020 .

^ "BBC: TV licence fee decriminalisation being considered" .

BBC News . 15 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2020 . Retrieved 5 April 2020 .

^ BBC.

"Annual Report and Accounts 2004–2005" (PDF) . p. 94.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 January 2012 . Retrieved 16 May 2011 .

^ a b "BBC Annual Report 2018/19" (PDF) . BBC. July 2019. p. 133; 91.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 July 2019 . Retrieved 5 April 2020 .

^ Heffer, Simon (22 September 2006).

"Why am I being hounded like this?" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 17 November 2007 . Retrieved 6 February 2008 .

^ Johnson, Boris (26 May 2005).

"I won't pay to be abused by the BBC" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 15 August 2007 . Retrieved 6 February 2008 .

^ "BBC bullies' shame in licence fee chaos" .

Daily Express . London. 7 November 2007.

Archived from the original on 24 July 2012 . Retrieved 6 February 2008 .

^ "TV Licensing" .

TV Licensing . 2 June 2008.

Archived from the original on 7 February 2008 . Retrieved 6 February 2008 .

^ "Example of Licence Fee pressure group" . Campaign to Abolish the Licence Fee. 2 June 2008.

Archived from the original on 20 February 2008 . Retrieved 6 February 2008 .

^ Waterson, Jim (23 July 2024).

"Half a million households cancelled BBC licence fee last year" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 26 December 2024 .

^ "Annual Review 2012/13" (PDF) . BBC Worldwide. p. 34.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 August 2013 . Retrieved 17 August 2013 .

^ "BBC Broadcasting House extension – review" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 11 May 2019 . Retrieved 10 June 2020 .

^ "BBC Television Centre closes its doors for the last time" .

The Evening Standard . 31 March 2013.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2016 . Retrieved 23 December 2015 .

^ BBC.

"New Broadcasting House – The future" .

Archived from the original on 21 May 2006 . Retrieved 6 July 2006 .

^ BBC.

"BBC News' television output moves to new studios at Broadcasting House" .

Archived from the original on 5 May 2019 . Retrieved 23 December 2015 .

^ BBC.

"New Broadcasting House" .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2009 . Retrieved 16 September 2009 .

^ "BBC Television Centre up for sale" .

BBC News . 13 June 2011.

Archived from the original on 20 July 2011 . Retrieved 11 July 2011 .

^ BBC News Online (31 May 2007).

"BBC Salford move gets green light" .

Archived from the original on 31 August 2007 . Retrieved 31 May 2007 .

^ "BBC North" . BBC. Archived from the original on 20 June 2011 . Retrieved 11 July 2011 .

^ "Roath Lock studios" . Roathlock.com.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2012 . Retrieved 29 March 2012 .

^ "Atos Origin acquires Siemens division for €850m" .

Computer Weekly . 15 December 2010.

Archived from the original on 12 May 2013 . Retrieved 27 May 2013 .

^ "Atos signs new contract with BBC for technology services" .

Atos . 11 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 19 September 2020 . Retrieved 10 July 2020 .

^ "BBC Efficiency Programme" .

House of Commons Public Accounts Committee . UK Parliament. 21 November 2011.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2013 . Retrieved 27 May 2013 .

^ Mari, Angelica (26 January 2012).

"CIO interview: John Linwood, chief technology officer, BBC" .

Computer Weekly .

Archived from the original on 28 May 2013 . Retrieved 28 May 2013 .

^ a b "BBC publishes Annual Report for 2011/12" (Press release). BBC Trust. 16 July 2012.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2012 . Retrieved 21 September 2012 .

^ a b c "Part 2 – The BBC Executive's Review and Assessment" (PDF) .

Annual Report 2011–12 . London: BBC. 16 July 2012. pp.

4– 9.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 October 2012 . Retrieved 21 September 2012 .

^ "BBC Three returns to TV with RuPaul special and regional focus" .

BBC News . 1 February 2022.

Archived from the original on 19 March 2022 . Retrieved 7 March 2022 .

^ "BBC News Report" . 15 March 2007.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2007 . Retrieved 15 March 2007 .

^ "BBC Alba Freeview date unveiled" .

BBC News . 23 May 2011.

Archived from the original on 11 October 2017 . Retrieved 28 July 2011 .

^ "BBC to trial High Definition broadcasts in 2006" (Press release). BBC Press Office. 8 November 2005.

Archived from the original on 18 May 2006 . Retrieved 7 July 2006 .

^ "Welcome to your brand new television channel: BBC Scotland" .

BBC .

Archived from the original on 7 November 2020 . Retrieved 16 May 2020 .

^ Waters, John (21 April 1997).

"Aerial warfare" .

The Independent . London.

Archived from the original on 9 October 2017 . Retrieved 24 August 2017 .

^ "BBC One and BBC Two to be simulcast from 27 November" (Press release). BBC Press Office. 19 November 2008.

Archived from the original on 25 August 2011 . Retrieved 15 November 2011 .

^ "BBC Three to be axed as on-air channel" .

BBC News . 5 March 2014.

Archived from the original on 5 March 2014 . Retrieved 5 March 2014 .

^ a b c Kelion, Leo (7 December 2012).

"BBC finishes Radio Times archive digitisation effort" .

BBC Online .

Archived from the original on 9 February 2013 . Retrieved 20 January 2013 .

^ BBC Archive Development (15 October 2014).

"Genome – Radio Times archive now live" .

BBC Online .

Archived from the original on 29 December 2014 . Retrieved 1 March 2015 .

^ "Radio 5 Live at 30" .

BBC . Retrieved 8 April 2025 .

^ "TV licence fee not value for money – inquiry hears" .

IOM Today . Douglas. 8 February 2011. Archived from the original on 21 December 2012 . Retrieved 1 January 2013 .

^ "The Work of the BBC World Service 2008-09" (PDF) . House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee. 5 February 2010.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 October 2020 . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

^ "News in your language" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 15 September 2024 . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

^ "192 Million BBC World Service Listeners" . BBC World Service. 25 October 2015.

Archived from the original on 1 August 2013 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

^ "BBC World Service Annual Review 2009–2010" (PDF) .

Annual Review . BBC World Service.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 January 2012 . Retrieved 12 July 2011 .

^ "How BBC World Service is run" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 30 September 2011 . Retrieved 12 July 2011 .

^ Harkey, Clare (13 March 2006).

"BBC Thai service ends broadcasts" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 18 December 2008 . Retrieved 8 November 2008 .

^ "BBC Arabic TV appoints former Al Jazeera employee as news editor" .

Middle East Times . Sydney. 15 March 2006. Archived from the original on 30 October 2006 . Retrieved 6 July 2006 .

^ Corke, Stuart (25 October 2012).

"MediaTel information for all BBC and commercial radio stations" . Mediatel.co.uk.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2012 . Retrieved 1 January 2013 .

^ The Radio Academy "Patrons" Archived 7 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ "This is BBC News" .

About BBC News . BBC. 13 September 2006.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 12 July 2011 .

^ Cozens, Claire (8 July 2005).

"BBC news ratings double" .

The Guardian . UK. Archived from the original on 10 July 2012 . Retrieved 25 December 2006 .

^ BBC.

"Statistics on BBC Webservers 7 July 2005" .

Archived from the original on 12 October 2006 . Retrieved 13 November 2006 .

^ "BBC keeps web adverts on agenda" .

BBC News . 22 February 2007.

Archived from the original on 15 January 2009 . Retrieved 15 November 2011 .

^ "bbc.co.uk Commissioning" .

Archived from the original on 6 July 2006 . Retrieved 6 July 2006 .

^ "bbc.co.uk Key Facts" .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2006 . Retrieved 6 July 2006 .

^ Titus, Richard (13 December 2007).

"A lick of paint for the BBC homepage" . BBC Internet Blog.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2008 . Retrieved 5 February 2008 .

^ "BBC News opens its archives for the first time" (Press release). BBC Press Office. 3 January 2006.

Archived from the original on 22 October 2023 . Retrieved 3 October 2006 .

^ "BBC Trust suspends BBC Jam" (Press release).

BBC Trust . 14 March 2007.

Archived from the original on 26 January 2008 . Retrieved 5 February 2008 .

^ Graf, Philip.

"Department of Culture, Media and Sport: Independent Review of BBC Online, pp41-58" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 July 2006 . Retrieved 6 July 2006 .

^ British Internet Publishers Alliance (31 May 2005).

"BIPA Response to Review of the BBC's Royal Charter" . Archived from the original on 27 August 2006 . Retrieved 6 July 2006 .

^ "Public value key to BBC websites" .

BBC News . 8 November 2004.

Archived from the original on 16 June 2006 . Retrieved 6 July 2006 .

^ Burrell, Ian (14 August 2006).

"99 per cent of the BBC archives is on the shelves. We ought to liberate it" .

The Independent . London. Archived from the original on 6 July 2008 . Retrieved 26 April 2010 .

^ Foster, Patrick (26 February 2010).

"BBC signals an end to era of expansion" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 23 April 2010 . Retrieved 26 February 2010 .

^ "BBC Proposes Deep Cuts in Web Site" .

The New York Times . 3 March 2010. Archived from the original on 23 April 2017 . Retrieved 2 March 2010 .

^ "BBC 6 Music and Asian Network face axe in shake-up" .

BBC News . 2 March 2010. Archived from the original on 3 March 2010 . Retrieved 2 March 2010 .

^ "Press Office – First look at new animated Doctor Who" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 20 November 2021 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 .

^ "BBC Orchestras and Choirs" .

BBC Music Events .

Archived from the original on 14 October 2019 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ "BBC Radio 3 – BBC Proms – History of the Proms" .

BBC .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2019 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ "BBC – BBC orchestras and choirs – Media Centre" .

www.bbc.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 23 December 2020 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ "BBC One Celebrates 60 Years of the Eurovision Song Contest with special anniversary event" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 1 January 2022 . Retrieved 1 January 2022 .

^ "History of ARM: from Acorn to Apple" .

The Telegraph . London. 6 January 2011. Archived from the original on 16 March 2018.

^ John Radcliffe and Roberts Salkeld (1983), "Towards Computer Literacy - The BBC Computer Literacy Project 1979-1983" , BBC Education.

^ HTML version Archived 4 December 2024 at the Wayback Machine , National Archive of Educational Computing. Retrieved 28 October 2024 ^ Ward, Mark (25 August 2010).

"Tech Know: BBC Micros used in retro programming class" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 26 August 2010 . Retrieved 28 October 2024 .

^ British Broadcasting Corporation (1969).

The BBC Hymn Book with Music . London: Oxford University Press.

^ "The lost art of tracking down sports scores: from shop loitering to Teletext" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 13 April 2025 .

^ Hand, John (23 October 2012).

"Ceefax service to end after 38 years on BBC" . BBC . Retrieved 13 April 2025 .

^ Griffin, Andrew (30 September 2020).

"BBC red button: Corporation U-turns on plans to cut services" .

Independent .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2020 . Retrieved 21 October 2022 .

^ a b "Britbox, a streaming service for British TV from the BBC and ITV, launches in the US" .

The Verge . 7 March 2017.

Archived from the original on 28 December 2017 . Retrieved 12 December 2017 .

^ "BBC set to launch Britflix rival to Netflix after John Whittingdale approves subscription streaming" .

www.msn.com . Archived from the original on 9 June 2016 . Retrieved 17 May 2016 .

^ " 'Britflix' and chill – doesn't have the quite same ring to it" .

The Guardian . London. 16 May 2016.

Archived from the original on 21 May 2016 . Retrieved 7 June 2016 .

^ "BBC and ITV set to launch Netflix rival" .

BBC News . 27 February 2019.

Archived from the original on 26 July 2019 . Retrieved 21 October 2019 .

^ "Britbox launches in Australia" .

Broadband TV News . 23 November 2020.

Archived from the original on 23 November 2020 . Retrieved 23 November 2020 .

^ "BritBox launched in South Africa at R100/month" .

TechCentral . 27 July 2021.

Archived from the original on 27 July 2021 . Retrieved 27 July 2021 .

^ Chu, Henry (29 November 2017).

"BBC Worldwide, BBC Studios to Merge into Single Operation" .

Variety . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

^ a b Cain, John (1992).

The BBC: 70 years of broadcasting . London: British Broadcasting Corporation. pp.

116– 119.

ISBN 0-563-36750-4 .

^ Kemp, Stuart (18 September 2012).

"BBC Earth Announces Three New 3D Projects" . The Hollywood Reporter.

Archived from the original on 24 October 2018 . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

^ "BBC's biggest bureau outside the UK is in Africa – Nairobi, Kenya" .

African News .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2023 . Retrieved 24 May 2023 .

^ a b Henery, Michelle.

"Why Do We See What We See: A comparison of CNN International, BBC World News and Al Jazeera English, analysing the respective drivers influencing editorial content" (PDF) .

reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk . Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, University of Oxford, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 September 2016 . Retrieved 15 August 2016 .

^ "Strictly Come Dancing: the worldwide phenomenon" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 27 March 2019 . Retrieved 25 August 2022 .

^ "Dancing with the Stars advertising opportunities" . Advertising.bbcworldwide.com.

Archived from the original on 15 September 2012 . Retrieved 20 September 2012 .

^ "Aardman Animations" . BFI . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Currie, Tony (2001).

The Radio Times Story . Kelly Publishing.

ISBN 978-1903053096 .

^ "The Radio Times" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 9 August 2022 . Retrieved 19 October 2023 .

^ Gavin, Jamie (24 May 2017).

"The Immediate Media Co story: from starting up to being acquired by Burda | News | FIPP.com" .

www.fipp.com . Archived from the original on 16 July 2019 . Retrieved 28 October 2024 .

^ "2 Entertain Video Limited overview - Find and update company information - GOV.UK" .

Companies House . 21 June 1985.

Archived from the original on 6 March 2025 . Retrieved 15 February 2024 .

^ "BBC Legends Vol.1" .

ica classics .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2025 . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

^ Perry, George (1999).

The Life of Python . London: Pavilion Books. p. 14.

ISBN 978-1-85793-441-0 .

^ a b Perry (1999) p16 ^ "URY History" .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2008 . Retrieved 21 November 2008 .

^ "Directory of Production Companies" . The International Association of Wildlife Filmmakers. Archived from the original on 29 August 2010 . Retrieved 6 July 2007 .

^ Muir, Hugh (8 October 2008).

"Public service broadcasting is 'lynchpin' of British culture, says Joan Bakewell" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 3 December 2013 . Retrieved 25 June 2010 .

^ "James Corden: BBC is a cornerstone of everything Britain stands for" .

The Guardian . London.

Press Association . 12 May 2016.

Archived from the original on 31 October 2016 . Retrieved 2 September 2019 .

^ "The BFI TV 100: 1–100" .

British Film Institute . 2000. Archived from the original on 23 February 2007 . Retrieved 23 February 2007 .

^ Lynskey, Dorian (10 June 2019).

"George Orwell's 1984: Why it still matters" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 12 October 2023 . Retrieved 14 August 2025 – via YouTube.

^ "How the 'unadulterated horror' of Peter Cushing's Nineteen Eighty-Four broke the BBC" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 14 August 2025 .

^ Oliver, John.

"Hill, Benny (1924-1992)" . BFI.

Archived from the original on 20 February 2025 . Retrieved 15 February 2025 .

^ "Entertainment | Obituary: Ronnie Barker" . BBC News. 4 October 2005 . Retrieved 20 February 2025 .

^ Berman, Garry (2011).

Best of the Britcoms: From Fawlty Towers to The Office . Taylor Trade Publishing. p. 55.

^ "BBC says fond farewell to Top of the Pops" (Press release). BBC Press Office. 20 June 2006.

Archived from the original on 24 September 2020 . Retrieved 25 September 2019 .

^ "BBC's Match of the Day marks 50 years as an institution of English football" .

The Guardian . London. 16 August 2014.

Archived from the original on 12 November 2021 . Retrieved 12 November 2021 .

^ Nikkhah, Roya (9 September 2012).

"Great British Bake Off sees sales of baking goods soar" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 22 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Moss, Stephen.

"Desert Island Discs: 75 defining moments from 75 years of castaways" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 16 April 2025 .

^ "Behind the scenes of the world's longest running radio sports programme" .

BBC . Retrieved 16 April 2025 .

^ "Sports Report at 70: Presenters' memories, royal recognition & THAT theme tune" . BBC Sport. 5 January 2018 . Retrieved 15 April 2025 .

^ "60 things you never knew you wanted to know about The Archers" .

The Independent . 1 January 2011.

Archived from the original on 4 January 2011 . Retrieved 16 April 2025 .

^ "Panorama returns to peak time on BBC ONE" .

BBC .

Archived from the original on 29 June 2022 . Retrieved 28 June 2022 .

^ Gaiman, Neil (1988).

Don't Panic: the official Hitch-Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy Companion . Pocket Books. p. 45.

ISBN 1852860138 .

^ "BBC to overhaul Wimbledon coverage as late matches clash with highlights" .

The Times . Retrieved 14 July 2025 .

^ "Switched On: Television joins the fold" . BAFTA.org.

Archived from the original on 6 January 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2022 .

^ "Bafta TV Awards 2007: The winners" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 23 January 2009 . Retrieved 5 January 2022 .

^ Roach, Peter (2011).

English Pronouncing Dictionary, 18th edition . Cambridge University Press. p. 6 . Retrieved 6 January 2013 .

^ "Speaking out for regional accents" .

BBC News . 3 March 1999.

Archived from the original on 30 September 2009 . Retrieved 26 January 2009 .

^ "Diversity Policy" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 7 February 2009 . Retrieved 26 January 2009 .

^ Martin, Cooper (2022).

Radio's Legacy in Popular Culture: The Sounds of British Broadcasting Over the Decades . Bloomsbury. p. 83.

^ Davies, Alan.

"Radio Rewind: Kenny Everett" .

Radio Rewind . Archived from the original on 1 May 2007 . Retrieved 10 May 2007 .

^ "Queen: Album Guide" .

Rolling Stone . New York. n.d.

Archived from the original on 27 April 2012 . Retrieved 30 March 2018 .

^ "Mark Thompson celebrates the official opening of a new state-of-the art BBC building in Hull" (Press release). BBC Press Office. 21 October 2004.

Archived from the original on 28 June 2006 . Retrieved 6 July 2006 .

^ "Hits of the World".

Billboard . Vol. 85, no. 26. New York. 30 June 1973. p. 57.

ISSN 0006-2510 .

^ "Terry Wogan: Broadcaster whose gentle iconoclasm made him much-loved by radio and television audiences" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 26 August 2024 . Retrieved 26 August 2024 .

^ "Auntie Beeb suffers a relapse" .

The Times . London. 7 December 2004. Archived from the original on 14 August 2011 . Retrieved 12 February 2007 .

^ "BBC logo design evolution, dating back to the 1950s" .

Logo Design Love . 26 August 2008.

Archived from the original on 26 June 2019 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ a b Walker, Hayden.

"BBC Corporate Logo" .

TV ARK . Archived from the original on 4 March 2012 . Retrieved 20 November 2010 .

^ a b "The BBC logo story" .

BBC . Archived from the original on 14 October 2013 . Retrieved 27 September 2013 .

^ a b Bright, Kerris (19 October 2021).

"Modernising audience experience across the BBC" .

BBC Media Centre (Press release).

Archived from the original on 20 October 2021 . Retrieved 19 October 2021 .

^ a b c d e Briggs, Geoffrey (1971).

Civic & corporate heraldry: a dictionary of impersonal arms of England, Wales, & N. Ireland; . London: Heraldry Today. p. 76.

ISBN 9780900455216 .

^ "BBC complaints framework" (PDF) .

downloads.bbc.co.uk . BBC Trust.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 January 2015 . Retrieved 6 July 2015 .

^ "House of Commons – Future of the BBC – Culture, Media and Sport" .

Publications.parliament.uk .

Archived from the original on 22 August 2017 . Retrieved 30 August 2017 .

^ Deech, Baroness (3 July 2015).

"Out of the frying pan into the fire: the BBC to OFCOM" .

lordsoftheblog.net . Lords of the Blog.

Archived from the original on 6 July 2015 . Retrieved 6 July 2015 .

^ Halliday, Josh (10 October 2012).

"BBC reporting scrutinised after accusations of liberal bias" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2017 . Retrieved 6 August 2017 .

The corporation has long faced accusations of liberal and leftwing bias from politicians and other sections of the media.

^ "Margaret Thatcher conducted covert war against BBC" .

Telegraph Online . 30 December 2014.

Archived from the original on 11 April 2018 . Retrieved 9 April 2018 .

^ Sissons, Peter (2011).

When One Door Closes . Bite Back.

^ Leonard, Tom (27 October 2006).

"The BBC's commitment to bias is no laughing matter" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 11 April 2018 . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .

^ Douglas, Torin (18 June 2007).

"Does the BBC have a bias problem?" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2022 . Retrieved 19 June 2015 .

^ Ward, Victoria (22 June 2015).

"BBC accused of liberal bias by former director" .

Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 11 April 2018 . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .

^ Badshah, Nadeem (3 December 2022).

"BBC chairman criticises Emily Maitlis' Newsnight comments on Dominic Cummings" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 3 December 2022 . Retrieved 4 December 2022 .

^ Jones, Owen (17 March 2014).

"It's the BBC's rightwing bias that is the threat to democracy and journalism" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2016 . Retrieved 11 December 2016 .

^ Jones, Owen (11 April 2018).

"If the BBC is politically neutral, how does it explain Andrew Neil?" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 9 December 2018 . Retrieved 7 December 2018 .

^ "Question Time, the BBC's flagship political show, gets a female host" .

The Economist . London. 9 January 2019.

Archived from the original on 16 January 2019 . Retrieved 16 January 2019 .

Sources Works cited Curran, James; Seaton, Jean (2018).

Power Without Responsibility . Abingdon, Oxon New York, NY: Routledge. pp.

205– 208.

ISBN 978-0-415-71042-8 .

(sections attributed in the index) Baade, Christina L.

Victory through Harmony: The BBC and Popular Music in World War II (Oxford University Press, 2012).

Briggs, Asa (1985).

The BBC . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-212971-6 .

Coulton, Barbara. – Louis MacNeice in the BBC – Writer and producer from 1941 to 1961 in the Features Department of BBC radio. – Faber & Faber , 1980.

ISBN 0-571-11537-3 Gilder, Eric. – Mass Media Moments in the United Kingdom, the USSR and the USA (2003). – Historical background relating to the British Broadcasting Company, Ltd, its founding companies; their transatlantic connections; General Post Office licensing system; commercial competitors from Europe before the Second World War and offshore during the 1960s.

online Archived 18 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine Hajkowski, Thomas.

The BBC and National Identity in Britain, 1922–53 (Manchester University Press, 2010), 252 pages; explores ideas of Britishness conveyed in BBC radio programmes, including notions of the empire and monarchy as symbols of unity; also considers regional broadcasting in Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland.

Hendy, David.

Life on air: a history of Radio Four (Oxford University Press, 2007) covers 1967 to 1997.

James, A. Lloyd.

The Broadcast Word . (Kegan Paul, 1935), Mills, Brett. "'Shoved Online': BBC Three, British Television and the Marginalisation of Young Adult Audiences." in Media, Margins and Popular Culture (Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2015) pp. 219–231.

Parker, Derek. – Radio: the Great Years – History of BBC radio programmes from the beginning until the date of publication. Newton Abbot: David & Charles , 1977.

ISBN 0-7153-7430-3 Potter, Simon J.

Broadcasting Empire: The BBC and the British World, 1922–1970 (2012) doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199568963.001.0001 online Smart, Billy. "The BBC Television Audience Research Reports, 1957–1979: Recorded Opinions and Invisible Expectations." Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television 34#3 (2014): 452–462.

Spangenberg, Jochen. – The BBC in Transition. Reasons, Results and Consequences – Encompassing account of the BBC and influencing external factors until 1996. – Deutscher Universitaetsverlag. 1997.

ISBN 3-8244-4227-2 West, W. J. – Truth Betrayed a critical assessment of the BBC, London, 1987, ISBN 0-7156-2182-3 Wilson, H. H. – Pressure Group – History of the political fight to introduce commercial television into the United Kingdom. – Rutgers University Press, 1961.

Wyver, John. – The Moving Image: An International History of Film, Television & Radio – Basil Blackwell Ltd in Association with the British Film Institute , 1989.

ISBN 0-631-15529-5 Primary sources About the BBC at BBC Online History of the BBC at BBC Online BBC Annual Reports at BBC Online – Copies of all of the BBC's annual reports since the millennium.

Milne, Alasdair. – The Memoirs of a British Broadcaster – History of the Zircon spy satellite affair, written by a former Director-General of the BBC. A series of BBC radio programmes called " The Secret Society " led to a raid by police in both England and Scotland to seize documents as part of a government censorship campaign. – Coronet, 1989.

ISBN 0-340-49750-5 External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to: BBC ( category ) Official website BBC companies grouped at OpenCorporates Third Programme Radio Scripts Collection at Stuart A. Rose Manuscript, Archives, & Rare Book Library, Emory University v t e BBC Services Television stations programmes Radio stations local BBC Online BBC Red Button Ceefax iPlayer BBC Sounds Management Chair Samir Shah Director-General Tim Davie BBC Board BBC Charter BBC independence Departments BBC Academy Archives BBC Film BBC World Service ( Timeline ) Television Design & Engineering Monitoring News Pronunciation Unit Radio Sport Weather Nations and regions England Birmingham Bristol East East Midlands London Manchester North East & Cumbria North West South South East South West West West Midlands Yorkshire Yorkshire & Lincolnshire Rest of UK Northern Ireland Scotland Gàidhlig Wales Commercial subsidiaries BBC Studios Productions Natural History Unit Home Entertainment Demon Music Group BBC Studioworks BBC Worldwide History Archives Sound Archive BBC Trust Board of Governors British Broadcasting Company Coat of arms Controversies Criticism First day of TV Logo Radio Times Genome Timeline Key properties ( full list ) London Broadcasting House Lime Grove (former) Maida Vale Studios Television Centre (former) White City & Media Village Birmingham Drama Village Mailbox Birmingham Pebble Mill Studios (former) Cardiff New Broadcasting House, Cardiff Broadcasting House (former) Drama Village (Roath Lock) BBC Hoddinott Hall Other locations Broadcasting House, Belfast BBC Elstree Centre MediaCityUK, Salford Pacific Quay, Glasgow Finance Television licence history Projects Backstage BBC Micro BBC UK regional TV on satellite The Box Bitesize BritBox Dirac Domesday Freely Freesat h2g2 Local Democracy Reporting Service Redux YouView Technical Programme Catalogue Programme Identifier Other List of songs banned by the BBC Live at the BBC Category Portal Commons Links to related articles v t e BBC Television BBC UK channels BBC One Northern Ireland Scotland Wales BBC Two Northern Ireland Wales BBC Three BBC Four BBC News BBC Parliament BBC Scotland CBBC CBeebies UK nations and regions Scotland Wales Northern Ireland North East and Cumbria North West Yorkshire Yorkshire and Lincolnshire West West Midlands East Midlands East London South West South South East Services and programming blocks BBC iPlayer BBC Learning Zone BBC Music BBC News BBC Red Button BBC Schools BBC Sport BBC Switch BBC Weather CBBC CBeebies UKTV channels U&Alibi U&Dave U&Drama U&Eden U&Gold U&W U&Yesterday International channels and joint ventures BritBox BBC Alba BBC America BBC News Arabic BBC Brit BBC Drama BBC Earth Canada India BBC First Canada Netherlands and Belgium BBC HD (international) BBC Kids ( Australia ) BBC Lifestyle BBC Maestro BBC Nordic BBC Persian Television BBC Player BBC Select BBC UKTV BBC News Together TV Defunct channels BBC Canada BBC Choice Northern Ireland Scotland Wales BBC Entertainment BBC First (Australia) BBC Food BBC HD (UK) BBC Japan BBC Kids (Canada) BBC Knowledge UK international BBC Living BBC Prime BBC Select BBC TV Europe BBC World Service Television BBC 2W BBC Two Scotland UKTV (various channels) Category v t e BBC Radio BBC UK stations Nationwide Radio 1 Radio 2 Radio 3 Radio 4 Radio 5 Live Digital-only Radio 1Xtra Radio 4 Extra Radio 5 Sports Extra Radio 6 Music Asian Network Online-only ( BBC Sounds ) CBeebies Radio Radio 1 Dance Radio 1 Anthems Radio 3 Unwind Nations Scotland Scotland Orkney Shetland Nan Gàidheal Wales Wales Cymru Cymru 2 Northern Ireland Ulster Foyle BBC Local Radio East Cambridgeshire Essex Norfolk Northampton Suffolk Three Counties East Midlands Derby Leicester Nottingham London London North East and Cumbria Cumbria Newcastle Tees North West Lancashire Manchester Merseyside South Berkshire Oxford Solent South East Kent Surrey Sussex South West Cornwall Devon Guernsey Jersey Somerset West Bristol Gloucestershire Wiltshire West Midlands CWR Hereford and Worcester Shropshire Stoke WM Yorkshire Leeds Sheffield York Yorkshire and Lincolnshire Humberside Lincolnshire International stations World Service Albanian (Dissolved) Arabic Bangla Nepali Brasil Hausa Mundo Persian Russian Ukrainian (Dissolved) Urdu Defunct stations and services Local services 2LO London 5IT Birmingham 2ZY Manchester 5NO Newcastle 5WA Cardiff 5SC Glasgow 2BD Aberdeen 6BM Bournemouth 2FL Sheffield 5PY Plymouth 5GB Daventry 2BE Belfast Relays 2EH Edinburgh 6LV Liverpool 2LS Leeds and Bradford 6KH Hull 5NG Nottingham 2DE Dundee 6ST Stoke 5SX Swansea National services Allied Expeditionary Forces Programme Forces Programme General Forces Programme Home Service Light Programme National Programme Radio 1 Relax (BBC Sounds) Radio 4 News FM Radio 5 Radio 7 (rebranded) Regional Programme Third Programme Related topics Awards Logos BBC Music National DAB multiplex Programmes Radio Explorer Radio Orchestra School Radio BBC Sounds Wartime Broadcasting Service Category v t e BBC News Television TV Channels BBC News Arabic BBC News (International) BBC News (UK) BBC Parliament BBC Persian Television Languages BBC Arabic BBC Hindi BBC Bangla BBC Hausa BBC Nepali BBC Brasil BBC Mundo BBC Persian BBC Punjabi BBC Russian BBC Somali BBC Ukrainian BBC Urdu Online services BBC News Online Programmes BBC Breakfast BBC Business Today BBC News BBC News at One BBC News at Six BBC News at Ten BBC News Now BBC Weekend News BBC World News America The Bottom Line The Catch Up The Context Focus on Africa Newscast Newsday (TV) Newsnight Newsround Newswatch Panorama Politics Live Question Time Reporters Sportsday Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg Talking Movies The Travel Show Verified Live The World Today Defunct The 7 O'Clock News 24 Hours 60 Seconds Asia Business Report Africa Business Report Afternoon Live The Andrew Marr Show BBC News at Five BBC News at Nine BBC News Summary BBC Newsroom Live BBC Nine O'Clock News BBC World News Breakfast News Breakfast Time Breakfast with Frost Brexitcast Click Daily/Sunday Politics Dateline London Despatch Box E24 Fast Track The Film Review Global GMT HARDtalk The Hub Impact In Business Africa India Business Report Inside Out Middle East Business Report Nai Zindagi Naya Jeevan Nationwide News After Noon Newsroom Outside Source Politics Show Real Story Revealed...

Show Me the Money Sixty Minutes Sport Today STORYFix Television Newsreel This Week This World Tonight (1957) Tonight (1975) UK Today Victoria Derbyshire We Are England Westminster Live Working Lunch Worklife World Business Report (TV) World Have Your Say World News Today Your News Timelines Timeline of the BBC News Channel Timeline of BBC Parliament Timeline of BBC Television News Online services BBC News Online Radio Radio stations BBC Radio 4 BBC Radio 5 Live BBC World Service BBC News Languages BBC Arabic BBC Hindi BBC Bangla BBC Hausa BBC Nepali BBC Brasil BBC Mundo BBC Persian BBC Punjabi BBC Russian BBC Somali BBC Ukrainian BBC Urdu Current Analysis Any Questions?

BBC OS (Radio) The Bottom Line Broadcasting House Business Daily The World Today File on 4 From Our Own Correspondent The Media Show Newsbeat Newscast Newsday (Radio) PM Today The Westminster Hour The World at One Wake Up to Money The World This Weekend The World Tonight Defunct Brexitcast Europe Today HARDtalk Have Your Say BBC OS (Radio) Radio Newsreel World Briefing The World Today World Update Timelines Timeline of BBC Radio News Online services BBC News Online Staff Director/CEO Tony Hall (1993–2001) Richard Sambrook (2001–2004) Helen Boaden (2004–2013) James Harding (2013–2018) Fran Unsworth (2018–2022) Deborah Turness (2022–) On-air staff Lists Current On-air staff Former On-air staff Chief Presenters Maryam Moshiri Lucy Hockings Matthew Amroliwala Victoria Derbyshire Christian Fraser Sumi Somaskanda Caitríona Perry Clive Myrie Ben Brown Annita McVeigh Geeta Guru-Murthy Sally Bundock Jon Kay Regional news List of BBC regional news programmes Category v t e BBC Orchestras and Singers Current BBC Concert Orchestra BBC Philharmonic BBC Symphony Orchestra BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra BBC National Orchestra of Wales BBC Big Band BBC Singers BBC Symphony Chorus Disbanded BBC Radio Orchestra BBC Television Orchestra BBC Midlands Radio Orchestra BBC Northern Dance Orchestra BBC Revue Orchestra BBC Scottish Radio Orchestra BBC Variety Orchestra BBC Dance Orchestra BBC Chorus v t e Members of the European Broadcasting Union Active members Current ARD BR DLR DW HR MDR NDR RB RBB SR SWR WDR ARMR ARMTV Arte BBC BHRT BNR BNT ČRo ČT CyBC DR ENRS EPTV ERR ER ETV ERT ERA GPB GRF FMM FTV RF HRT HR İCTI İR İTV JRTV KAN LNC LRT LSM LR LTV MMD MRT MSP MTVA Duna NPO AVROTROS BNNVARA EO HUMAN KRO-NCRV MAX NOS NTR ON PowNed Ster VPRO WNL Zwart NRK NTU ORF PBS PR RAI ROR RTBF RTCG RTÉ RTL RTP RTS RTSH RTT RT TT RTVA RTVE RNE TVE RTVSLO RÚV SMRTV SNRT SRG SSR SRT SR SVT UR STVR SU TDA TG4 TL TRM TRT TV 2 (DK) TV 2 (NO) TVM (MC) TVP TVR UKIB C4 ITV S4C STV VR VRT Yle ZDF Suspended BTRC C1R RDO MK OP VGTRK Former A3R C+ C1O COPE CRCA ČST E1 ERTT GRMC RMC TMC IBA (GB) IBA (IL) INR-NIR ITA ITCA JRT LJBC MBA MR MTV (FI) MTV (HU) NERIT NRU OFRT ORTF RTF RTVS SER SRo STV TDF TF1 TMC TV4 UJRT Associate members Current ABC (AU) ABC (US) ACORAB APM C13 (CL) CBC/SRC (CA) CBS CMG CCTV CGTN CNR CRI FPA Free ICRT IRIB KA KBS MBC (MU) NBAB NBC (US) NHK NPR ORTAS PART RB RNZ RTHK RTM SBS SMG TBS TEME TVNZ WFMT Former 4TA ABERT AFMN AIR AMÉRICA ANB ATEC ATV BCB C7 C12 C13 (AR) CBC (BB) CBC (LK) CMRT CNN CPB CTV DA EBC EMI EURT FTN GBC GBS GLOBO GRTS IBB IRV JBC JCC IBTE KBTS KNR LBC MBC (MW) MBC (KR) MBS MPR NACB NAEB NBC (NG) NBC (PNG) NET NTV NTVC NYPR ORTN PANTEL PBC PTV QR QTBC RCR RCTV RD REI RN RNT RP RRI RTC RTG RTI RTM RTS RTV SABC SABTVS SLBC STS T2 TBC TCM TFM/JOAU-FM TH TIM TIME TSM TSN TVA TVB TVM (MR) TVN TVRI UAERTVD USIA VK VV VZ WGBH ZBC Approved participants Current CAT Cellnex Euronews INA JPMRD RTV TV5Monde Former Abertis AH IETV MEBC RETE RTRN SNTC URTI v t e Department for Culture, Media and Sport Headquarters: 100 Parliament Street Ministers Secretary of State Lisa Nandy Minister of State Minister of State for Creative Industries, Arts and Tourism : Chris Bryant Under-Secretaries of State Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Sport, Media, Civil Society and Youth : Stephanie Peacock Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Gambling: The Baroness Twycross Non-ministerial departments Charity Commission National Archives Non-departmental public bodies Advisory Advisory Council on National Records and Archives Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest Theatres Trust Treasure Valuation Committee Executive Arts Council England British Film Institute Gambling Commission Historic England Horserace Betting Levy Board National Heritage Memorial Fund National Lottery Community Fund Sport England Sports Grounds Safety Authority UK Anti-Doping UK Sport VisitBritain VisitEngland Museums British Library British Museum Horniman Museum Museum of the Home Imperial War Museums National Gallery National Museums Liverpool National Portrait Gallery Natural History Museum Royal Armouries Royal Museums Greenwich Science Museum Group Sir John Soane's Museum Tate Victoria and Albert Museum Wallace Collection Tribunal Horserace Betting Levy Appeal Tribunal Other bodies BBC BBC Board Channel Four Television Corporation Churches Conservation Trust Historic Royal Palaces National Citizen Service S4C S4C Authority The Royal Parks Category v t e Media in the United Kingdom UK national newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals Newspapers ( history , circulation ) Broadsheet Financial Times The Daily Telegraph The Sunday Telegraph The Sunday Times Compact The i Paper The Times The Guardian The Observer Middle-market Daily Express Daily Mail The Mail on Sunday Tabloid Daily Mirror Sunday Mirror Morning Star The Sunday People Daily Star Daily Star Sunday The Sun Sunday Sport Weekend Sport Midweek Sport Online 5Pillars Magazines and other periodicals List of magazines in the United Kingdom List of magazines by circulation Radio in the UK National stations BBC BBC Radio 1 BBC Radio 1Xtra BBC Radio 2 BBC Radio 3 BBC Radio 4 BBC Radio 4 Extra BBC Radio 5 Live BBC Radio 5 Sports Extra BBC Radio 6 Music BBC Asian Network BBC World Service BBC National DAB (multiplex) Independent / commercial Absolute Radio Network BFBS Radio Capital Capital Xtra Classic FM Digital One (multiplex) Gold Greatest Hits Radio Heart Hits Radio Jazz FM Kiss Network LBC LBC News Magic Magic Classical Premier Christian Radio RNIB Connect Radio Sound Digital (multiplex) Smooth Radio talkSPORT TalkRadio Times Radio UCB UK Virgin Radio UK Radio X Regional and local stations BBC List of BBC Local Radio stations BBC Radio Scotland BBC Radio nan Gàidheal BBC Radio Ulster BBC Radio Foyle BBC Radio Wales BBC Radio Cymru Cymru 2 Independent / commercial List of community radio stations List of local commercial radio stations List of semi-national / regional analogue and digital radio stations Other stations List of hospital radio stations Pirate radio Restricted Service Licence (RSL) List of RSL stations List of student radio stations Other Broadcasting House FM broadcasting Radio Academy Radio Academy Awards Radio Independents Group RAJAR Most listened to programmes Television in the UK Principal channels ( list ) BBC / UKTV BBC One BBC Two BBC Three BBC Four BBC News BBC Parliament BBC Alba BBC Scotland CBBC CBeebies U&Alibi U&Dave U&Drama U&Eden U&Gold U&W U&Yesterday ITV ITV1 / STV / UTV ITV2 ITV3 ITV4 ITV Quiz Channel 4 / S4C Channel 4 S4C E4 E4 Extra Film4 More4 4seven Paramount 5 5Star 5USA 5Select 5Action Comedy Central Comedy Central Extra MTV MTV Music MTV 80s MTV 90s Club MTV Nickelodeon Nicktoons Nick Jr.

Sky UK Challenge Sky Arts Sky Atlantic Sky Cinema Sky Comedy Sky Crime Sky Documentaries Sky History Sky History 2 Sky Kids Sky Max Sky Mix Sky Nature Sky News Sky Replay Sky Sci-Fi Sky Showcase Sky Sports Box Office Sky Sports F1 Sky Sports News Sky Sports Racing Sky Sports Sky Witness Warner Bros. Discovery Animal Planet Boomerang Cartoon Network Cartoonito CNN International Discovery Channel Discovery History Discovery Science Discovery Turbo DMAX Food Network HGTV Investigation Discovery Quest Quest Red Really TLC TNT Sports Narrative Entertainment UK Limited Great! Action Great! Movies Great! Romance Great! Real Great! TV Pop Tiny Pop Services and platforms Current Amazon Prime Video BBC iPlayer cable Channel 4 digital digital terrestrial List of channels Disney+ EE TV 5 Freely Freesat Freesat+ Freeview high-definition List of channels ITV ITVX STV Player local television Now Netflix Paramount+ Pop Player Restricted Service Licence satellite List of channels Sky Group Sky Q Sky Glass Sky Stream TalkTalk TV TVPlayer U Virgin Media FilmFlex TiVo YouView Defunct analogue analogue terrestrial BBC Store Film4oD Real Digital Sky Group Freesat from Sky On Demand Sky+ Sky+ HD TalkTalk TV Store Top Up TV Virgin Media V+ Studios Current 3 Mills Studios BBC Cymru Wales New Broadcasting House BBC Elstree Centre BBC Pacific Quay The Bottle Yard Studios Broadcasting House Broadcasting House, Belfast Broadcasting House, Bristol Dock10 Elstree Studios (Shenley Road) Gas Street Studios The Leeds Studios The Maidstone Studios Mailbox Birmingham MediaCityUK Old Granada Studios Riverside Studios Roath Lock The Sharp Project Sky Campus Space Studios Manchester Television Centre, London Defunct Broadcasting House, Cardiff Dickenson Road Studios Fountain Studios The Hospital Club Lime Grove Studios Limehouse Studios The London Studios MGM-British Studios New Broadcasting House, Manchester Pebble Mill Studios Teddington Studios Television Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne Television Centre, Southampton Upper Boat Studios Other Television in Northern Ireland in Scotland in Wales Defunct channels Edinburgh International Television Festival History List of years Viewing statistics Most-watched broadcasts Companies and organisations Major companies Banijay UK Productions Bauer Media Audio UK BBC Bloomsbury Publishing BT Group Channel Four Television Corporation Daily Mail and General Trust Dentsu International Economist Group EMI Music Publishing Future plc Global Media & Entertainment Guardian Media Group Haymarket Media Group Informa ITN ITV plc National World News Broadcasting News UK Newsquest Pearson plc Press Holdings Reach plc RELX Reuters Sky STV Group Syco TalkTalk Group Paramount Networks UK & Australia Virgin Media O2 The Walt Disney Company (UK) Ltd.

Warner Bros. Discovery EMEA Resources Arqiva List of largest UK book publishers Government and regulatory bodies Advertising Standards Authority BBC Board (formerly: BBC Trust Board of Governors of the BBC ) British Board of Film Classification British Film Institute Culture, Media, and Sport Select Committee Department for Culture, Media and Sport Independent Press Standards Organisation Ofcom Press Recognition Panel S4C Authority Industry and trades bodies British Academy of Film and Television Arts British Phonographic Industry Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union Clearcast Digital TV Group Equity Everyone TV Federation Against Copyright Theft Independent Publishers Guild National Union of Journalists The Publishers Association Royal Television Society United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting Other BBC Academy National Film and Television School National Science and Media Museum Regional and student media Regional media Media in England Birmingham London Manchester Media in Scotland Aberdeen Dundee Glasgow Media in Wales Cardiff Student media Student television Student press Category Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz People Trove Archaeology Data Service Other IdRef MusicBrainz label SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hq9x6
Cached time: 20250817170512
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.852 seconds
Real time usage: 3.283 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 23283/1000000
Revision size: 217068/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1183179/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 174744/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 48/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1101428/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.699/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15248606/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2617.532      1 -total
 54.06% 1415.168      2 Template:Reflist
 21.75%  569.412    127 Template:Cite_news
 17.12%  448.251     91 Template:Cite_web
  9.39%  245.750     48 Template:Navbox
  6.68%  174.727      1 Template:Infobox_company
  6.36%  166.573      1 Template:Infobox
  5.43%  142.243      1 Template:Navboxes
  5.35%  140.094     28 Template:Cite_book
  4.91%  128.397      9 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19344654:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817170512 and revision id 1306289939. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=BBC&oldid=1306289939 " Categories : BBC Radio in the United Kingdom Mass media companies based in London British companies established in 1922 1922 establishments in England European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Radio stations established in 1922 Radio broadcasting companies of the United Kingdom Television broadcasting companies of the United Kingdom Mass media companies established in 1922 Publicly funded English language broadcasters YouTube channels launched in 2005 Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from December 2024 Use British English from November 2012 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from January 2022 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2012 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2021 OpenCorporates groupings This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 00:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents BBC 125 languages Add topic

