Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Megasporogenesis 2 Megagametogenesis 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Megaspore 17 languages Bosanski Català Español فارسی Français Galego हिन्दी Ido Italiano ქართული Кыргызча Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Српски / srpski Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Large spore in heterosporous plants that germinates into a female gametophyte Microscopic photo of spores (in red) of Selaginella . The large three spores at the top are megaspore s whereas the numerous smaller red spores at the bottom are microspores.

Megaspores , also called macrospores , are a type of spore that is present in heterosporous plants . These plants have two spore types, megaspores and microspores . Generally speaking, the megaspore, or large spore, germinates into a female gametophyte , which produces egg cells . These are fertilized by sperm produced by the male gametophyte developing from the microspore. Heterosporous plants include seed plants ( gymnosperms and flowering plants ), water ferns ( Salviniales ), spikemosses ( Selaginellaceae ) and quillworts ( Isoetaceae ).

Megasporogenesis [ edit ] In gymnosperms and flowering plants, the megaspore is produced inside the nucellus of the ovule .  During megasporogenesis, a diploid precursor cell, the megasporocyte or megaspore mother cell, undergoes meiosis to produce initially four haploid cells ( the megaspores ).

[ 1 ] Angiosperms exhibit three patterns of megasporogenesis: monosporic, bisporic, and tetrasporic , also known as the Polygonum type, the Alisma type, and the Drusa type, respectively.  The monosporic pattern occurs most frequently (>70% of angiosperms) and is found in many economically and biologically important groups such as Brassicaceae (e.g., Arabidopsis , Capsella , Brassica ), Gramineae (e.g., maize, rice, wheat), Malvaceae (e.g., cotton), Leguminoseae (e.g., beans, soybean), and Solanaceae (e.g., pepper, tobacco, tomato, potato, petunia).

[ 2 ] This pattern is characterized by cell plate formation after meiosis 1 & 2, which results in four one-nucleate megaspores, of which three degenerate.  The bisporic pattern is characterized by cell plate formation only after meiosis 1, and results in two two-nucleate megaspores, of which one degenerates. The tetrasporic pattern is characterized by cell plates failing to form after either meiosis 1 or 2, and results in one four-nucleate megaspore.  Therefore, each pattern gives rise to a single functional megaspore which contains one, two, or four meiotic nuclei, respectively.

[ 2 ] The megaspore then undergoes megagametogenesis to give rise to the female gametophyte.

Megagametogenesis [ edit ] Plant ovules with megasporocytes before meiosis: Gymnosperm ovule on left, angiosperm ovule (inside ovary) on right After megasporogenesis, the megaspore develops into the female gametophyte (the embryo sac) in a process called megagametogenesis.  The process of megagametogenesis varies depending on which pattern of megasporogenesis occurred.  Some species, such as Tridax trilobata , Ehretia laevis , and Alectra thomsoni , can undergo different patterns of megasporogenesis and therefore different patterns of megagametogenesis.    
If the monosporic pattern occurred, the single nucleus undergoes mitosis three times, producing an eight-nucleate cell.  These eight nuclei are arranged into two groups of four. These groups both send a nucleus to the center of the cell; these become the polar nuclei.  Depending on the species, these nuclei fuse before or upon fertilization of the central cell. The three nuclei at the end of the cell near the micropylar become the egg apparatus, with an egg cell in the center and two synergids. At the other end of the cell, a cell wall forms around the nuclei and forms the antipodals. Therefore, the resulting embryo sac is a seven-celled structure consisting of one central cell, one egg cell, two synergid cells, and three antipodal cells.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The bisporic and tetrasporic patterns undergo varying processes and result in varying embryo sacs as well.  In Lilium which has a tetrasporic pattern, the central cell of the embryo sac is 4n.  Therefore, upon fertilization the endosperm will be 5n rather than the typical 3n.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Megasporangium Microspore Spore Double fertilization References [ edit ] ^ Estrada-Luna, A. A.; W. Huanca-Mamani; G. Acosta-García; G. León-Martínez; A. Becerra-Flora; R. Pérez-Ruíz; J. -Ph. Vielle-Calzada (Mar–Apr 2002). "Beyond Promiscuity: From Sexuality to Apomixis in Flowering Plants".

In Vitro Cellular & Developmental Biology - Plant .

38 (2): 146– 151.

doi : 10.1079/ivp2001278 .

JSTOR 20065024 .

S2CID 29722931 .

^ a b c Yadegaria, Ramin; Gary N. Drewsb (2004-04-09).

"Female Gametophyte Development" .

The Plant Cell .

16 (Suppl): S133 – S141 , Supplement.

doi : 10.1105/tpc.018192 .

PMC 2643389 .

PMID 15075395 . Archived from the original on 2011-02-25 . Retrieved 2010-11-28 .

^ Raven, Peter H.; Evert, Ray Franklin.; Eichhorn, Susan E. (2005).

Biology of Plants . New York, NY: W.H. Freeman.

ISBN 0-7167-1007-2 .

^ Sargent, E. (1900).

"Recent work on the results of fertilization in angiosperms" .

Annals of Botany .

14 (4): 689– 712.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aob.a088799 . Archived from the original on 2010-12-10 . Retrieved 2010-11-28 .

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Megaspore&oldid=1279359363 " Categories : Plant development Fertility Reproduction Plant sexuality Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 March 2025, at 02:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Megaspore 17 languages Add topic

