Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 See also 4 Notes 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Mir Fendereski 7 languages العربية فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia مازِرونی Тоҷикӣ اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Persian philosopher, poet and mystic Mir Fendereski میرفِنْدِرِسْکی Bust of Mir Fendereski in Isfahan province Born 1562 Died 1640 Occupation Philosopher & Poet Known for Writing various works such as: Resâle Sanaie Resâleh dar kimiyâ Šahre ketabe mahârat Resāla al-ṣenāʿiya Mir Fendereski ( Persian : میرفِنْدِرِسْکی)‎ (1562–1640) was a Persian [ 1 ] philosopher, poet and mystic of the Safavid era. His full name is given as Mir Abulqasim Mirfendereski ( Persian : میرابوالقاسم میرفندرسکی).  He lived for a while in Isfahan at the same time as Mir Damad , spent a great part of his life in India among yogis and Zoroastrians , and learnt from them. He was patronized by both the Safavid and Mughal courts.

[ 2 ] The famous Persian philosopher Mulla Sadra also studied under him.

[ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Mir Fendereski remains a mysterious and enigmatic figure whom we know very little about.

[ 2 ] He was probably born around 1562-1563 and died at the age of eighty.

[ 2 ] He gained a reputation of an ascetic at the court of Shah Abbas in Isfahan. He is said to have journeyed through India, where he became a vegetarian and refused to go on pilgrimage to Mecca, so he would not be forced to sacrifice sheep.

[ 4 ] Mir Fendereski was trained in the works of Avicenna as he taught the Avicennian medical and philosophical compendiums of al-Qanun (The Canon) and Al-Shifa (The Cure) in Isfahan .

Works [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2008 ) A number of works are attributed to him, although these have not been studied in detail. In his extensive commentary on the Persian translation of the Mahabharata ( Razm-Nama in Persian) and Nizam al-Din Panipati 's rendition of the Yoga Vasistha , he complains about the quality of the translation, which implies that he was familiar with Sanskrit . He was among a group of Persians at the Mughal court to engage with Indian thought.

Some of his most famous works are "Resâle Sanaie", "Resâleh dar kimiyâ" and "Šahre ketabe mahârat", in Persian language. He was also a poet and composed a long philosophical ode (qaṣida ḥekmiya) in imitation of and response to the Persian Ismaʿili thinker Nasir Khusraw .  His best-known work is titled al-Resāla al-ṣenāʿiya , an examination of the arts and professions within an ideal society. The importance of this treatise is that it combines a number of genres and subject areas: political and ethical thought, mirrors for princes , metaphysics, and the critical subject of the classifications of the sciences.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] List of Iranian scientists Iranian philosophy Philosophers Fenderesk District Notes [ edit ] ^ Hossein, Nasr, Seyyed (24 April 2012).

"Findiriskī" . Encyclopedia of Islam, second edition, Brill . Retrieved 11 February 2017 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c d Encyclopedia Iranica, "Mir Fenderski" by Sajjad. H. Rizvi ^ Fazlur Rahman, The Philosophy of Mullā Ṣadrā (Ṣadr Al-Dīn Al-Shirāzī) , SUNY Press, 1975 ^ "Anthropology and Iranian cultures: Iranian anthropology 1900–25" , Politics of Culture in Iran , Routledge, pp.

35– 52, 2006-08-21, doi : 10.4324/9780203029879-7 , ISBN 9780203029879 , retrieved 2022-11-24 Further reading [ edit ] "The Place of the School of Isfahan in Islamic Philosophy and Sufism," in The Heritage of Sufism, Volume III: Late Classical Persianate Sufism (1501–1750) , ed. L. Lewisohn and D. Morgan, Oxford, 1999, pp. 3–15.

v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National United States Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mir_Fendereski&oldid=1292709538 " Categories : 16th-century Iranian philosophers 17th-century Iranian philosophers 1562 births 1640 deaths People from Gorgan Burials at Takht-e Foulad Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles to be expanded from June 2008 All articles to be expanded This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 11:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mir Fendereski 7 languages Add topic

