Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Species Toggle Species subsection 1.1 Elephant 1.2 Rhinoceros 1.3 African buffalo 1.4 Lion 1.5 Leopard 2 Conservation status 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Big Five game 26 languages Afrikaans Azərbaycanca Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Hrvatski Italiano עברית Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Shqip SiSwati Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 IsiNdebele seSewula Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Big five game ) African game-hunting species The Big Five In Africa , the Big Five game animals are the lion , leopard , rhinoceros , elephant , and African buffalo .

[ 1 ] The term was coined by big-game hunters to refer to the five most difficult animals in Africa to hunt on foot, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] but is now more widely used by game viewing tourists and safari tour operators.

[ 5 ] [ 2 ] [ 6 ] They are examples of charismatic megafauna , featuring prominently in popular culture, and are among the most famous of Africa's large animals.

The 1990 and later releases of South African rand banknotes feature a different big-five animal on each denomination. Countries where all can be found include Angola , Botswana , the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Eswatini , Kenya , Malawi , Mozambique , Namibia , Rwanda , South Africa , Tanzania , Uganda , Zambia and Zimbabwe .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Species [ edit ] Elephant [ edit ] African bush elephant ( Loxodonta africana ) The African bush elephant ( Loxodonta africana ) and the African forest elephant ( Loxodonta cyclotis ) are the largest extant land-based animals. Elephants are herbivores with thick, almost hairless skin; a long, flexible, prehensile trunk; upper incisors forming long, curved, ivory tusks; and large, fan-shaped ears. Elephants are difficult to hunt because, despite their large size, they are able to hide in thick bush and are more likely to charge than the other Big Five species. They become aggressive when their young are threatened.

[ 9 ] Rhinoceros [ edit ] Black rhinoceros ( Diceros bicornis ) The black rhinoceros ( Diceros bicornis ) and the white rhinoceros ( Ceratotherium simum ) are large herbivores with two upright horns on their nasal bridge. The black rhino is classified as critically endangered and the white rhino as near threatened , and both are subject to extensive poaching. Among big-five game hunters, the black rhinoceros is more highly prized.

[ 10 ] The current existing rhinos throughout the savanna are southern white rhinoceros , eastern black rhinoceros , south-western black rhinoceros and south-central black rhinoceros .

African buffalo [ edit ] African buffalo ( Syncerus caffer ) The African buffalo ( Syncerus caffer ) is a large horned bovid . It is the only animal among the Big Five that is not on the "endangered" or "threatened" list.

[ 11 ] The Cape buffalo ( Syncerus caffer caffer ) is considered by many to be the most dangerous of any of the Big Five: [ 12 ] buffalos have reportedly been known to ambush and attack humans.

[ 13 ] Lion [ edit ] Lion ( Panthera leo ) The lion ( Panthera leo ) is a large, carnivorous feline found in both Africa and northwestern India . It has a short, tawny coat; a tufted tail; and, in the male, a heavy mane around the neck and shoulders. As a large and charismatic apex predator with cultural significance, lions are among the most popular species to view on safari tours.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Leopard [ edit ] African leopard ( Panthera pardus ) The leopard ( Panthera pardus ) is a large, carnivorous feline which like the lion is found not just in Africa but also India (as well as the rest of Asia). Its fur is generally tawny with dark rosette-shaped markings. The leopard is the most seldom seen of the Big Five because of its nocturnal habits (it is most active between sunset and sunrise, although it may hunt during the day in some areas), and because it is wary of humans and will take flight in the face of danger. Leopards can be located in the grasslands, dense brushes, deserts, and forested areas of African savannas.

Conservation status [ edit ] Africa's Big Five have become major concerns for wildlife conservationists in recent years. The African lion and African leopard are both classified as vulnerable . The African savanna elephant is classified as endangered by the IUCN as of 2021. The southern white rhinoceros and African buffalo are classified as near threatened while the black rhinoceros is classified as critically endangered .

[ 17 ] The Big Five in art See also [ edit ] Charismatic megafauna Elephant gun Hunting Game (hunting) Big-game hunting Little five game References [ edit ] ^ Capstick, Peter H. (1984).

Safari, the last adventure . St. Martin's Press. p. 148.

ISBN 978-0-312-69657-3 .

Generally known as the "Big Five," the group we're talking about comprises lion, leopard, elephant, Cape buffalo and rhino, although not necessarily in that order.

^ a b Zijlma, Anouk.

"The Big Five: Index" .

Africa for Visitors .

About.com .

Archived from the original on 9 February 2007 . Retrieved 29 December 2006 .

^ Capstick, Peter H. (1983).

Death in the Dark Continent . St. Martin's Press. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-312-18615-9 .

No human being could begin to outrun any of the big five, nor would he last more than a few seconds in any contest of strength.

^ Du Toit, Richard (2001).

Africa's Big Five .

Struik Publishers .

ISBN 978-1-86872-582-3 .

^ "Understanding and Protecting the Big Five in South Africa" .

goeco.org . Retrieved 14 December 2018 .

^ Nelson, Marsea.

"Ten Wild Facts about the "Big Five" " .

www.worldwildlife.org . worldwildlife.org . Retrieved 14 December 2018 .

^ Planet, Lonely (28 October 2013).

"Lonely Planet's Best in Travel 2014 - top 10 countries" .

lonelyplanet.com .

^ "Rhinos Return to Rwanda's Akagera National Park after 10 Years" .

ugandatravelblog.com . 2 May 2017. Archived from the original on 20 July 2018 . Retrieved 2 May 2017 .

^ Fodor's African Safari, 1st Edition: From Budget to Big Spending Where and How to Find the Best Big Game Adventure in Southern and Eastern Africa . Fodor's. 2004. p.

142 .

ISBN 978-1-4000-1234-3 .

^ "Current Zoology" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 January 2022.

^ Stumpf, Bruce G.

"Africa on the Matrix: The Cape Buffalo" . Archived from the original on 20 December 2002 . Retrieved 23 October 2010 .

^ Wieland, Terry (2006).

Dangerous-Game Rifles . Countrysport Press. p. 286.

ISBN 978-0-89272-691-2 .

^ "African Animals Hunting facts and tips - Buffalo Hunting" . safariBwana newsletter. Archived from the original on 8 July 2013 . Retrieved 23 October 2010 .

^ Capstick, Peter H. (1984).

Safari, the last adventure . St. Martin's Press. p. 165.

ISBN 978-0-312-69657-3 .

^ "African Lion" .

safaribwana.com . Archived from the original on 16 April 2016 . Retrieved 1 October 2010 .

^ Robinson, Steve (2008).

"Unpleasant Truth About Canned Shooting" .

shakariconnection.com . Shakari Connection . Retrieved 2 October 2010 .

^ "Diceros bicornis" .

External links [ edit ] Look up big game in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

20 Incredible African Safari Animals & Where to See Them Weight, diet, life span and other lifestyle details of the Big Five v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Big_Five_game&oldid=1305629393 " Categories : Mammals of Africa Hunting Tourism in Africa 5 (number) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2020 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 05:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Big Five game 26 languages Add topic

