Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Process Toggle Process subsection 1.1 Silicification 1.2 Carbonate mineralization 1.3 Pyritization 2 Scientific implications 3 Examples of permineralization 4 References Toggle the table of contents Permineralization 11 languages العربية Català Español Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית ଓଡ଼ିଆ Português Simple English Slovenščina Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Permineralized ) Type of fossilization Part of a series on Paleontology Fossils Fossil Fossil preparation Fossil collecting Index fossil Microfossil Trace fossil Transitional fossil Geology Geology Absolute dating Relative dating Biochronology Geochronology Geologic formation Geologic record Geologic time scale Geological map Lagerstätte Stratigraphy Extinction Extinction Extinction event Lazarus taxon Living fossil Pseudoextinction Mass extinction Evolution Evolution Cladistics Convergent evolution Natural selection Phyletic gradualism Punctuated equilibrium Phylogenetic tree Speciation History History of paleontology List of years in paleontology Applications Age of Earth Origin of life History of life Cambrian explosion Ediacaran biota Biogeography Biochronology Biostratigraphy Ecological succession Anagenesis Evolutionary taxonomy Macroevolution Microevolution Cultural impact Cultural depictions of dinosaurs List of films featuring dinosaurs Dinosaur renaissance Paleoart Paleontology portal Category v t e Permineralization is a process of fossilization of bones and tissues in which mineral deposits form internal casts of organisms. Carried by water, these minerals fill the spaces within organic tissue. Because of the nature of the casts, permineralization is particularly useful in studies of the internal structures of organisms, usually of plants.

[ 1 ] Process [ edit ] Permineralization, a type of fossilization, involves deposits of minerals within the cells of organisms. Water from the ground, lakes, or oceans seeps into the pores of organic tissue and forms a crystal cast with deposited minerals. Crystals begin to form in the porous cell walls. This process continues on the inner surface of the walls until the central cavity of the cell, the lumen , is completely filled. The cell walls themselves remain intact surrounding the crystals.

[ 2 ] [ need quotation to verify ] Silicification [ edit ] In silicification , [ 3 ] the weathering of rocks releases silicate minerals and the silica makes its way into a body of still water.  Eventually, the mineral-laden water permeates the pores and cells of some dead organism, where it becomes a gel .  Over time, the gel will dehydrate , forming an opaline crystal structure that is an internal cast of the organism.  This accounts for the detail found in permineralization. Silicification reveals information about what type of environment the organism was likely to have lived in. Most fossils that have been silicified are bacteria , algae , [ 3 ] and other plant life. Silicification is the most common type of permineralization.

[ 4 ] Carbonate mineralization [ edit ] Main article: Coal ball A coal ball Carbonate mineralization involves the formation of coal balls.

Coal balls are the fossilizations of many different plants and their tissues.  They often occur in the presence of seawater or acidic peat. Coal balls are calcareous permineralizations of peat by calcium and magnesium carbonates. Often spherical in shape and ranging from a few grams to several hundred kilograms in mass, coal balls are formed when water containing carbonate permeates the cells of an organism.  This type of fossilization yields information about plant life in the Upper Carboniferous Period (325 to 280 million years ago).

[ 5 ] Pyritized ammonite of the genus Lytoceras in Holzmaden Shale Pyritization [ edit ] This method involves the elements sulfur and iron . Organisms may become pyritized when they are in marine sediments saturated with iron sulfides.  ( Pyrite is iron sulfide.) As organic matter decays it releases sulfide which reacts with dissolved iron in the surrounding waters. Pyrite replaces carbonate shell material due to an undersaturation of carbonate in the surrounding waters.  Some plants become pyritized when they are in a clay terrain, but to a lesser extent than in a marine environment. Some pyritized fossils include Precambrian microfossils, marine arthropods and plants.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Scientific implications [ edit ] Permineralized fossils preserve the original cell structure, which can help scientists study an organism at the cellular level. These three-dimensional fossils create permanent molds of internal structures. The mineralization process helps prevent tissue compaction, distorting organs' actual size. 
A permineralized fossil will also reveal much about an organism's environment and the substances found in it since it preserves soft body parts.
This helps researchers investigate the plants, animals, and microbes of different periods.

Examples of permineralization [ edit ] Polished section of petrified wood showing annual rings.

Most dinosaur bones are permineralized.

Petrified wood : Permineralization is the first step in petrification . In petrification, the cellulose cell walls are completely replaced by minerals.

Some examples of soft-bodied pyritization are Beecher's Trilobite Bed ( Ordovician ) and the Hunsrück Slate ( Devonian ) References [ edit ] ^ Mani, K. (1996). Permineralization Retrieved March 29, 2009, from Fossils: A window to the past. Web site: http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/paleo/fossils/permin.html ^ Loren E. Babcock , "Permineralization", in AccessScience@McGraw-Hill, http://www.accessscience.com , doi : 10.1036/1097-8542.803250 ^ a b Götz, Annette E.; Montenari, Michael; Costin, Gelu (2017).

"Silicification and organic matter preservation in the Anisian Muschelkalk: Implications for the basin dynamics of the central European Muschelkalk Sea" .

Central European Geology .

60 (1): 35– 52.

Bibcode : 2017CEJGl..60...35G .

doi : 10.1556/24.60.2017.002 .

ISSN 1788-2281 .

^ Oehler, John H., & Schopf, J. William (1971). Artificial microfossils: Experimental studies of permineralization of blue-green algae in silica.

Science . 174, 1229-1231.

^ Scott, Andrew C.; Rex, G. (1985).

"The formation and significance of Carboniferous coal balls" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society . B 311 (1148): 123– 137.

Bibcode : 1985RSPTB.311..123S .

doi : 10.1098/rstb.1985.0144 .

JSTOR 2396976 .

^ Wacey, D. et al (2013) Nanoscale analysis of pyritized microfossils reveals differential heterotrophic consumption in the ~1.9-Ga Gunflint chert PNAS 110 (20) 8020-8024 doi : 10.1073/pnas.1221965110 ^ Raiswell, R. (1997). A geochemical framework for the application of stable sulfur isotopes to fossil pyritization.

Journal of the Geological Society 154, 343-356.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Permineralization&oldid=1306572280 " Categories : Geological processes Fossilization Mineralogy concepts Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2019 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 14:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Permineralization 11 languages Add topic

