Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Career 3 Selected books Toggle Selected books subsection 3.1 Kitāb al-Ḥayawān ( كتاب الحيوان ) 'book of the animal' 3.2 Kitāb al-Bukhalā’ ( البُخلاء ) 'the book of misers' (a.k.a. 'avarice and the avaricious') 3.3 Kitāb al-Bayān wa-al-Tabyīn 'The Book of eloquence and demonstration' 3.4 Fakhr al-Sūdān ala al-Bīḍān ( فَخْر السُودان على البيضان ) 'pride of blacks over whites' 3.4.1 Editions and translations 4 On the Zanj ("Swahili coast") 5 Mu‘tazilī theological debate 6 Death 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Notes 8.2 Citations 8.3 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Al-Jahiz 44 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kurdî Latina Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip سنڌي Slovenščina کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arabic writer (776–869) al-Jahiz Syrian stamp of al-Jahiz from 1968 Born Abū ʿUthman ʿAmr ibn Baḥr al-Kinānī al-Baṣrī 776 Basra , Abbasid Caliphate Died December 868/January 869 (aged 92-93) Basra, Abbasid Caliphate Philosophical work Era Islamic Golden Age / Medieval era Region Islamic Philosophy School Aristotelianism Main interests Arabic literature , Biology , Trivium , Islamic studies , Islamic theology Religious life Religion Islam Denomination Mu'tazila [ 1 ] Abu Uthman Amr ibn Bahr al-Kinani al-Basri ( Arabic : أبو عثمان عمرو بن بحر الكناني البصري , romanized : Abū ʿUthman ʿAmr ibn Baḥr al-Kinānī al-Baṣrī ; c.

776–868/869 ), commonly known as al-Jahiz ( Arabic : الجاحظ , romanized : al-Jāḥiẓ , lit.

'the bug eyed'), was an Arab polymath and author of works of literature (including theory and criticism), theology , zoology , philosophy , grammar, dialectics, rhetoric , philology , linguistics , and politico-religious polemics .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] His extensive zoological work has been credited with describing principles related to natural selection , ethology , and the functions of an ecosystem.

[ 6 ] Ibn al-Nadim lists nearly 140 titles attributed to al-Jahiz, of which 75 are extant. The best known are Kitāb al-Ḥayawān (The Book of Animals), a seven-part compendium on an array of subjects with animals as their point of departure; Kitāb al-Bayān wa-l-tabyīn (The Book of Eloquence and Exposition), a wide-ranging work on human communication; and Kitāb al-Bukhalāʾ (The Book of Misers), a collection of anecdotes on stinginess.

[ 7 ] Tradition claims that he was smothered to death when a vast amount of books fell over him.

[ 8 ] Life [ edit ] The actual name of al-Jahiz was Abū ʿUthman ʿAmr ibn Bahr ibn Maḥbūb. His grandfather, Maḥbūb, was a protégé or mawali of ‘Amr ibn Qal‘ al-Kinānī, who was from Arab Banu Kinanah tribe.

[ n 1 ] Not much is known about al-Jāḥiẓ's early life, but his family was very poor. Born in Basra early in 160/February 776, he asserted in a book he wrote that he was a member of the Banu Kinanah.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] However, the grandfather of al-Jāḥiẓ was reportedly a Black jammāl (cameleer)  –  or ḥammāl (porter); the manuscripts differ – of ‘Amr ibn Qal‘ named Maḥbūb, nicknamed Fazārah, or Fazārah was his maternal grandfather, and Maḥbūb his paternal. The names may however have been confused. His nephew also reported that al-Jāḥiẓ's grandfather was a black cameleer.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] In the early Islamic Arabia, the designation of Black ( Arabic: السودان "as-swadan" ) was used to describe people like Zuṭṭ and Zanj, [ 18 ] and based on this, several scholars have stated that al-Jahiz descended from one of these black communities, [ 19 ] with some even suggesting that he was possibly of African descent.

[ 17 ] [ 16 ] He sold fish along one of the canals in Basra to help his family. Financial difficulties, however, did not stop al-Jāḥiẓ from continuously seeking knowledge. He used to gather with a group of other youths at Basra's main mosque, where they would discuss different scientific subjects.  During the cultural and intellectual revolution under the Abbasid Caliphate books became readily available, and learning accessible. Al-Jāḥiẓ  studied philology , lexicography and poetry from among the most learned scholars at the School of Basra , where he attended the lectures of Abū Ubaydah , al-Aṣma’ī , Sa'īd ibn Aws al-Anṣārī and studied ilm an-naḥw ( علم النحو , i.e., syntax ) with Akhfash al-Awsaṭ (al-Akhfash Abī al-Ḥasan).

[ 20 ] Over a twenty-five-year span studying,  al-Jāḥiẓ acquired a considerable knowledge of Arabic poetry , Arabic philology, pre-Islamic Arab history , the Qur'an and the Hadiths .  He read translated books on Greek sciences and Hellenistic philosophy , especially that of the Greek philosopher Aristotle . Al-Jahiz was also critical of those who followed the Hadiths of Abu Hurayra , referring to his Hadithist opponents as al-nabita ("the contemptible").

[ 21 ] Al-Jāḥiẓ died 250 [A.D. 869], during the caliphate of al-Mu‘tazz .

Al-Nadīm reports that al-Jāḥiẓ said he was about the same age as Abū Nuwās [ n 2 ] and older than al-Jammāz.

[ n 3 ] [ 13 ] Career [ edit ] While still in Basra, al-Jāḥiẓ wrote an article about the institution of the Caliphate. This is said to have been the beginning of his career as a writer, which would become his sole source of living. It is said that his mother once offered him a tray full of notebooks and told him he would earn his living from writing. He went on to write two hundred books in his lifetime on a variety of subjects, including on the Quran , Arabic grammar , zoology , poetry, lexicography, and rhetoric . Al-Jāḥiẓ was also one of the first Arabic writers to suggest a complete overhaul of the language's grammatical system, though this would not be undertaken until his fellow linguist Ibn Maḍāʾ took up the matter two hundred years later.

[ 22 ] Al-Nadīm cited this passage from a book of al-Jāḥiẓ: [ 23 ] When I was writing these two books, about the creation of the Qur’ān, which was the tenet given importance and honour by the Commander of the Faithful , [ n 4 ] and another about superiority in connection with the Banū Hāshim , the ‘Abd Shams , and Makhzūm .

[ n 5 ] What was my due but to sit above the Simakān, Spica and Arcturus, or on top of the ‘Ayyūq, [ n 6 ] or to deal with red sulphur, or to conduct the ‘Anqā by her leading string to the Greatest King.

[ n 7 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Al-Jāḥiẓ moved to Baghdad , then the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate , in 816 AD, because the caliphs encouraged scientists and scholars and had just founded the library of the Bayt al-Ḥikmah .  But al-Nadim suspected al-Jāḥiẓ's claim that the caliph al-Ma’mūn had praised his books on the imamate and the caliphate, for his eloquent phraseology, and use of market-place speech, and that of the elite and of the kings, [ 29 ] was exaggerated self-glorification and doubted that al-Ma’mūn could have spoken these words.

[ n 8 ] Al-Jāḥiẓ was said to have admired the eloquent literary style of the director of the library, Sahl ibn Hārūn (d. 859/860) and quoted his works.

[ 31 ] Because of the caliphs' patronage and his eagerness to establish himself and reach a wider audience, al-Jāḥiẓ stayed in Baghdad.

Al-Nadīm gives two versions [ n 9 ] [ 32 ] of an anecdote which differ in their source: his first source is Abū Hiffān [ n 10 ] and his second is the grammarian al-Mubarrad , [ 13 ] –  and retells the story of al-Jāḥiẓ's reputation for being one of the three great bibliophiles and scholars – the two others being al-Fatḥ ibn Khāqān and judge Ismā’īl ibn Isḥāq [ n 11 ] –  such that “whenever a book came into the hand of al-Jāḥiẓ he read through it, wherever he happened to be. He even used to rent the shops of al-warrāqūn [ n 12 ] for study.” [ 34 ] Al-Jāḥiẓ replaced Ibrāhīm ibn al-‘Abbās al-Ṣūlī in the government secretariat of al-Ma’mūn but left after just three days.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Later at Samarra he wrote a huge number of his books. The caliph al-Ma'mun wanted al-Jāḥiẓ to teach his children, but then changed his mind when his children were frightened by al-Jāḥiẓ's boggle-eyes ( جاحظ العينين ). This is said to be the origin of his nickname.

[ 37 ] He enjoyed the patronage of al-Fath ibn Khaqan , the bibliophile boon companion of Caliph al-Mutawakkil , but after his murder in December 861 he left Samarra for his native Basra, where he lived on his estate with his “concubine, her maid, a manservant, and a donkey.” [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Selected books [ edit ] Main article: al-Jahiz bibliography Kitāb al-Ḥayawān ( كتاب الحيوان ) 'book of the animal' [ edit ] A page from a reproduction of al-Jāḥiẓ's Kitāb al-Hayawān depicting an ostrich ( Struthio camelus ) in a nest with eggs . Basra.

Kitāb al-Ḥayawān is an extensive zoological encyclopedia in seven volumes [ n 13 ] consisting of anecdotes , proverbs, and descriptions of over 350 animal species, including in-depth analyses of their ecosystems and behaviors.

[ 40 ] It was composed in honour of Muḥammad ibn ‘Abd al-Mālik al-Zayyāt , who paid him five thousand gold coins.

[ 41 ] The 11th-century scholar al-Khatib al-Baghdadi dismissed it as  "little more than a plagiarism " of Aristotle's Kitāb al-Hayawān – a charge of plagiarism was levelled against Aristotle himself with regard to a certain "Asclepiades of Pergamum".

[ 42 ] Later scholars have noted that there was only a limited Aristotelian influence in al-Jāḥiẓ's work, and that al-Baghdadi may have been unacquainted with Aristotle's work.

[ 43 ] Conway Zirkle , writing about the history of natural selection science in 1941, said that an excerpt from this work was the only relevant passage he had found from an Arabian scholar. He provided a quotation describing the struggle for existence , citing a Spanish translation of this work: The rat goes out for its food, and is clever in getting it, for it eats all animals inferior to it in strength", and in turn, it "has to avoid snakes and birds and serpents of prey, who look for it in order to devour it" and are stronger than the rat. Mosquitos "know instinctively that blood is the thing which makes them live" and when they see an animal, "they know that the skin has been fashioned to serve them as food". In turn, flies hunt the mosquito "which is the food that they like best", and predators eat the flies. "All animals, in short, can not exist without food, neither can the hunting animal escape being hunted in his turn. Every weak animal devours those weaker than itself. Strong animals cannot escape being devoured by other animals stronger than they. And in this respect, men do not differ from animals, some with respect to others, although they do not arrive at the same extremes. In short, God has disposed some human beings as a cause of life for others, and likewise, he has disposed the latter as a cause of the death of the former." [ 44 ] According to Frank Edgerton (2002), the claim made by some authors that al-Jahiz was an early evolutionist is "unconvincing", but the narrower claim that Jahiz "recognized the effect of environmental factors on animal life" seems valid.

[ 45 ] Rebecca Stott (2013) writes of al-Jahiz's work: Jahiz was not concerned with argument or theorizing. He was concerned with witnessing; he promoted the pleasures and fascinations of close looking and told his readers that there was nothing more important than this. ... Here and there amid the close looking there are visions, glimpses of brilliant insight and perception about natural laws, but the overt purpose of Living beings was to persuade the reader to fulfil his moral obligation to God, an obligation enjoined by the Qu'ran : to look closely and search for understanding. ... If certain historians have claimed that Jahiz wrote about evolution a thousand years before Darwin and that he discovered natural selection, they have misunderstood. Jahiz was not trying to work out how the world began or how species had come to be. He believed that God had done the making and that he had done it brilliantly. He took divine creation and intelligent design for granted. … There was, for him, no other possible explanation. ... What is striking, however, about Jahiz’s portrait of nature in Living Beings is his vision of interconnectedness, his repeated images of nets and webs. He certainly saw ecosystems, as we would call them now, in the natural world. He also understood what we might call the survival of the fittest .

[ 46 ] Like Aristotle, al-Jahiz believed in spontaneous generation . He frequently used metaphors of webs and nets to express the interconnectedness of the natural world.

[ 6 ] Kitāb al-Bukhalā’ ( البُخلاء ) 'the book of misers' (a.k.a. 'avarice and the avaricious') [ edit ] A collection of stories about the greedy . Humorous and satirical , it is the best example of al-Jāḥiẓ' prose style. Al-Jāḥiẓ ridicules schoolmasters, beggars , singers and scribes for their greedy behavior. Many of the stories continue to be reprinted in magazines throughout the Arabic-speaking world . The book is considered one of the best works of al-Jāḥiẓ.

[ citation needed ] The book has two English translations: One by Robert Bertram Serjeant titled The Book of Misers , and another by Jim Colville titled Avarice and the Avaricious .  Editions: Arabic (al-Ḥājirī, Cairo, 1958); [ 47 ] Arabic text, French preface.

Le Livre des avares . (Pellat. Paris, 1951) [ 48 ] Kitāb al-Bayān wa-al-Tabyīn 'The Book of eloquence and demonstration' [ edit ] al-Bayan wa al-Tabyin was one of al-Jāḥiẓ's later works, in which he wrote on epiphanies, rhetorical speeches, sectarian leaders, and princes. The book is considered to have started Arabic literary theory in a formal, systemic fashion.

[ 49 ] Al-Jāḥiẓ's defining of eloquence as the ability of the speaker to deliver an effective message while maintaining it as brief or elaborate at will was widely accepted by later Arabic literary critics.

[ 50 ] Fakhr al-Sūdān ala al-Bīḍān ( فَخْر السُودان على البيضان ) 'pride of blacks over whites' [ edit ] This book is composed as a debate between black people and white people as to which group is superior.

[ 51 ] Al-Jāḥiẓ mentions that Blacks have an oratory and eloquence of their own culture and language.

[ 52 ] Editions and translations [ edit ] al-Jahiz, Fakhr El Soudan Ala Al Bidhan (Beirut: Dar al-Guiel, 1991).

al-Jāḥiẓ, “The Boasts of the Blacks Over the Whites,” trans. Tarif Khalidi, Islamic Quarterly , 25, no. 1 (1981): 3–51.

On the Zanj ("Swahili coast") [ edit ] Concerning the Zanj , he wrote: Everybody agrees that there is no people on earth in whom generosity is as universally well developed as the Zanj. These people have a natural talent for dancing to the rhythm of the tambourine, without needing to learn it. There are no better singers anywhere in the world, no people more polished and eloquent, and no people less given to insulting language. No other nation can surpass them in bodily strength and physical toughness. One of them will lift huge blocks and carry heavy loads that would be beyond the strength of most Bedouins or members of other races. They are courageous, energetic, and generous, which are the virtues of nobility, and also good-tempered and with little propensity to evil. They are always cheerful, smiling, and devoid of malice, which is a sign of noble character.

The Zanj say that God did not make them black to disfigure them; rather it is their environment that made them so. The best evidence of this is that there are black tribes among the Arabs, such as the Banu Sulaim bin Mansur, and that all the peoples settled in the Harra, besides the Banu Sulaim are black. These tribes take slaves from among the Ashban to mind their flocks and for irrigation work, manual labor, and domestic service, and their wives from among the Byzantines; and yet it takes less than three generations for the Harra to give them all the complexion of the Banu Sulaim. This Harra is such that the gazelles, ostriches, insects, wolves, foxes, sheep, asses, horses and birds that live there are all black. White and black are the results of environment, the natural properties of water and soil, distance from the sun, and intensity of heat. There is no question of metamorphosis, or of punishment, disfigurement or favor meted out by Allah. Besides, the land of the Banu Sulaim has much in common with the land of the Turks, where the camels, beasts of burden, and everything belonging to these people is similar in appearance: everything of theirs has a Turkish look.

[ 53 ] Mu‘tazilī theological debate [ edit ] Al-Jāḥiẓ intervened in a theological dispute between two Mu’tazilītes, and defended Abū al-Hudhayl al-'Allaf against the criticism of Bishr ibn al-Mu‘tamir .

[ 54 ] Another Mu‘tazilite theologian, Ja‘far ibn Mubashshir, [ n 14 ] wrote a  “refutation of al-Jāḥiẓ”.

[ 55 ] According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, he was "part of the rationalist Mu’tazilite school of theology supported by the caliph al-Maʾmūn and his successor. When Muʿtazilism was abandoned by the caliph al-Mutawakkil, al-Jāḥiẓ remained in favour by writing essays such as Manāqib at-turk (Eng. trans., “Exploits of the Turks”).

[ 56 ] Death [ edit ] Al-Jāḥiẓ returned to Basra with hemiplegia after spending more than fifty years in Baghdad . He died in Basra in the Arabic month of Muharram in AH 255/December 868 – January 869 AD.

[ 57 ] His exact cause of death is not clear, but a popular assumption is that al-Jāḥiẓ died in his private library after one of many large piles of books fell on him, killing him instantly.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Shu'ubiyya Ajam Al-Jāhiz (crater) List of Arab scientists and scholars References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ The ancestor of ‘Amr ibn Qal‘ was Abū al-Qallamas; [ 9 ] the first of the Nasāh [ 10 ] of the Banū Kināna who were overseers of observance of the religious holy months, when warfare was forbidden. His genealogy has been reported as ‘Amr ibn Qal‘ al-Kinānī, then al-Fuqaymī, a.k.a. ‘Amr ibn Qal‘ al-Kinānī al-Fuqaymī in an akhbār cited by al-Anbārī. Kinānī and Fuqaymī refer to the tribes of Kināna [ 11 ] and Fuqaym.

[ 12 ] ‘Amr ibn Qal‘s ancestor was one of the Nasah (Nasa’ah).

[ 13 ] ^ Abū Nuwās al-Ḥasan ibn Hāni’ (d. 810), licentious poet and court companion of Hārūn al-Rashīd .

^ al-Jammāz Muḥammad ibn ‘Amr, Abū ‘Abd Allāh (d. 868/869) a satirist and storyteller at the court of al-Mutawakkil ^ Probably the Caliph al-Ma’mūn, who made a special point of the doctrine of the creation of the Qur’ān.

[ 24 ] Al-Jāḥiẓ wrote numerous books about the caliphs, and which two books he refers to is unknown.

^ Dodge notes that al-Jāḥiẓ’s praise for the ‘Abbāsid lineage, and promotion of their ancestors, the Banū Hāshim, over the ‘Abd Shams, ancestors of the Umayyads, and the Banū Makhzūm, is evidentially political expedience.

^ The Simakān were two stars: al-Simāk al-A‘zal or Spica, and al-Simāk al-Rāmiḥ or Arcturus. The ‘Ayyūq was either Aldebaran in the constellation of Taurus, or else Capella.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] ^ The ‘Anqā was a fabled bird, also called Simurgh, that reigned as queen on Mount Qāf. The Ṣūfīs sometimes used the bird as an allegorical symbol of divine truth, so that the “Greatest King” probably refers to God.

^ Bayard Dodge in his editorial notes that he books about the caliphate undoubtedly tried to prove that it was the ‘Abbāsid caliphs who had the divine right to rule the Islamic theocracy and that al-Jāḥiẓ had put these words into the caliph’s mouth in an attempt to boast of his erudition and clarity of style.

[ 30 ] ^ Compare “al-Fihrist” (ed. Dodge, 1970), Ch. III, §.2, near n. 12; Ch. V, §.1.

^ Abū Hiffān 'Abd Allāh ibn Aḥmad ibn Ḥarb al-Mihzamī was a secretary and poet who died in Baghdād in 871.

^ Ismā’īl ibn Isḥāq ibn Ismā’īl ibn Ḥammād, al-Qāḍī  (d. 895/896) a jurist of Baṣrah who became a judge at Baghdād.

^ A copiest of MSS, or stationer, or bookshop owner.  Bookshops were often meeting places for scholarly debate.

[ 33 ] ^ Al-Fihrist gives a list of the first and last sentences of each section of the Kitāb al-Ḥayawān .

^ Ja‘far ibn Mubashshir al-Thaqafī, Abū Muḥammad, (d. 848/49) a Mu‘tazilah of Baghdād.

Citations [ edit ] ^ "al-Jāḥiẓ" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica, inc. 7 March 2012 . Retrieved 22 June 2020 .

^ Yāqūt 1907 , pp. 56–80, VI (6).

^ Baghdādī (al-) Khaṭīb 2001 , pp. 124–132, 14.

^ Pellat 1953 , p. 51.

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , pp. 397–409.

^ a b "Darwin's Ghosts, By Rebecca Stott" .

independent.co.uk . 31 May 2012.

Archived from the original on 4 June 2012 . Retrieved 19 June 2012 .

^ Blankinship (2020).

"Giggers, Greeners, Peyserts, and Palliards: Rendering Slang in al-Bukhalāʾ of al-Jāḥiẓ" .

Journal of the American Oriental Society .

140 (1): 17.

doi : 10.7817/jameroriesoci.140.1.0017 .

S2CID 219100706 .

^ a b Pellat, C. (1990).

"al-Jahiz" . In Ashtiany, Julia; Johnstone, T.M.; Latham, J.D.; Serjeat, R.B.; Rex Smith, G. (eds.).

Abbasid Belles Lettres . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. p. 81.

ISBN 9780521240161 . Retrieved 14 October 2023 .

A late tradition claims that Jahiz...was smothered to death under an avalanche of books.

^ Mas’ūdī (al-) 1864 , p. 116.

^ Bīrūnī (al-) 1878 , p. 12, l.1.

^ Watt 1986 , p. 116.

^ Durayd (Ibn) 1854 , p. 150.

^ a b c Nadīm (al-) 1970 , p. 398.

^ Al-Jahiz messages, Alwarraq edition, page 188; Yāqūt, Irshād al-arīb ilá ma`rifat al-adīb , ed. Iḥsān `Abbās, 7 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 1993), 5:2102.

^ Chuo Kikuu cha Dar es Salaam. Chuo cha Uchunguzi wa Lugha ya Kiswahili (1974).

Kiswahili . East African Swahili Committee. p. 16.

; Yāqūt, Irshād al-arīb ilá ma`rifat al-adīb , ed. Iḥsān `Abbās, 7 vols (Beirut: Dār al-Gharb al-Islāmī, 1993), 5:2102.

^ a b Haug & Judd 2023 , p. 226.

^ a b Al-Jubouri, I. M. N. (12 October 2010).

Islamic Thought: From Mohammed to September 11, 2001 . Xlibris Corporation.

ISBN 9781453595855 .

^ Haug & Judd 2023 , p. 222–225.

^ Haug & Judd 2023 , p. 225–226.

^ Yāqūt 1907 , p. 56.

^ Zaman, Muhammad Qasim (1997).

Religion and Politics Under the Early 'Abbasids: The Emergence of the Proto-Sunni Elite .

Leiden : E.J. Brill . p. 55.

ISBN 978-9-00410-678-9 .

^ Shawqi Daif , Introduction to Ibn Mada's Refutation of the Grammarians , pg. 48. Cairo, 1947.

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , p. 401.

^ Hitti, Philip K (1970).

History of The Arabs (10th ed.). Hong Kong: MacMillan Education Ltd. p.

429 .

ISBN 0-333-09871-4 .

^ Richardson, John (1852).

A dictionary, Persian, Arabic, and English . London: W.H. Allen. p.

1040 .

^ Lane, E. W.

(1874).

An Arabic English Lexicon Book-i, Part-v . London: Williams & Norgate. p.

2199 .

^ Richardson 1852 , p. 1032.

^ Browne, Edward G.

(1964).

Literary History of Persia . Vol. II. Cambridge: University Press. p.

33 n. 3.

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , p. 400, I, ch.5 §1.

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , p. 400 n.108.

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , pp. 262–3.

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , pp. 255, 398.

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , p. 929.

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , p. 255.

^ Yāqūt 1907 , p. 58, VI (6).

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , p. 399.

^ Khallikān (Ibn) 1843b , p. 405, ii.

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , p. 402.

^ Kennedy 2006 , p. 252.

^ "Islam's evolutionary legacy" .

TheGuardian.com . March 2009.

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , pp. 402–4.

^ F. E., Peters (1968).

Aristotle and the Arabs: The Aristotelian Tradition in Islam .

New York University Press . p. 133.

^ Mattock, J. N. (1971). "Review: Aristotle and the Arabs: The Aristotelian Tradition in Islam by F. E. Peters".

Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London .

34 (1): 147– 148.

doi : 10.1017/s0041977x00141722 .

JSTOR 614638 .

S2CID 223939666 .

...there is much more in al-Jāḥiẓ, enough to indicate that he used a version of Aristotle (or an epitome), but still not very much. If al-Baghdadi thought that the Kitab al-hayawan was a plagiarism of the Aristotelian work he was either a fool or unacquainted with Aristotle.

^ Zirkle C (1941). "Natural Selection before the 'Origin of Species' ".

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society .

84 (1): 71– 123.

^ Edgerton, Frank N. (2002).

"A History of the Ecological Sciences, Part 6: Arabic Language Science: Origins and Zoological Writings" .

Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America .

83 (2): 142– 146.

JSTOR 20168700 .

^ Stott, Rebecca (2013).

Darwin's Ghosts . Bloomsbury. p. 50.

ISBN 9781408831014 .

^ Jāḥiẓ (al-), Abū ‘Uthman ‘Amr ibn Bahr (1958). al-Ḥājirī, Ṭāhā (ed.).

Kitāb al-Bukhalā' (in Arabic). Cairo: Dār al-Ma‘ārif.

^ Jāḥiẓ (al-), Abū ‘Uthman ‘Amr ibn Bahr (1951).

Pellat , C. (ed.).

Kitāb al-Bukhalā' (Tr. Le Livre des avares) (in Arabic and French). Paris: Maisoneuve.

^ G. J. H. Van Gelder, Beyond the Line: Classical Arabic Literary Critics on the Coherence and Unity of the Poem , pg. 2. Volume 8 of Studies in Arabic literature: Supplements to the Journal of Arabic Literature. Leiden: Brill Publishers, 1982.

ISBN 9789004068544 ^ G.J. van Gelder, "Brevity in Classical Arabic Literary Theory." Taken from Proceedings of the Ninth Congress of the Union Européenne Des Arabisants et Islamisants: Amsterdam, 1 to 7 September 1978, pg. 81. Ed. Rudolph Peters. Volume 4 of Publications of the Netherlands Institute of Archaeology and Arabic Studies in Cairo. Leiden: Brill Archive, 1981.

ISBN 9789004063808 ^ Sharawi, Helmi, 'The African in Arab culture: Dynamics of Inclusion and Exclusion', in Imagining the Arab Other, How Arabs and Non-Arabs View Each Other , ed. by Tahar Labib (New York: I. B. Tauris, 2008), pp. 92-156 (p. 99); ISBN 9781845113841 .

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , p. 35.

^ "Medieval Sourcebook: Abû Ûthmân al-Jâhith: From The Essays, c. 860 CE" . Retrieved 2 October 2014 .

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , pp. 390–1.

^ Nadīm (al-) 1970 , p. 397.

^ "al-Jahiz | biography - Muslim theologian and scholar | Britannica.com" .

www.britannica.com . Archived from the original on 6 September 2015.

.

^ al-Ṣūlī, Muḥammad ibn Yaḥyá (1998).

Kniga listov . Sankt-Peterburg: T͡Sentr "Peterburgskoe vostokovedenie". p. 392.

Sources [ edit ] Haug, Robert; Judd, Steven, eds. (2023).

Islam on the Margins: Studies in Memory of Michael Bonner . BRILL.

ISBN 978-90-04-52783-6 .

Baghdādī (al-) Khaṭīb, Abū Bakr Aḥmad ibn ‘Alī (2001). "§6622)".

Tārīkh Baghdād aw madīnat al-salām (in Arabic). Vol. 14. Beirut: Dār al-Gharb al-Islāmi. pp.

124– 132.

Bīrūnī (al-), Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad (1878).

Sachau , Eduard (ed.).

Chronologie orientalischer Völker von Albērūnī (in Arabic). Leipzig: Brockhaus. p.

12 , l.1.

Durayd (Ibn), Abū Bakr Muḥammad ibn al-Ḥasan (1854).

Wüstenfeld , F. (ed.).

Kitāb al-Ishtiqāq (Ibn Doreid's genealogisch-etymologisches Handbuch) (in Arabic). Göttingen: Dieterich. p. 150.

Khallikān (Ibn), Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad (1843b).

Ibn Khallikan's Biographical Dictionary (tr. Wafayāt al-A'yān wa-al-Anbā Abnā' al-Zamān) . Vol. ii. Translated by McGuckin de Slane , William. London: W.H.Allen. pp.

405– 410.

Mas’ūdī (al-), Abū al-Ḥasan ‘Alī ibn al-Ḥusayn (1864).

Meynard (de) , C. Barbier; Courteille (de) , A. Pavet (eds.).

Kitāb al-Murūj al-Dhahab wa-Ma'ādin al-Jawhar (tr. Les Prairies d'or) (in Arabic and French). Vol. iii. Paris: Imprimerie impériale. p.

116 .

Montgomery, James (2013).

Al-Jāḥiẓ: In Praise of Books.

Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 978-0748683321 .

Nadīm (al-), Abū al-Faraj Muḥammad ibn Isḥāq Abū Ya’qūb al-Warrāq (1970).

Dodge , Bayard (ed.).

The Fihrist of al-Nadim; a tenth-century survey of Muslim culture . Vol. ii. New York & London: Columbia University Press. pp.

397– 409.

Pellat, Charles (1953), Le milieu baṣrien et la formation de Ğāḥiẓ (Doctoral dissertation, Université de Paris; Librairie d'Amérique et d'Orient) (in French), Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve, OCLC 7049520 Watt, W. Montgomery (1986), "Kināna" , in Bosworth, CE; Donzel, E van; Lewis, B; Pellat, C (eds.), Encyclopedia of Islam , vol. 5 (New ed.), Leiden: Brill, p. 116 Kennedy, Hugh (2006).

When Baghdad Ruled the Muslim World: The Rise and Fall of Islam's Greatest Dynasty . Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press.

ISBN 978-0-306814808 .

Yāqūt, Shīhab al-Dīn ibn ‘Abd Allāh al-Ḥamawī (1907), Margoliouth , D. S. (ed.), Irshād al-Arīb alā Ma'rifat al-Adīb (Yāqūt's Dictionary of Learned Men) (in Arabic), vol. VI, Leiden: Brill, pp.

56– 80 Further reading [ edit ] Jāḥiẓ; Pellat, C.

; Hawke, D. M. (1969).

The life and works of Jahiz : Transl. of selected texts . Berkeley and Los Angeles: Univ. of California Press.

OCLC 488398998 .

Khallikān (Ibn), Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad (1843).

Ibn Khallikan's Biographical Dictionary (tr. Wafayāt al-A'yān wa-al-Anbā Abnā' al-Zamān) . Vol. i. Translated by McGuckin de Slane , William. London: W.H. Allen. pp.

61 –74.

Khallikān (Ibn), Aḥmad ibn Muḥammad (1972).

Wafayāt al-A'yān wa-Anbā' Abnā' al-Zamān (in Arabic). Vol. III. Beirut: Dār Ṣādar. pp. 470–475 (§506 ).

Pellat, Charles; Kīlānī, Ibrāhīm (1961).

al-Ǧāḥiẓ fī al-Baṣrah wa Baḡdād wa Sāmirāʻ (in Arabic). Damas: Dar El-Yakaza.

Kennedy, Hugh N. (2010) [2007]. "Al-Jahiz and the Construction of Homosexuality at the Abbasid Court". In Harper, April; Proctor, Caroline (eds.).

Medieval Sexuality: A Casebook (Second ed.). London [u.a.]: Routledge. pp.

175– 188.

doi : 10.4324/9780203935026 .

ISBN 978-1-135-86634-1 .

al-Quda, Al-Qadi.

A Treasury of Virtues: Sayings, Sermons, and Teachings of Ali, with the One Hundred Proverbs, attributed to al-Jahiz . Vol. 26. NYU Press, 2013.

Yāqūt, Shihāb al-Dīn ibn ‘Abd al-Ḥamawī (c. 1229).

Margoliouth , D. S. (ed.).

Irshād al-Arīb alā Ma'rifat al-Adīb (in Arabic). Vol. VI (7). Leiden: Brill (published 1913).

Yāqūt, Shihāb al-Dīn ibn ‘Abd al-Ḥamawī (c. 1229). Abbās, Ihsan (ed.).

Irshād al-Arīb alā Ma'rifat al-Adīb (in Arabic). Beirut: Dār Gharib al-Islām i (published 1993). pp.

2101 -2122 (§872).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Al-Jahiz .

Plessner, M. (2008) [1970–80].

"Al-Jāḥith, Abū 'Uthmān 'Amr Ibn Baḥr" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Encyclopedia.com.

Kitāb al-Hayawān (Book of Animals), by al-Jāḥiẓ (Full Arabic text) Arabic literature v t e Arabic literature Old Namara inscription Pre-Islamic Arabic inscriptions Pre-Islamic Abu Layla al-Muhalhel Adi ibn Zayd Afira bint 'Abbad Al-Fāriʿah bint Shaddād Al-Hujayjah Al-Ḥurqah Al-Khirniq bint Badr Al-Shanfara Al-Nu'man ibn Humaydah 'Alqama ibn 'Abada 'Amir ibn al-Tufayl Amr ibn Kulthum Antarah ibn Shaddad Al-A'sha Harith ibn Hilliza Al-Yashkuri Hatim al-Tai Labīd Laila bint Lukaiz Mahd al-Aadiyya Mu'aqqir Al-Nabigha Imru' al-Qais Samaw'al ibn 'Adiya Tarafa Uthman ibn al-Huwayrith Zuhayr bin Abi Sulma Zuhayr ibn Janab Aktham ibn Saifi Al-Munakhal Classical Early Islamic Al-Akhtal al-Taghlibi Al-Farazdaq Abd al-Hamid al-Katib Fadl Ashsha'ira Hassan ibn Thabit Ibn Abi Hasina Maysun bint Bahdal Jamil ibn Ma'mar Suraqa bin Malik Jarir ibn Atiyah Ka'b bin Zuhayr Al-Khansa Kuthayyir Layla al-Akhyaliyya Suraqah al-Bariqi Qutayla ukht al-Nadr Waddah al-Yaman Yunus al-Katib al-Mughanni Zufar ibn al-Harith al-Kilabi Dhu Jadan al-Himyari Dorayd bin Al Soma Qatari ibn al-Fuja'a al-Mufaddal Abbasid era Bint al-Mahdī Ibn al-Ahnaf Ibn al-Mu'tazz Abu Firas al-Hamdani Abu Tammam Al-Mudabbir Abu'l-Qasimbal-Maghribi Arib al-Ma'muniyya Al-Asma'i Ahmad al-Tifashi Abu al-Atahiya ibn al-'Amid Al-Hamadani Baha' al-din Zuhair Bashshar ibn Burd Buhturi Al-Busiri Al-Isfahani Al-Fath ibn Khaqan Al-Hariri of Basra Ibn al-Farid Ibn al-Rumi Ibn Duraid al-Zajjaj Abu Mansur al-Azhari ibn al-Mahdi ibn al-Mudabbir Al-Ma'arri Marwan ibn Abi Hafsa Marwan ibn Abi al-Janub Al-Mutanabbi Abu Nuwas Al-Jahiz Shāriyah Al-Armanazi Aban al-Lahiqi Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani Rabia of Basra Yunus ibn Habib Abu Nasr al-Jawhari Al-Farahidi Al-Shafi'i Ibn al-Muqaffa' Al-Mubarrad Ibn Abi Tahir Tayfur Safiyya al-Baghdadiyya Al-Zahiri Abu Muhammad al-Anbari Ibn al-Anbari Al-Qasabani Ibn Qutaybah Dik al-Jinn ‘Inān Abu Ahmad Monajjem Ibn Bakkar Al-Sarī al-Raffā’ Al-Suli Niftawayh Al-Tughrai Laylā bint Ṭarīf Al-Tha'alibi Al-Daylami al-Tawhīdī Al-Sharif al-Radi Ibn Hayyus Al-Raghib al-Isfahani Sharif al-Murtaza Al Uyuni Yaqut al-Hamawi Al Suhrawardi Al-Hallaj Usama ibn Munqidh Ibn al-Qatta' al-Siqilli Ibn al-Shajari Ibn al-Nafis Ibn 'Adlan Al-Andalus and Maghreb Abu Ja'far Al-Rumaikiyya Maria Alphaizuli Ibn Ammar Buthaina Al-Rukuniyya Hamda bint Ziyad al-Muaddib Ibn Hamdis Ibn Abd Rabbih Ibn al-Abbar Ibn al-Zaqqaq Ibn Amira Ibn Baqi Ibn Bassam Ibn Juzayy Ibn Khafaja Ibn al-Khatib Ibn Quzman Ibn Sahl Ibn Zamrak Ibn Zaydún Lubna of Córdoba Al-Mu'tamid ibn Abbad ibn Hani al-Azdi Muhya Nazhun Qasmuna Al-Tutili Umm Al-Kiram Yusuf III Yusuf III Ibn Hazm Ibn Arabi al-Shushtari Abu Madyan al-Rundi Ibn al-Arif Ibn Wahbun Ibn Abdun Avempace al-Baji al-Fazazi Ibn al-Yayyab Ibn Jubayr Ibn al-Kattani Ibn Tufayl Ibn Abi al-Khisal Mamluk era Ahmad ibn Arabshah Al-Busiri Ibn Manzur Ibn Battuta 'A'isha al-Ba'uniyya Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Nubata al-Nafzawi Ibn Khaldun Al-Qalqashandi Ottoman era Al-Nabulsi Fuzûlî Abdul Qadir al-Baghdadi Hanna Diyab Ibn al-Wannan Ahmed Ben Triki Modern Nahda El Baroudy Maruf al Rusafi Nasif al-Yaziji Ibrahim al-Yaziji Jamil Sidqi al-Zahawi Ahmad Faris Shidyaq Naoum Mokarzel Ahmad Rida Ameen Rihani Qustaki al-Himsi al-Kawakibi Suleyman al-Boustani Butrus al-Bustani Ahmad Zaki Pasha Rifa'a al-Tahtawi Abdallah Marrash Francis Marrash Maryana Marrash Hafez Ibrahim Ahmed Shawqi Mikhail Naimy Kahlil Gibran Farah Antun Jurji Zaydan May Ziadeh Taha Hussein Tawfiq al-Hakim Contemporary Nawal El Saadawi Naguib Mahfouz Yusuf Idris Sonallah Ibrahim Ahlam Mosteghanemi Mahmoud Darwish Adunis Ahmad Abd al-Ghafur Attar Abdur Rahman Kashgari Muhammad al-Maghut Nizar Qabbani Abbās al-Aqqād Mustafa Wahbi al-Tal Said Akl Fayeq Abdul-Jaleel Sinan Antoon Ibrahim Tuqan Emile Habibi Ghassan Kanafani Ghada al-Samman Abdul Rahman Munif al-Gosaibi Echebbi Hanna Mina Colette Khoury Saadallah Wannous Zakaria Tamer Tayeb Salih Leila Aboulela Ihsan Abdel Quddous al-Aswany Mohamed Choukri Leila Abouzeid Mohammed Bennis Abdellatif Laabi Mohamed Said Raihani Waciny Laredj Tahar Djaout Alifa Rifaat Ali Douagi Youssef Rzouga Salah Jahin Amal Donqol Ahmed Zaki Abu Shadi Hasan Tawfiq al-Mazini al-Jawahiri Safa Khulusi Nazik Al-Malaika Ahmed Matar Al-Bayati al-Sayyab Saadi Yousef Ibrahim Nasrallah Elia Abu Madi Omar Abu Risha Yusuf al-Khal Mourid Barghouti Jabra Ibrahim Jabra al-Qasim Fadwa Tuqan Nuri Ayyub National literatures of Arab states Algeria Bahrain Comoros Djibouti Egypt Copto-Arabic Iraq Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco Oman Palestine Qatar Saudi Arabia Somalia Sudan Syria Tunisia U.A.E.

Yemen v t e Islamic theology Fields Theologians Books Fields Aqidah Eschatology Ethics Kalam Philosophy ‘Aql Education Logic Peace Science Astronomy Cosmology Physics Sufism Cosmology Metaphysics Philosophy Theologians Ash'arism ( al-Ash'ari ) Al-Bayhaqi Al-Baqillani Al-Juwayni Al-Qushayri Al-Shahrastani Al-Ghazali Al-Taftazani Al-Maziri Ibn Furak Ibn Abi Zayd al-Qayrawani Zakariyya al-Ansari Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Abu Ishaq al-Isfara'ini Ibn Aqil Ibn Tumart Abdul Qadir Gilani Abu al-Walid al-Baji Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi Ibn al-Jawzi Qadi Ayyad Ahmad al-Rifa'i Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Sayf al-Din al-Amidi Izz al-Din ibn 'Abd al-Salam Taqi al-Din al-Subki Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati Al-Baydawi Ibn Khaldun Ibn Arafa Abd al-Rahman al-Tha'alibi Ibn Hajar al-Haytami Al-Sha'rani Jalal al-Din al-Dawani Al-Maqqari al-Tilmisani Abd al-Rahman al-Fasi Ibn Ashir Al-Bahūtī Muhammad Mayyara Abu Ali al-Hassan al-Yusi 'Illish Ibrahim al-Bajuri Abdullah ibn Alawi al-Haddad Ahmad al-Dardir Muhammad Arafa al-Desouki Ahmad Zayni Dahlan Said Nursî Early Sunni Abū Ḥanīfah al-Nu'mān ibn Thābit ( Hanafiyah ) Malik ibn Anas ( Maliki ) Al-Shafi'i ( Shafi‘i ) Maturidism ( Al-Maturidi ) Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi Al-Sarakhsi Al-Bazdawi Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi 'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari Al-Sharif al-Jurjani Akmal al-Din al-Babarti Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi Nur al-Din al-Sabuni Najm al-Din 'Umar al-Nasafi Siraj al-Din al-Ushi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Khidr Bey Ibn Kemal Ali Qushji Ali al-Qari Al-Maydani Ahmad Sirhindi Anwar Shah Kashmiri Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Shah Abdul Aziz Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri Zakariyya Kandhlawi Rahmatullah Kairanawi Murtada al-Zabidi Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi Muhammad Abu Zahra Kanthapuram A. P. Aboobacker Musliyar Rumi Mu'attila Al-Ja'd ibn Dirham Mu'jbira Abū Muḥrīz Jahm ibn Ṣafwān ar-Rāsibī as-Samarqāndī at-Tirmidhī Jahmīyya Abū Abdirrahmān Bishr ibn Ghiyāth ibn Abī Karīma al-Marīsī al-Baghdādī Mu'jassimā Abu’l-Hassan Muqātil ibn Sulaymān ibn Bashīr al-Azdī al- |Balkhī (Muqātilīyya) Abū Muḥāmmad (Abū’l-Hākem) Heshām ibn Sālem al-Jawālikī al- Juzjanī al- Kūfī Jawālikīyya Rum Abdals Ibn Karram ( Karramiyya ) Murji'ah Abū Marwān Gaylān ibn Mūslīm ad- Dimashqī an- Nabati al-Qībtī ( Murjī - Qadariyah ) Mu'tazila ( Wasil ibn 'Ata' ) Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm ibn Sayyār ibn Hāni’ an-Nazzām (Nazzāmīyya) Abū Bakr Abdurrahmān ibn Kaysān al-Asāmm Abū Mūsā Isā ibn Subeyh (Sabīh) al-Murdār al-Bāsrī (Murdārīyya) Hīshām ibn Amr al-Fuwātī ash-Shaybānī (Hīshāmīyya) Abū Sahl Abbād ibn Sulaimān (Salmān) as-Sāymarī Abū Alī Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb ibn Sallām al-Jubbā'ī (Jubbāīyya) Abū’l-Hūsayn Abdūrrāhīm ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Uthmān al-Hayyāt (Hayyātīyya) Ja'far ibn Harb Ja'far ibn Mūbassīr Abū Uthmān Amr ibn Bhār ibn Māhbūb al-Jāhiz al-Kinānī (Jāhizīyya) Al-Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar Abu al-Husayn al-Basri Al-Zamakhshari Amr ibn Ubayd Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Sahib ibn Abbad Abū Amr Ḍirār ibn Amr al-Gatafānī al-Kūfī (Ḍirārīyya) Najjārīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh al-Husayn ibn Muḥāmmad ibn ʿAbdillāh an-Najjār ar-Rāzī Abū Amr (Abū Yahyā) Hāfs al-Fard Muḥāmmad ibn ʿĪsā (Burgūsīyya) Abū ʿAbdallāh Ibnū’z-Zā‘farānī (Zā‘farānīyya) Mustadrakīyya Salafi Theologians Ibn Taymiyyah Ibnul Qayyim Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Wahhabism Al-Shawkani Rashid Rida Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i Al-Albani Saleh Al-Fawzan Rabee al-Madkhali Madkhalism Syed Nazeer Husain Ahl-i Hadith Siddiq Hasan Khan Zubair Ali Zai Safar Al-Hawali Sahwa movement Salman al-Ouda Osama bin Laden Salafi Jihadism Ahmad ibn Umar al-Hazimi Hazimism Yasir Qadhi Post-Salafism Twelver Shi'ism Twelve Imams Ali Hasan ibn Ali Husayn ibn Ali Ali al-Sajjad Muhammad al-Baqir Ja'far al-Sadiq Musa al-Kazim Ali al-Rida Muhammad al-Jawad Ali al-Hadi Hasan al-Askari Muhammad al-Mahdi Al-Shaykh Al-Mufid Sharif al-Murtaza Shaykh Tusi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Allamah Al-Hilli Mohammad-Baqer Majlesi Zurarah ibn A'yan Hisham ibn Hakam Agha Zia ol Din Araghi Ja'far Sobhani Ruhollah Khomeini Wilayat al-faqih Isma'ili Shi'ism Al-Qadi al-Nu'man Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani Al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Naysaburi Abu'l-Fawaris Ahmad ibn Ya'qub Tayyibi Ismā'īlī doctrine Dhu'ayb ibn Musa Hassan Ala Dhikrihi's Salam Idris Imad al-Din Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Walid Zaydi Shi'ism Abu'l-Jarud al-Hamdani Ahmad ibn Isa ibn Zayd Al-Qasim al-Rassi Al-Hadi ila'l-Haqq Yahya Al-Mansur al-Qasim Key books Sunni books Asas al-Taqdis Al-Baz al-Ashhab Al-Farq bayn al-Firaq Al-Milal wa al-Nihal Al-Irshad Al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah Al-Sawad al-A'zam Kitab al-Tawhid Tabsirat al-Adilla Masnavi Fihi Ma Fihi Divan-i Shams-i Tabrizi The Moderation in Belief Shia books Eʿteqādātal-Emāmīya Al-Amali Al-Khisal Awail Al Maqalat Tashih al-I'tiqad Tajrid al-I'tiqad Independent Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Kitab al-Majmu of Alawis Malfūzāt of Ahmadiyya Umm al-kitab of Musta'li Isma'ilism Early Muslim scholars List of contemporary Muslim scholars of Islam Islamic schools and branches Sunni Islam Ahl al-Hadith ( Atharism ) Kullabiyya Ibn Kullab Hanbalis Ahmad ibn Hanbal Al-Qadi Abu Ya'la Khwaja Abdullah Ansari Zahiris Dawud al-Zahiri Salafism Ahl-i Hadith Syed Nazeer Husain / Siddiq Hasan Khan Wahhabism Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Al-Albani Other Salafi trends Jihadism Madkhalism Sahwa Salafi Modernism Muhammad bin Dawud Maqrizi Ahl ar-Ra'y ( Ilm al-Kalam ) Ash'arism Malikis Shafi'is Abdullah al-Harari – Al-Ahbash Maturidism Hanafis Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi / Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Muhammad Qasim Nanautavi / Rashid Ahmad Gangohi – Deobandi Shia Islam Zaydism Zayd ibn Ali Jarudiyya Batriyya Imamate Alid dynasties of northern Iran Hasan al-Utrush Yahya ibn Umar Imams of Yemen Extinct Zaydi Shi'a sects Dukayniyya Khalafiyya Imami Mahdiist Shi'ite Sects in Islam Imami Twelver Theology of Twelvers Ja'fari Akhbari Usuli Shaykhism Qizilbash Sheikh Haydar / Shah Ismail / Pir Sultan / Kul Nesîmî – Safavid Islam Ghulat al-Khaṣībī / ibn Nusayr – Alawites Astarabadi (Naimi) / Imadaddin Nasimi – Hurufism / Bektashism Baktāshism Demir Bābā – Alians Bābā Rexheb – Hārābātīs Imami Isma'ilism Fathite Abdallah al-Aftah Batiniyyah Hamdan Qarmat – Sevener Qarmatians Hamza / Baha al-Din al-Muqtana / ad-Darazi – Druzes Fatimids Musta'li Tayyibi Alavi Dawoodi Sulaymani Hafizi Nasir Khusraw al-Qubadiani – Badakhshan Alevism Nizari Hassan-i Sabbah – Assassins Aga Khans – Nizaris / Khojas Pir Sadardin – Satpanth Kaysanites Shia Mukhtār Abū ʿAmra Kaysān Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah – Hashimiyya Hārbīyya ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Hārb ibn al-Kindi Janāhiyya Abdallah ibn Mu'awiya Hārithīyya Riyāhīyya Sam‘ānīyya Bayān ibn Sam‘ān Rezāmīyya Abu Muslim Sunpadh Muḥammirah Khurramites Babak Mazyar al-Muqanna Ishaq al-Turk Khashabiyya Shia Other Mahdists An-Nafs Az-Zakiyyah Hurufiyya Maḥmūd Pasīkhānī – Nuktawiyya Shayki Nuqta-yi Ula – Bábīyya Tawussite Shia ʿAjlan ibn Nawus Waqifite Shia Muhakkima ( Arbitration ) Kharijites Ajardi Abd al-Karīm ibn Adjrād Maymunīyyah Sa'labīyyah Azariqa Nafi ibn al-Azraq al-Hānafī al-Handhalī Bayhasīyyah Abu Bayhas al-Hāytham ibn Jābir Najdat Najdah ibn 'Amir al-Hānafī Sufri Abu Qurra Abū Yazīd Mukhallad ibn Kayrād al- Nukkari Ibadism 'Abdullāh ibn Ibāḍ al-Tamimi Jābir ibn Zayd Abu Qudama Yazid ibn Fandin al- Ifrani Abd Allah ibn Wahb al-Rasibi Wahbiyyah Azzabas Murji'ah ( Hasan ibn Muḥāmmad ibn al- Hanafiyyah ) Karrāmīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh Muḥāmmad ibn Karrām ibn Arrāk ibn Huzāba ibn al-Barā’ as-Sijjī ʿĀbidīyya (ʿUthmān al-ʿĀbid) Dhīmmīyya Hakāiqīyya Haisamīyya (Abū ʿAbdallāh Muhammad ibn al-Haisam) Hīdīyya (Hīd ibn Saif) Ishāqīyya (Abū Yaʿqūb Ishāq ibn Mahmashādh) Maʿīyya Muhājirīyya (Ibrāhīm ibn Muhājir) Nūnīyya Razīnīyya Sauwāqīyya Sūramīyya Tarā'ifīyya (Ahmad ibn ʿAbdūs at-Tarā'ifī) Tūnīyya (Abū Bakr ibn ʿAbdallāh) Wāhidīyya Zarībīyya Other sects Gaylānīyya Gaylān ibn Marwān Yūnusīyya Yūnus ibn Awn an-Namīrī Gassānīyya Gassān al-Kūfī Tūmanīyya Abū Muāz at-Tūmanī Sawbānīyya Abū Sawbān al-Murjī Sālehīyya Sāleh ibn Umar Shamrīyya Abū Shamr Ubaydīyya Ubayd al-Mūktaib Ziyādīyya Muhammad ibn Ziyād al-Kūfī Other Murjīs Al-Harith ibn Surayj Sa'id ibn Jubayr Hammād ibn Abū Sūlaimān Muhārīb ibn Dithār Sābit Kutna Awn ibn Abdullāh Mūsā ibn Abū Kasīr Umar ibn Zar Salm ibn Sālem Hālaf ibn Ayyūb Ibrāhim ibn Yousūf Nusayr ibn Yahyā Ahmad ibn Hārb Amr ibn Murrah Mu'shabbiha Tamsīl Jawārībīyya Dāwūd al-Jawāribî Hāshwīyya Hulmānīyya Abū Hulmān al- Fārisī ad- Dimashqī Qalandariyya Barak Baba Tajsīm Khaṭṭābiyya Abu al-Khattab Bāzīghiyya Bāzīgh ibn Mūsā Muʿāmmarīyya Muʿāmmar ibn Ahmar ʿIjlīyya/Umayrīyya Umayr ibn Bayān al-ʿIjlī Mufaḍḍaliyya al-Mufaddal ibn Umar al-Ju'fi Ghurābīyya Mānsūrīyya Abū Mānsūr al-ʿIjlī Mughīrīyya Abū Abdillāh Mugīre ibn Sāīd al-ʿIjlī el-Bajalī Mukhāmmīsa Namiriya ‘Ulyanīyya/'Alyaīyya Saba'īyya Abdullah ibn Saba' Qadariyah ( Ma'bad al-Juhani ) Alevism Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar – Malamatiyya / Qalandariyya Baba Ishak – Babai revolt Balım Sultan – Bektashi Order Galip Hassan Kuscuoglu – Galibi Order Muʿtazila ( Rationalism ) Mā’marīyya Abū Amr (Abū Mu‘tamīr) Muāmmar ibn Abbād as-Sūlamī Bishriyya Abū Sahl Bīshr ibn al-Mu‘tamīr al-Hilālī al-Baghdādī Abū Abdi’l-Lāh Ahmad ibn Abī Du'ad Faraj ibn Carīr ibn Mâlik al-Iyādī Bahshamiyya Abū Hāshīm Abdu’s-Salām ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb al-Jubbā'ī Huzaylīyya Abū’l-Huzayl Muḥāmmad ibn al-Huzayl ibn Abdillāh al-Allāf al-Abdī al-Bāsrī Abū Ma‘n Sūmāma ibn Ashras an-Nūmayrī al-Bāsrī al-Baghdādī Ikhshīdiyya Nazzāmīyya Ali al-Aswarī Abū Bakr Muḥāmmad ibn Abdillāh ibn Shabīb al-Basrī Hābītīyya Ahmad ibn Hābīt Sumamīyya Sumāma ibn Ashras Kā‘bīyya Abū’l-Kāsīm Abdullāh ibn Ahmad ibn Māhmūd al-Balhī al-Kā‘bī Quranism Ahle Qur'an Kala Kato United Submitters International Rashad Khalifa Edip Yüksel Independent Muslim beliefs Messianism Ahmadiyya Mirza Ghulam Qadiani Lahori Kabbalist Dönmes Sabbatai Zevi – Sabbatean Mahdavīyya Muhammad Jaunpuri / Bandagi Mian Syed Khundmir – Zikris Nation of Islam Wallace Fard Muhammad 's doctrine Modernism Modernist Salafism Muhammad Abduh Muhammad Asad Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani Rashid Rida Other Islamic modernists Taṣawwuf Tariqah Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Hilmi Tunahan – Süleymancı Ahmad al-Rifa'i – Rifa`i Other orders Tawassul Other beliefs Sadaqah Sunnah Taqwa Tawakkul Tewafuq Thawab Other scholars of Sunni schools of jurisprudence : Hanafi Hanbali Maliki Shafi'i Zahiri v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐br9zf
Cached time: 20250817045026
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.376 seconds
Real time usage: 1.649 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10397/1000000
Revision size: 39252/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 429510/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12869/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 194911/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.878/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23375522/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1345.756      1 -total
 19.53%  262.817      2 Template:Reflist
 14.52%  195.436     28 Template:Cite_book
 13.84%  186.312      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 11.55%  155.397      3 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.41%  126.698      2 Template:Langx
  9.38%  126.166     33 Template:Sfn
  7.59%  102.121      1 Template:Infobox_religious_biography
  7.18%   96.578      2 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  6.92%   93.132      1 Template:Arabic_literature Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:641954:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045026 and revision id 1303386003. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Al-Jahiz&oldid=1303386003 " Categories : Darwinism 776 births 860s deaths 8th-century Arab people 9th-century Arab people Mu'tazilites Quranist Muslims 9th-century Muslim scholars of Islam Arab writers Medieval Arabic literature 9th-century Arabic-language writers Writers from Basra Zoologists of the medieval Islamic world 9th-century people from the Abbasid Caliphate Scholars from the Abbasid Caliphate Hidden categories: CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2019 Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013 CS1: long volume value Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 17:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Al-Jahiz 44 languages Add topic

