Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Family and childhood Toggle Family and childhood subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Education and move to Illinois 1.3 Marriage and children 1.4 Early vocations and militia service 2 Early political offices and prairie lawyer Toggle Early political offices and prairie lawyer subsection 2.1 Illinois state legislature (1834–1842) 2.2 U.S. House of Representatives (1847–1849) 2.3 Prairie lawyer 3 Republican politics (1854–1860) Toggle Republican politics (1854–1860) subsection 3.1 Emergence as Republican leader 3.1.1 1856 campaign 3.1.2 Dred Scott v. Sandford 3.2 Lincoln–Douglas debates and Cooper Union speech 3.3 1860 presidential election 4 Presidency (1861–1865) Toggle Presidency (1861–1865) subsection 4.1 First term 4.1.1 Secession and inauguration 4.1.2 Personnel 4.1.3 Commander-in-Chief 4.1.4 Early Union military strategy 4.1.5 McClellan 4.1.6 Emancipation Proclamation 4.1.7 Gettysburg Address (1863) 4.1.8 Promoting Grant 4.1.9 Fiscal and monetary policy 4.1.10 Foreign policy 4.1.11 Native Americans 4.2 Second term 4.2.1 Re-election 4.2.2 Reconstruction 4.2.3 Assassination 4.2.4 Funeral and burial 5 Philosophy and views Toggle Philosophy and views subsection 5.1 Religious skepticism and providence 6 Health and appearance 7 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 7.1 Historical reputation 7.2 Memorials and commemorations 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Sources 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Abraham Lincoln 204 languages Acèh Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chi-Chewa ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Dolnoserbski डोटेली Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 گیلکی ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni Gungbe 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar Madhurâ मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano ߒߞߏ Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pangcah پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ سرائیکی Sardu Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Tyap Тыва дыл Українська اردو Vahcuengh Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Batak Mandailing Ghanaian Pidgin Yerwa Kanuri Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia President of the United States from 1861 to 1865 For other uses, see Abraham Lincoln (disambiguation) .

"President Lincoln" redirects here. For the troopship, see USS President Lincoln .

Abraham Lincoln Lincoln in 1863 16th President of the United States In office March 4, 1861 – April 15, 1865 Vice President Hannibal Hamlin (1861–1865) Andrew Johnson (Mar–Apr. 1865) Preceded by James Buchanan Succeeded by Andrew Johnson Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Illinois 's 7th district In office March 4, 1847 – March 3, 1849 Preceded by John Henry Succeeded by Thomas L. Harris Member of the Illinois House of Representatives from Sangamon County In office December 1, 1834 – December 4, 1842 Preceded by Achilles Morris Personal details Born ( 1809-02-12 ) February 12, 1809 near Hodgenville, Kentucky , U.S.

Died April 15, 1865 (1865-04-15) (aged 56) Washington, D.C., U.S.

Manner of death Assassination by gunshot Resting place Lincoln Tomb Political party Whig (before 1856) Republican (after 1856) Other political affiliations National Union (1864–1865) Height 6 ft 4 in (193 cm) [ 1 ] Spouse Mary Todd ​ ( m.

1842 ) ​ Relatives Lincoln family Occupation Politician lawyer Signature Military service Branch/service Illinois Militia Years of service April–July 1832 Rank Captain [ a ] Private [ a ] Battles/wars Black Hawk War (see Abraham Lincoln in the Black Hawk War ) Abraham Lincoln [ b ] (February 12, 1809 – April 15, 1865) was the 16th president of the United States , serving from 1861 until his assassination in 1865. He led the United States through the American Civil War , defeating the Confederate States of America and playing a major role in the abolition of slavery .

Lincoln was born into poverty in Kentucky and raised on the frontier . He was self-educated and became a lawyer, Illinois state legislator , and U.S. representative . Angered by the Kansas–Nebraska Act of 1854, which opened the territories to slavery, he became a leader of the new Republican Party . He reached a national audience in the 1858 Senate campaign debates against Stephen A. Douglas . Lincoln won the 1860 presidential election , prompting the slave states to begin to secede and form the Confederate States of America. A month after Lincoln assumed the presidency, Confederate forces attacked Fort Sumter , starting the Civil War.

Lincoln, a moderate Republican , had to navigate a contentious array of factions in managing conflicting political opinions during the war effort. Lincoln closely supervised the strategy and tactics in the war effort, including the selection of generals, and implemented a naval blockade of Southern ports. He suspended the writ of habeas corpus in April 1861, an action that Chief Justice Roger Taney found unconstitutional in Ex parte Merryman , and he averted war with Britain by defusing the Trent Affair . On January 1, 1863, he issued the Emancipation Proclamation , which declared the slaves in the states "in rebellion" to be free. On November 19, 1863, he delivered the Gettysburg Address , which became one of the most famous speeches in American history. He promoted the Thirteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution , which, in 1865, abolished chattel slavery .

Re-elected in 1864 , he sought to heal the war-torn nation through Reconstruction .

On April 14, 1865, five days after the Confederate surrender at Appomattox , Lincoln was attending a play at Ford's Theatre in Washington, D.C., when he was fatally shot by Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth . Lincoln is remembered as a martyr and a national hero for his wartime leadership and for his efforts to preserve the Union and abolish slavery.

He is often ranked in both popular and scholarly polls as the greatest president in American history.

This article is part of a series about Abraham Lincoln Personal Early life and career Family Health Religious views Sexuality Patent Artifacts and relics Photographs Black Hawk War Political Spot Resolutions Political career, 1849–1861 Baltimore Plot Douglas debates Views on slavery 16th President of the United States Presidency Transition Inaugurations first second Tenure American Civil War The Union Proclamation 80 Emancipation Proclamation Ten percent plan 13th Amendment Reconstruction Presidential campaigns 1860 election convention 1864 election convention Speeches and works Inaugural speeches first second State of the Union 1861 1862 1863 1864 Lyceum Peoria Lost Speech House Divided Cooper Union Farewell address Gettysburg Poetry " The Suicide's Soliloquy " Bixby letter McCullough letter Assassination Baltimore Plot State funeral Tomb Catafalque Flags Hearse Lincoln–Kennedy coincidences Legacy Historical reputation Memorials Depictions Lincoln's Birthday Ghost Bibliography Topical guide v t e Family and childhood Early life Main article: Early life and career of Abraham Lincoln Abraham Lincoln was born into hardship on February 12, 1809, in a log cabin on Sinking Spring Farm near Hodgenville, Kentucky .

[ 3 ] [ 1 ] The second child of Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks Lincoln , he was a descendant of Samuel Lincoln , an Englishman who migrated from England to Massachusetts in 1638, [ 4 ] and of the Harrison family of Virginia .

[ c ] His paternal grandfather and namesake, Captain Abraham Lincoln , moved the family from Virginia to Kentucky . The captain was killed in a Native American raid in 1786.

[ 4 ] The family settled in Hardin County, Kentucky , in the early 1800s.

[ 6 ] Lincoln's mother Nancy is widely assumed to have been the daughter of Lucy Hanks.

[ 7 ] Thomas and Nancy married on June 12, 1806, and moved to Elizabethtown, Kentucky .

[ 8 ] They had three children: Sarah, Abraham, and Thomas; Thomas died as an infant.

[ 9 ] Lincoln's father bought multiple farms in Kentucky but could not get clear property titles to any, losing hundreds of acres in legal disputes.

[ 10 ] In 1816, the family moved to Indiana , where land titles were more reliable.

[ 11 ] They settled on a forested plot in Little Pigeon Creek Community , Indiana.

[ 12 ] In Kentucky and Indiana, Thomas worked as a farmer, cabinetmaker, and carpenter.

[ 13 ] At various times he owned farms, livestock, and town lots, appraised estates, and served on county patrols. Thomas and Nancy were members of a Separate Baptist Church , a pious evangelical group whose members largely opposed slavery.

[ 14 ] Overcoming financial challenges, Thomas obtained clear title to 80 acres (32 ha) in Indiana's Little Pigeon Creek Community in 1827.

[ 15 ] On October 5, 1818, Nancy Lincoln died from milk sickness , leaving 11-year-old Sarah in charge of the household, which included her father, 9-year-old Abraham, and Nancy's 19-year-old orphan cousin, Dennis Hanks.

[ 16 ] Ten years later, on January 20, 1828, Sarah died in childbirth, devastating Lincoln.

[ 17 ] On December 2, 1819, Thomas married Sarah Bush Johnston , a widow with three children of her own.

[ 1 ] Abraham became close to his stepmother and called her "Mama".

[ 18 ] Education and move to Illinois Lincoln was largely self-educated.

[ 19 ] His formal schooling was from itinerant teachers . It included two short stints in Kentucky, where he learned to read, but probably not to write. After moving to Indiana at age seven, he attended school only sporadically, for a total of less than 12 months by age 15.

[ 20 ] Nonetheless, he was an avid reader and retained a lifelong interest in learning.

[ 21 ] When Lincoln was a teenager his father relied heavily on him for farmwork and for supplementary income, hiring the boy out to area farmers and pocketing the money, as was the custom at the time.

[ 22 ] Lincoln and some friends took goods by flatboat to New Orleans , Louisiana, where the slave markets , according to the historian Michael Burlingame , "would leave an indelible impression on him.... It was the first time, but not the last, that he would be repelled while observing slavery firsthand." [ 23 ] In March 1830, fearing another milk-sickness outbreak, several members of the extended Lincoln family, including Abraham, moved west to Illinois and settled in Macon County .

[ 24 ] Abraham became increasingly distant from Thomas, in part due to his father's lack of interest in education; [ 25 ] he would later refuse to attend his father's deathbed or funeral in 1851.

[ 1 ] Marriage and children Further information: Lincoln family , Health of Abraham Lincoln , and Sexuality of Abraham Lincoln Mary Todd Lincoln with Willie and Tad Some historians, such as Michael Burlingame, identify Lincoln's first romantic interest as Ann Rutledge , a young woman also from Kentucky whom he met when he moved to New Salem, Illinois .

[ 26 ] Lewis Gannett , however, disputes that the evidence supports a romantic relationship between the two.

[ 27 ] David Herbert Donald states that "How that friendship [between Lincoln and Rutledge] developed into a romance cannot be reconstructed from the record".

[ 28 ] Rutledge died on August 25, 1835, of typhoid fever . Lincoln took her death very hard, sinking into a serious depression and contemplating suicide.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] In the early 1830s, he met Mary Owens from Kentucky.

[ 31 ] Late in 1836, Lincoln agreed to a match with Owens if she returned to New Salem. Owens arrived that November and he courted her, but they both had second thoughts. On August 16, 1837, he wrote Owens a letter saying he would not blame her if she ended the relationship, and she declined to marry him.

[ 32 ] In 1839, Lincoln met Mary Todd in Springfield, Illinois , and the following year they became engaged.

[ 33 ] She was the daughter of Robert Smith Todd , a wealthy lawyer and businessman in Lexington, Kentucky .

[ 34 ] Lincoln initially broke off the engagement in early 1841, but the two were reconciled and married on November 4, 1842.

[ 35 ] In 1844, the couple bought a house in Springfield near his law office.

[ 36 ] The marriage was turbulent; Mary was verbally abusive and at times physically violent towards her husband.

[ 37 ] They had four sons. The eldest, Robert Todd Lincoln , was born in 1843, and was the only child to live to maturity.

Edward Baker Lincoln (Eddie), born in 1846, died February 1, 1850, probably of tuberculosis . Lincoln's third son, "Willie" Lincoln , was born on December 21, 1850, and died of a fever at the White House on February 20, 1862. The youngest, Thomas "Tad" Lincoln , was born on April 4, 1853, and died of edema at age 18 on July 16, 1871.

[ 38 ] Lincoln loved children, [ 39 ] and the Lincolns were not considered to be strict with their own.

[ 40 ] The deaths of Eddie and Willie had profound effects on both parents. Lincoln suffered from " melancholy ", a condition now thought to be clinical depression .

[ 30 ] Early vocations and militia service Further information: Early life and career of Abraham Lincoln and Abraham Lincoln in the Black Hawk War In 1831, Lincoln's father moved the family to a new homestead in Coles County, Illinois , after which Abraham struck out on his own.

[ 41 ] He made his home in New Salem, Illinois , for six years.

[ 42 ] During 1831 and 1832, Lincoln worked at a general store in New Salem.

[ 43 ] He gained a reputation for strength and courage after winning a wrestling match with the leader of a group of ruffians known as the Clary's Grove boys.

[ 44 ] In 1832, he declared his candidacy for the Illinois House of Representatives , though he interrupted his campaign to serve as a captain in the Illinois Militia during the Black Hawk War .

[ 43 ] He was elected the captain of his militia company but did not see combat.

[ 45 ] In his political campaigning, Lincoln advocated for navigational improvements on the Sangamon River .

[ 46 ] He drew crowds as a raconteur , but he lacked name recognition, powerful friends, and money, and he lost the election.

[ 47 ] When Lincoln returned home from the war, he planned to become a blacksmith but instead purchased a New Salem general store in partnership with William Berry. Because a license was required to sell customers alcoholic beverages, Berry obtained bartending licenses for Lincoln and himself, and in 1833 the Lincoln–Berry General Store became a tavern as well.

[ 48 ] But according to Burlingame, Berry was "an undisciplined, hard-drinking fellow", and Lincoln "was too soft-hearted to deny anyone credit"; [ 49 ] although the economy was booming, the business struggled and went into debt, prompting Lincoln to sell his share.

[ 48 ] Lincoln served as New Salem's postmaster and later as county surveyor , but he continued his voracious reading and decided to become a lawyer.

[ 50 ] Rather than studying in the office of an established attorney, as was customary, Lincoln read law on his own, borrowing legal texts, including Blackstone 's Commentaries and Chitty 's Pleadings , from attorney John Todd Stuart .

[ 51 ] He later said of his legal education that he "studied with nobody." [ 52 ] Early political offices and prairie lawyer Illinois state legislature (1834–1842) Lincoln's home in Springfield, Illinois , where he resided from 1844 until becoming president in 1861 In Lincoln's second state house campaign in 1834, as a supporter of Whig Party leader Henry Clay , he finished second among thirteen candidates running for four places.

[ 53 ] Lincoln echoed Clay's support for the American Colonization Society , which advocated abolition in conjunction with settling freed slaves in Liberia .

[ 54 ] The Whigs also favored economic modernization in banking, tariffs to fund internal improvements such as railroads, and urbanization.

[ 55 ] Lincoln served four terms in the Illinois House of Representatives for Sangamon County .

[ 56 ] In this role, he championed construction of the Illinois and Michigan Canal .

[ 57 ] Lincoln also voted to expand suffrage beyond White landowners to all White men.

[ 58 ] Lincoln was admitted to the Illinois bar on September 9, 1836.

[ 59 ] He moved to Springfield and began to practice law under John T. Stuart , Mary Todd's cousin.

[ 60 ] He partnered for several years with Stephen T. Logan and, in 1844, began his practice with William Herndon .

[ 61 ] On January 27, 1838, Lincoln delivered an address at the Lyceum in Springfield, after the murder of the anti-slavery newspaper editor Elijah Parish Lovejoy . In this ostensibly non-partisan speech, Lincoln indirectly attacked Stephen Douglas and the Democratic Party , who the Whigs argued were supporting "mobocracy"; he also attacked anti-abolitionism and racial bigotry.

[ 62 ] He was criticized in the press for a planned duel with James Shields , whom he had ridiculed in letters published under the name "Aunt Rebecca"; though the duel ultimately did not take place, Burlingame noted that "the affair embarrassed Lincoln terribly".

[ 63 ] U.S. House of Representatives (1847–1849) In 1843, Lincoln sought the Whig nomination for Illinois's 7th district seat in the U.S. House of Representatives ; John J. Hardin was the winning candidate, though Lincoln convinced the party convention to limit Hardin to one term.

[ 64 ] Lincoln not only gained the nomination in 1846, but also won the election.

[ 65 ] The only Whig in the Illinois delegation, he was assigned to the Committee on Post Office and Post Roads and the Committee on Expenditures in the War Department .

[ 66 ] Lincoln teamed with Joshua R. Giddings on a bill to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia , but dropped the bill when it failed to attract support from most other Whigs.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] Lincoln spoke against the Mexican–American War (1846–1848), for which he said President James K. Polk "had some strong motive ... to involve the two countries in a war, and trusting to escape scrutiny, by fixing the public gaze upon the exceeding brightness of military glory—that attractive rainbow, that rises in showers of blood".

[ 69 ] He supported the Wilmot Proviso , a failed 1846 proposal to ban slavery in any U.S. territory won from Mexico.

[ 70 ] Polk insisted that Mexican soldiers had begun the war by "invading the territory of the State of Texas ... and shedding the blood of our citizens on our own soil".

[ 71 ] In his 1847 " spot resolutions ", Lincoln rhetorically demanded that Polk tell Congress the exact "spot" where this occurred, but the Polk administration did not respond.

[ 72 ] [ 1 ] His approach and rhetoric cost Lincoln political support in his district, and newspapers derisively nicknamed him "spotty Lincoln".

[ 1 ] Lincoln had pledged in 1846 to serve only one term in the House.

[ 73 ] Realizing Henry Clay was unlikely to win the presidency, he supported Zachary Taylor for the Whig nomination in the 1848 presidential election .

[ 74 ] Taylor won and Lincoln hoped in vain to be appointed commissioner of the United States General Land Office .

[ 75 ] The administration offered to appoint him secretary of the Oregon Territory instead.

[ 76 ] This would have disrupted his legal and political career in Illinois, so he declined and resumed his law practice.

[ 77 ] Prairie lawyer See also: List of cases involving Abraham Lincoln In his Springfield practice, according to Donald, Lincoln handled "virtually every kind of business that could come before a prairie lawyer".

[ 78 ] He dealt with many transportation cases in the midst of the nation's western expansion, particularly river barge conflicts under the new railroad bridges. In 1849 he received a patent for a flotation device for the movement of riverboats in shallow water [ 79 ] and Lincoln initially favored riverboat legal interests, but he represented whoever hired him.

[ 80 ] He represented a bridge company against a riverboat company in Hurd v. Rock Island Bridge Company , a landmark case involving a canal boat that sank after hitting a bridge.

[ 81 ] His patent was never commercialized, but it made Lincoln the only president to hold a patent.

[ 79 ] Lincoln appeared before the Illinois Supreme Court in 411 cases.

[ 82 ] From 1853 to 1860, one of his largest clients was the Illinois Central Railroad , who Lincoln successfully sued to recover his legal fees.

[ 83 ] Lincoln represented William "Duff" Armstrong in his 1858 trial for the murder of James Preston Metzker.

[ 84 ] The case is famous for Lincoln's use of a fact established by judicial notice to challenge the credibility of an eyewitness. After a witness testified to seeing the crime in the moonlight, Lincoln produced a Farmers' Almanac showing the Moon was at a low angle, drastically reducing visibility. Armstrong was acquitted.

[ 85 ] In an 1859 murder case, he defended "Peachy" Quinn Harrison, the grandson of Peter Cartwright , Lincoln's political opponent.

[ 86 ] Harrison was charged with the murder of Greek Crafton who, according to Cartwright, said as he lay dying that he had "brought it upon myself" and that he forgave Harrison.

[ 87 ] Lincoln angrily protested the judge's initial decision to exclude Cartwright's claim as hearsay . Lincoln argued that the testimony involved a dying declaration and so was not subject to the hearsay rule. Instead of holding Lincoln in contempt of court as expected, the judge, a Democrat, admitted the testimony into evidence, resulting in Harrison's acquittal.

[ 88 ] Republican politics (1854–1860) Main article: Political career of Abraham Lincoln (1849–1861) Emergence as Republican leader Further information: Slave states and free states and Abraham Lincoln and slavery Lincoln in 1858, the year of his debates with Stephen Douglas over slavery The Compromise of 1850 failed to alleviate tensions over slavery between the slave-holding South and the free North.

[ 89 ] As the slavery debate in the Nebraska and Kansas territories became particularly acrimonious, Illinois Senator Stephen A. Douglas proposed popular sovereignty as a compromise; the measure would allow the electorate of each territory to decide the status of slavery. The legislation alarmed many Northerners, who sought to prevent the spread of slavery, but Douglas's Kansas–Nebraska Act narrowly passed Congress in May 1854.

[ 90 ] Lincoln's Peoria Speech of October 1854, in which he declared his opposition to slavery, [ 91 ] was one of an estimated 175 speeches he delivered in the next six years on the topic of excluding slavery from the territories.

[ 1 ] Lincoln's attacks on the Kansas–Nebraska Act marked his return to political life.

[ 92 ] Nationally, the Whigs were irreparably split by the Kansas–Nebraska Act and other ineffective efforts to compromise on the slavery issue. Reflecting on the demise of his party, Lincoln wrote in 1855, "I think I am a whig; but others say there are no whigs, and that I am an abolitionist.... I now do no more than oppose the extension of slavery." [ 93 ] The new Republican Party was formed as a northern party dedicated to anti-slavery, drawing from the anti-slavery wing of the Whig Party and combining Free Soil , Liberty , and anti-slavery Democratic Party members, [ 94 ] Lincoln resisted early Republican entreaties, fearing that the new party would become a platform for extreme abolitionists.

[ 95 ] Lincoln held out hope for rejuvenating the Whigs, though he lamented his party's growing closeness with the nativist Know Nothing movement.

[ 96 ] In 1854, Lincoln was elected to the Illinois legislature, but before the term began he declined to take his seat so that he would be eligible to run in the upcoming U.S. Senate election.

[ 97 ] At that time, senators were elected by state legislatures. After leading in the first six rounds of voting, Lincoln was unable to obtain a majority. Lincoln instructed his backers to vote for Lyman Trumbull , an anti-slavery Democrat who had received few votes in the earlier ballots. Lincoln's decision to withdraw enabled his Whig supporters and Trumbull's anti-slavery Democrats to combine and defeat the mainstream Democratic candidate, Joel Aldrich Matteson .

[ 98 ] 1856 campaign Violent political confrontations in Kansas continued, and opposition to the Kansas–Nebraska Act remained strong throughout the North. As the 1856 elections approached, Lincoln joined the Republicans and attended the Bloomington Convention , where the Illinois Republican Party was established. The convention platform endorsed Congress's right to regulate slavery in the territories and backed the admission of Kansas as a free state. Lincoln gave the final speech of the convention, calling for the preservation of the Union.

[ 99 ] At the June 1856 Republican National Convention , Lincoln received support to run as vice president, but ultimately the party put forward a ticket of John C. Frémont and William Dayton , which Lincoln supported throughout Illinois. The Democrats nominated James Buchanan and the Know Nothings nominated Millard Fillmore .

[ 100 ] Buchanan prevailed, while Republican William Henry Bissell won election as Governor of Illinois, and Lincoln became a leading Republican in Illinois.

[ 101 ] [ d ] Dred Scott v. Sandford Main article: Dred Scott v. Sandford Dred Scott was a slave whose master took him from a slave state to a territory that was free as a result of the Missouri Compromise . After Scott was returned to the slave state, he petitioned a federal court for his freedom. His petition was denied in Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857).

[ 103 ] Supreme Court Chief Justice Roger B. Taney wrote in his opinion that Black people were not citizens and derived no rights from the Constitution, and that the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional for infringing upon slave owners' property rights. While many Democrats hoped that Dred Scott would end the dispute over slavery in the territories, the decision sparked further outrage in the North.

[ 104 ] Lincoln denounced it as the product of a conspiracy of Democrats to support the Slave Power .

[ 105 ] He argued that the decision was at variance with the Declaration of Independence , which stated that "all men are created equal ... with certain unalienable rights", among them "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness".

[ 106 ] Lincoln–Douglas debates and Cooper Union speech Abraham Lincoln , a portrait by Mathew Brady taken February 27, 1860, the day of Lincoln's Cooper Union speech in New York City Further information: Lincoln–Douglas debates and Cooper Union speech In 1858, Douglas was up for re-election in the U.S. Senate, and Lincoln hoped to defeat him. Many in the party felt that a former Whig should be nominated in 1858, and Lincoln's 1856 campaigning and support of Trumbull had earned him a favor.

[ 107 ] For the first time, Illinois Republicans held a convention to agree upon a Senate candidate, and Lincoln won the nomination with little opposition.

[ 108 ] Lincoln accepted the nomination with great enthusiasm and zeal. After his nomination he delivered his House Divided Speech : "A house divided against itself cannot stand." I believe this government cannot endure, permanently half slave and half free . I do not expect the Union to be dissolved —I do not expect the house to fall —but I do expect it will cease to be divided. It will become all one thing, or all the other.

[ 109 ] The speech created a stark image of the danger of disunion.

[ 110 ] When informed of Lincoln's nomination, Douglas stated, "[Lincoln] is the strong man of the party ... and if I beat him, my victory will be hardly won." [ 111 ] The Senate campaign featured seven debates between Lincoln and Douglas; they had an atmosphere akin to a prizefight and drew thousands.

[ 112 ] Lincoln warned that the Slave Power was threatening the values of republicanism, and he accused Douglas of distorting Jefferson's premise that all men are created equal . In his Freeport Doctrine , Douglas argued that, despite the Dred Scott decision, which he claimed to support, local settlers, under popular sovereignty , should be free to choose whether to allow slavery in their territory. He accused Lincoln of having joined the abolitionists.

[ 113 ] Though the Republican legislative candidates won more popular votes, the Democrats won more seats, and the legislature re-elected Douglas. However, Lincoln's articulation of the issues had given him a national political presence.

[ 114 ] In the aftermath of the 1858 election, newspapers frequently mentioned Lincoln as a potential Republican presidential candidate. While Lincoln was popular in the Midwest , he lacked support in the Northeast and was unsure whether to seek the office.

[ 115 ] In January 1860, Lincoln told a group of political allies that he would accept the presidential nomination if offered and, in the following months, William O. Stoddard 's Central Illinois Gazette , the Chicago Press & Tribune , and other local papers endorsed his candidacy.

[ 116 ] On February 27, 1860, powerful New York Republicans invited Lincoln to give a speech at the Cooper Union . In this address Lincoln argued that the Founding Fathers had little use for popular sovereignty and had repeatedly sought to restrict slavery; he insisted that morality required opposition to slavery and rejected any "groping for some middle ground between the right and the wrong".

[ 117 ] Many in the audience thought he appeared awkward and even ugly.

[ 118 ] But Lincoln demonstrated intellectual leadership, which brought him into contention for the presidency. Journalist Noah Brooks reported, "No man ever before made such an impression on his first appeal to a New York audience".

[ 119 ] Historian David Herbert Donald described the speech as "a superb political move for an unannounced presidential aspirant." [ 120 ] In response to an inquiry about his ambitions, Lincoln said, "The taste is in my mouth a little".

[ 121 ] 1860 presidential election Main article: 1860 United States presidential election The Rail Candidate , a critical Currier and Ives illustration, which depicted Lincoln's platform in the 1860 presidential campaign as being held up by a slave and Horace Greeley On May 9–10, 1860, the Illinois Republican State Convention was held in Decatur .

[ 122 ] Exploiting his embellished frontier legend of clearing land and splitting fence rails, Lincoln's supporters adopted the label of "The Rail Candidate".

[ 123 ] On May 18 at the Republican National Convention in Chicago, Lincoln won the nomination on the third ballot.

[ 1 ] A former Democrat, Hannibal Hamlin of Maine, was nominated for vice president to balance the ticket .

[ 124 ] Throughout the 1850s, Lincoln had doubted the prospects of civil war, and his supporters rejected claims that his election would incite secession.

[ 125 ] When Douglas was selected as the candidate of the Northern Democrats, delegates from the Southern slave states elected incumbent Vice President John C. Breckinridge as their candidate.

[ 126 ] A group of former Whigs and Know Nothings formed the Constitutional Union Party and nominated John Bell of Tennessee. Lincoln and Douglas competed for votes in the North, while Bell and Breckinridge primarily found support in the South.

[ 107 ] A nationwide militaristic Republican youth organization, the Wide Awakes , "turned it into one of the most excited elections in American history" and "triggered massive popular enthusiasm", according to the political historian Jon Grinspan.

[ 127 ] People of the Northern states knew the Southern states would vote against Lincoln and rallied supporters for him.

[ 128 ] As Douglas and the other candidates campaigned, Lincoln gave no speeches, relying on the enthusiasm of the Republican Party. Republican speakers emphasized Lincoln's childhood poverty to demonstrate the power of "free labor", which allowed a common farm boy to work his way to the top by his own efforts.

[ 129 ] Though he did not give public appearances, many sought to visit and write to Lincoln. In the runup to the election, he took an office in the Illinois state capitol to deal with the influx of attention. He also hired John George Nicolay as his personal secretary, who would remain in that role during the presidency.

[ 130 ] On November 6, 1860, Lincoln was elected as the first Republican president. His victory was entirely due to his support in the North and West. No ballots were cast for him in 10 of the 15 Southern slave states.

[ 131 ] Lincoln received 1,866,452 votes, or 39.8 percent of the total in a four-way race, carrying the free Northern states, as well as California and Oregon, and winning the electoral vote decisively.

[ 132 ] Presidency (1861–1865) Lincoln's first inaugural at the United States Capitol on March 4, 1861, with the Capitol dome above the rotunda still under construction.

Headlines in The New York Times following Lincoln's first inauguration portended imminent hostilities.

Main article: Presidency of Abraham Lincoln First term Secession and inauguration Main article: Presidential transition of Abraham Lincoln Further information: Secession winter and Baltimore Plot After Lincoln's election, secessionists implemented plans to leave the Union before he took office in March 1861.

[ 133 ] [ 1 ] On December 20, 1860, South Carolina adopted an ordinance of secession; by February 1, 1861, Florida, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas had followed.

[ 134 ] Six of these states declared themselves to be a sovereign nation, the Confederate States of America , selecting Jefferson Davis as its provisional president.

[ 135 ] The upper South and border states (Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, Kentucky, Missouri, and Arkansas) initially rejected the secessionist appeal.

[ 136 ] President Buchanan and President-elect Lincoln refused to recognize the Confederacy, declaring secession illegal.

[ 137 ] On February 11, 1861, Lincoln gave a particularly emotional farewell address upon leaving Springfield for Washington.

[ 138 ] Lincoln and the Republicans rejected the proposed Crittenden Compromise as contrary to the party's platform of free-soil in the territories .

[ 139 ] Lincoln said, "I will suffer death before I consent ... to any concession or compromise which looks like buying the privilege to take possession of this government to which we have a constitutional right".

[ 140 ] Lincoln supported the Corwin Amendment to the U.S. Constitution , which would have protected slavery in states where it already existed. The amendment passed Congress and was awaiting ratification by the required three-fourths of the states when Southern states began to secede.

[ 141 ] On March 4, 1861, in his first inaugural address , Lincoln said that, because he held "such a provision to now be implied constitutional law, I have no objection to its being made express, and irrevocable".

[ 142 ] Lincoln was mocked by opposition papers falsely claiming that he snuck into Washington in disguise after the 1860 election.

Due to secessionist plots, careful attention was given to Lincoln's security and to that of the train he took to Washington. The president-elect evaded suspected assassins in Baltimore . He traveled in disguise, wearing a soft felt hat instead of his customary stovepipe hat and draping an overcoat over his shoulders while hunching to conceal his height. On February 23, 1861, he arrived in Washington, D.C., which was placed under military guard. Many in the opposition press criticized his secretive journey; opposition newspapers mocked Lincoln with caricatures showing him sneaking into the capital.

[ 143 ] Lincoln directed his inaugural address to the South, proclaiming once again that he had no inclination to abolish slavery in the Southern states: Apprehension seems to exist among the people of the Southern States, that by the accession of a Republican Administration, their property, and their peace, and personal security, are to be endangered. There has never been any reasonable cause for such apprehension. Indeed, the most ample evidence to the contrary has all the while existed, and been open to their inspection. It is found in nearly all the published speeches of him who now addresses you. I do but quote from one of those speeches when I declare that "I have no purpose, directly or indirectly, to interfere with the institution of slavery in the States where it exists. I believe I have no lawful right to do so, and I have no inclination to do so." — First inaugural address , 4 March 1861 [ 144 ] The president ended his address with an appeal to the people of the South: "We are not enemies, but friends.... The mystic chords of memory, stretching from every battlefield, and patriot grave, to every living heart and hearthstone ... will yet swell the chorus of the Union, when again touched ... by the better angels of our nature".

[ 145 ] According to Donald, the failure of the Peace Conference of 1861 to attract the attendance of seven of the Confederate states signaled that legislative compromise was not a practical expectation.

[ 146 ] Personnel Main articles: Presidency of Abraham Lincoln § Foreign policy , and Diplomacy of the American Civil War Lincoln cabinet [ 147 ] Office Name Term President Abraham Lincoln 1861–1865 Vice President Hannibal Hamlin 1861–1865 Andrew Johnson 1865 Secretary of State William H. Seward 1861–1865 Secretary of the Treasury Salmon P. Chase 1861–1864 William P. Fessenden 1864–1865 Hugh McCulloch 1865 Secretary of War Simon Cameron 1861–1862 Edwin M. Stanton 1862–1865 Attorney General Edward Bates 1861–1864 James Speed 1864–1865 Postmaster General Montgomery Blair 1861–1864 William Dennison Jr.

1864–1865 Secretary of the Navy Gideon Welles 1861–1865 Secretary of the Interior Caleb Blood Smith 1861–1862 John Palmer Usher 1863–1865 In selecting his cabinet, Lincoln chose the men he found the most competent, even when they had been his opponents for the presidency. Lincoln commented on his thought process, "We need the strongest men of the party in the Cabinet. We needed to hold our own people together. I had looked the party over and concluded that these were the very strongest men. Then I had no right to deprive the country of their services." [ 148 ] Goodwin described the group in her biography of Lincoln as a " team of rivals ".

[ 149 ] Lincoln named his main political opponent, William H. Seward , as Secretary of State.

[ 150 ] Lincoln made five appointments to the Supreme Court.

Noah Haynes Swayne , a prominent corporate lawyer from Ohio, replaced John McLean after the latter's death in April 1861. Like McLean, Swayne opposed slavery.

[ 151 ] Samuel Freeman Miller , who replaced Peter V. Daniel , was an avowed abolitionist and received widespread support from Iowa politicians.

[ 152 ] David Davis was Lincoln's campaign manager in 1860 and had served as a judge in the Illinois court circuit where Lincoln practiced.

[ 153 ] Democrat Stephen Johnson Field , a previous California Supreme Court justice, provided geographic and political balance.

[ 154 ] Finally, after the death of Roger B. Taney , Lincoln appointed his secretary of the treasury, Salmon P. Chase , to replace Taney as chief justice. Lincoln believed Chase was an able jurist who would support Reconstruction legislation and that his appointment would unite the Republican Party.

[ 155 ] Commander-in-Chief Main articles: American Civil War and Battle of Fort Sumter Portrait of Lincoln c.

1862 In early April 1861, Major Robert Anderson , commander of Fort Sumter in Charleston, South Carolina, advised that he was nearly out of food. After considerable debate, Lincoln decided to send provisions; according to Michael Burlingame, he "could not be sure that his decision would precipitate a war, though he had good reason to believe that it might".

[ 156 ] On April 12, 1861, Confederate forces fired on Union troops at Fort Sumter .

[ 157 ] Donald concludes: His repeated efforts to avoid collision ... showed that he adhered to his vow not to be the first to shed fraternal blood. But he had also vowed not to surrender the forts.... The only resolution of these contradictory positions was for the Confederates to fire the first shot.

[ 158 ] The April 12 and 13 attack on Fort Sumter rallied the Northern public to see military action against the South as necessary to defend the nation.

[ 159 ] On April 15, Lincoln called for 75,000 militiamen to recapture forts, protect Washington, and preserve the Union. This call forced states to choose whether to secede or to support the Union. North Carolina, Virginia, Tennessee, and Arkansas seceded. As the Northern states sent regiments south, on April 19 Baltimore mobs in control of the rail links attacked Union troops who were changing trains. Local leaders' groups later burned critical rail bridges to the capital and the Army responded by arresting local Maryland officials . Lincoln suspended the writ of habeas corpus , allowing arrests without formal charges.

[ 160 ] John Merryman , a Maryland officer arrested for hindering U.S. troop movements, successfully petitioned Supreme Court Chief Justice Taney to issue a writ of habeas corpus . In an opinion titled Ex parte Merryman , Taney, not ruling on behalf of the Supreme Court, wrote that the Constitution authorized only Congress and not the president to suspend habeas corpus. But Lincoln engaged in nonacquiescence and persisted with the policy of suspension in select areas.

[ 161 ] Under various suspensions, 15,000 civilians were detained without trial; several, including the anti-war Democrat Clement L. Vallandigham , were tried in military courts for "treasonable" actions, which was condemned as an attack on free speech.

[ 1 ] [ 162 ] Early Union military strategy Main articles: Eastern theater of the American Civil War and Western theater of the American Civil War Further information: Trans-Mississippi theater of the American Civil War and Lower seaboard theater of the American Civil War Lincoln took executive control of the war and shaped the Union military strategy. He responded to the unprecedented political and military crisis as commander-in-chief by exercising unprecedented authority. He expanded his war powers, imposed a naval blockade on Confederate ports, disbursed funds before appropriation by Congress, suspended habeas corpus , and arrested and imprisoned thousands of suspected Confederate sympathizers. Lincoln gained the support of Congress and the northern public for these actions. Lincoln also had to reinforce Union sympathies in the border slave states and keep the war from becoming an international conflict.

[ 163 ] It was clear from the outset that bipartisan support was essential to success, and that any compromise alienated factions in both political parties. Copperheads (anti-war Democrats) criticized Lincoln for refusing to compromise on slavery; the Radical Republicans (who demanded harsh treatment against secession) criticized him for moving too slowly in abolishing slavery.

[ 164 ] On August 6, 1861, Lincoln signed the Confiscation Act , which authorized judicial proceedings to confiscate and free slaves who were used to support the Confederates. The law had little practical effect, but it signaled political support for abolishing slavery.

[ 165 ] Running the Machine , an 1864 political cartoon satirizing Lincoln and his administration, including William Fessenden , Edwin Stanton , William Seward , and Gideon Welles .

Lincoln's war strategy had two priorities: ensuring that Washington was well defended and conducting an aggressive war effort for a prompt, decisive victory.

[ e ] Twice a week, Lincoln met with his cabinet. Occasionally, Lincoln's wife, Mary, prevailed on him to take a carriage ride, concerned that he was working too hard.

[ 167 ] Early in the war, Lincoln selected civilian generals from varied political and ethnic backgrounds "to secure their and their constituents' support for the war effort and ensure that the war became a national struggle".

[ 168 ] In January 1862, after complaints of inefficiency and profiteering in the War Department, Lincoln replaced Simon Cameron as war secretary with Edwin Stanton .

[ 169 ] Stanton worked more often and more closely with Lincoln than did any other senior official. According to Stanton's biographers Benjamin Thomas and Harold Hyman, "Stanton and Lincoln virtually conducted the war together".

[ 170 ] Lincoln saw the importance of Vicksburg for control of the Mississippi River valley and understood the necessity of defeating the enemy's army, rather than merely capturing territory.

[ 171 ] In directing the Union's war strategy, Lincoln valued the advice of Winfield Scott , even after his retirement as Commanding General of the United States Army . In 1861 Scott proposed the Anaconda Plan , which relied on port blockades and advancing down the Mississippi to subdue the South. In June 1862, Lincoln made an unannounced visit to West Point , where he spent five hours consulting with Scott regarding the handling of the war.

[ 172 ] Internationally, Lincoln wanted to forestall foreign military aid to the Confederacy.

[ 173 ] He relied on his combative Secretary of State William Seward while working closely with Senate Foreign Relations Committee chairman Charles Sumner .

[ 174 ] In 1861 the U.S. Navy illegally intercepted a British mail ship, the RMS Trent , on the high seas and seized two Confederate envoys. Although the North celebrated the seizure, Britain protested vehemently, and the Trent Affair threatened war between the Americans and the British. Lincoln ended the crisis by releasing the two diplomats.

[ 175 ] McClellan Lincoln meeting with Union Army officers on October 3, 1862, following the Battle of Antietam , including left to right: Col.

Delos Sackett ; 4. Gen.

George W. Morell ; 5.

Alexander S. Webb , Chief of Staff, V Corps; 6. McClellan;. 8.

Jonathan Letterman ; 10. Lincoln; 11.

Henry J. Hunt ; 12.

Fitz John Porter ; 15.

Andrew A. Humphreys ; 16. Capt.

George Armstrong Custer Main article: George B. McClellan After the Union rout at Bull Run and Winfield Scott's retirement, Lincoln appointed George B. McClellan general-in-chief.

[ 176 ] Early in the war, McClellan created defenses for Washington that were almost impregnable: 48 forts and batteries , with 480 guns manned by 7,200 artillerists.

[ 177 ] He spent months planning his Virginia Peninsula Campaign . McClellan's slow progress and excessive precautions frustrated Lincoln. McClellan, in turn, blamed the failure of the campaign on Lincoln's cautiousness in having reserved troops for the capital.

[ 178 ] In 1862, Lincoln removed McClellan as general-in-chief; he elevated Henry Halleck to the post and appointed John Pope as head of the new Army of Virginia .

[ 179 ] In the summer of 1862 Pope was soundly defeated at the Second Battle of Bull Run , forcing him to retreat to Washington. Soon after, the Army of Virginia was disbanded.

[ 180 ] Despite his dissatisfaction with McClellan's failure to reinforce Pope, Lincoln restored him to command of all forces around Washington, which included both the Army of the Potomac and the remains of the Army of Virginia.

[ 181 ] Two days later, Robert E. Lee 's forces crossed the Potomac River into Maryland, leading to the Battle of Antietam .

[ 182 ] This battle, a Union victory, was among the bloodiest in American history.

[ 183 ] A crisis of command occurred for Lincoln when McClellan then resisted the president's demand that he pursue Lee's withdrawing army, while Don Carlos Buell likewise refused orders to move the Army of the Ohio against rebel forces in eastern Tennessee. Lincoln replaced Buell with William Rosecrans and McClellan with Ambrose Burnside ; according to Donald, this was a "shrewd" political move as they were non-partisan—unlike McClellan, a Democrat.

[ 184 ] Against presidential advice, Burnside launched an offensive across the Rappahannock River and was defeated by Lee at Fredericksburg in December.

[ 185 ] Facing low morale and discontent among the troops, Lincoln replaced Burnside with Joseph Hooker .

[ 186 ] Hooker endured heavy casualties at the Battle of Chancellorsville in May, then resigned in June and was replaced by George Meade .

[ 187 ] Meade followed Lee north into Pennsylvania and defeated him in the Gettysburg campaign but then failed to effectively block Lee's orderly retreat to Virginia, despite Lincoln's demands. At the same time, Ulysses S. Grant captured Vicksburg and gained control of the Mississippi River.

[ 188 ] In May 1863, Lincoln issued the Lieber Code , which governed wartime conduct of the Union Army, defining command responsibility for war crimes and crimes against humanity.

[ 189 ] Emancipation Proclamation Main articles: Abraham Lincoln and slavery and Emancipation Proclamation First Reading of the Emancipation Proclamation of President Lincoln , an 1864 portrait by Francis Bicknell Carpenter (clickable image—use cursor to identify) Two Union generals had issued emancipation orders in 1861 and 1862, but Lincoln overrode both: he found that the decision to emancipate was not within the generals' power, and that it might induce loyal border states to secede.

[ 190 ] However, in June 1862, Congress passed an act banning slavery in all federal territories, which Lincoln signed.

[ 191 ] In July, the Confiscation Act of 1862 was enacted, [ 192 ] allowing the targeted seizure of slaves for those disloyal to the United States. On July 22, 1862, Lincoln reviewed a draft of the Emancipation Proclamation with his cabinet.

[ 193 ] Senator Willard Saulsbury Sr.

criticized the proclamation, stating that it "would light their author to dishonor through all future generations".

[ 194 ] By contrast, Horace Greeley , editor of the New-York Tribune , in his public letter, "The Prayer of Twenty Millions", implored Lincoln to embrace emancipation.

[ 195 ] In a public letter of August 22, 1862, Lincoln replied to Greeley that while he personally wished all men could be free, his first obligation as president was to preserve the Union: [ 196 ] My paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union, and is not either to save or to destroy slavery. If I could save the Union without freeing any slave I would do it, and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone I would also do that.

[ 1 ] Buttressed by news of the recent Union victory at Antietam, on September 22, 1862, Lincoln issued the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation. On January 1, 1863, he issued the final version, [ 197 ] freeing the slaves in 10 states not then under Union control, [ 198 ] exempting areas under such control.

[ 199 ] Lincoln commented on signing the Proclamation: "I never, in my life, felt more certain that I was doing right, than I do in signing this paper." [ 200 ] On New Year's Eve in 1862, Black people – enslaved and free – gathered across the United States to hold Watch Night ceremonies for "Freedom's Eve", looking toward the promised fulfillment of the Proclamation.

[ 201 ] With the abolition of slavery in the rebel states now a military objective, Union armies advancing south enabled thousands to escape bondage.

[ 202 ] The Proclamation was immediately denounced by Copperheads, who advocated restoring the union by allowing slavery.

[ 203 ] It was also seen as a betrayal of his promise to Southern Unionists not to tamper with slavery; Emerson Etheridge , then Clerk of the House of Representatives , joined an unsuccessful plot to give the Democrats and Southern Unionists control of the House.

[ 204 ] As a result of the Proclamation, enlisting freedmen became official policy. In a letter to Tennessee military governor Andrew Johnson , Lincoln wrote, "The bare sight of fifty thousand armed, and drilled black soldiers on the banks of the Mississippi would end the rebellion at once".

[ 205 ] Gettysburg Address (1863) Main article: Gettysburg Address Gettysburg Address engraved in the Lincoln Memorial Lincoln gave the dedication for the Gettysburg battlefield cemetery on November 19, 1863.

[ 206 ] He asserted that the nation was "conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal", and that the deaths of the "brave men ... who struggled here" would not be in vain, but that the nation "shall have a new birth of freedom—and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth".

[ 207 ] The address became the most quoted speech in American history.

[ 208 ] Following Admiral David Farragut 's capture of New Orleans in 1862, and after victories at Gettysburg and Vicksburg, Lincoln proclaimed a national Thanksgiving holiday , to be celebrated on the final Thursday of November 1863.

[ 209 ] Promoting Grant Main article: Ulysses S. Grant Grant's victories at the Battle of Shiloh and in the Vicksburg campaign impressed Lincoln. Responding to criticism of Grant after Shiloh, Lincoln said, "I can't spare this man. He fights." [ 210 ] Following Meade's failure to capture Lee's army after Gettysburg and after Grant's success at Chattanooga , Lincoln promoted Grant to commander of all Union armies.

[ 1 ] Lincoln reacted to Union losses by mobilizing support throughout the North.

[ 211 ] Union forces targeted infrastructure—plantations, railroads, and bridges—to weaken the South's morale and fighting ability.

[ 212 ] While Lincoln sanctioned this approach, he emphasized the defeat of the Confederate armies over destruction for its own sake.

[ 213 ] Grant's bloody Overland Campaign [ 214 ] turned into a strategic success for the Union despite a number of setbacks. But the campaign was the bloodiest in American history: approximately 55,000 casualties on the Union side (including 7,600 deaths), compared to about 33,000 on the Confederate (including 4,200 deaths). Lee's losses, although lower in absolute numbers, were proportionately higher (over 50%) than Grant's (about 45%).

[ 215 ] [ 216 ] In early April, the Confederate government evacuated Richmond and Lincoln visited the conquered capital.

[ 217 ] Amid the turmoil of military actions, on June 30, 1864, Lincoln signed into law the Yosemite Grant , which provided unprecedented federal protection for the area now known as Yosemite National Park .

[ 218 ] According to Rolf Diamant and Ethan Carr, "the Yosemite Grant was a direct consequence of the war ... an embodiment of the ongoing process of remaking government ... an intentional assertion of a steadfast belief in the eventual Union victory." [ 219 ] Fiscal and monetary policy Main article: Economic history of the United States Civil War One-dollar "greenback" Lincoln and Secretary of the Treasury Salmon Chase faced a challenge in funding a wartime economy. Congress quickly approved Lincoln's request to assemble an army, even increasing his proposed 400,000 soldiers to 500,000, but both Congress and Chase initially resisted raising taxes.

[ 220 ] After the Union defeat at the First Battle of Bull Run, which collapsed the bond market, Congress passed the Revenue Act of 1861 . This act imposed the first U.S. federal income tax , creating a flat tax of three percent on annual incomes above $800 ($28,000 in current dollars). The preference for taxation based on income rather than property reflected the increasing amount of wealth held in stocks and bonds; for example, Representative Schuyler Colfax declared during the debate, "I cannot go home and tell my constituents that I voted for a bill that would allow a man, a millionaire, who has put his entire property into stock, to be exempt from taxation, while a farmer who lives by his side must pay a tax".

[ 221 ] As the average urban worker made approximately $600 per year, many were not required to pay income taxes.

[ 222 ] [ f ] Lincoln also signed increases to the Morrill Tariff , which had become law in the final months of Buchanan's tenure. These tariffs raised import duties considerably and were designed both to increase revenue and to help manufacturers offset the burden of new taxes.

[ 224 ] Throughout the war, Congress debated whether to raise additional revenue primarily by increasing tariff rates, which most strongly affected rural areas, or by increasing income taxes , which most affected wealthier individuals; the latter view proved more popular.

[ 225 ] The revenue measures of 1861 proved inadequate for funding the war, forcing Congress to take further action.

[ 226 ] In February 1862, Congress passed the Legal Tender Act , which authorized the minting of $150 million in " greenbacks "—the first banknotes issued by the U.S. government since the end of the American Revolution . Greenbacks were not backed by gold or silver , but rather by the government's promise to honor their value. By the end of the war, $450 million worth of greenbacks were in circulation.

[ 227 ] [ g ] Congress also passed the Revenue Act of 1862, which established an excise tax affecting nearly every commodity, as well as the first national inheritance tax .

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] It also added a progressive tax structure to the federal income tax.

[ 231 ] To collect these taxes, Congress created the Office of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue .

[ 230 ] Despite the new revenue measures, funding the war remained challenging.

[ 232 ] The government continued to issue greenbacks and borrow large amounts of money, and the U.S. national debt grew from $65 million in 1860 to over $2 billion in 1866.

[ 233 ] The Revenue Act of 1864 represented a compromise between those who favored a more progressive tax structure and those who favored a flat tax.

[ 234 ] [ 230 ] It established a five-percent tax on incomes above $600 and a ten-percent tax on incomes above $10,000, and it raised taxes on businesses.

[ 230 ] In early 1865, Congress reduced the threshold for ten-percent taxation to incomes above $5000.

[ 235 ] By the end of the war, the income tax constituted about one-fifth of the federal government's revenue, [ 230 ] though it was intended as a temporary wartime measure .

[ 236 ] [ 230 ] Lincoln also took action against wartime fraud, signing into law the False Claims Act of 1863 . This statute imposed penalties for false claims and made it possible for private citizens to file false-claim ( qui tam ) lawsuits on behalf of the U.S. government and share in the recovery.

[ 237 ] [ 238 ] Hoping to stabilize the currency, Lincoln convinced Congress to pass the National Banking Act in 1863, established the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency to oversee "national banks," which were subject to federal, rather than state, regulation. In return for investing a third of their capital in federal bonds, national banks were authorized to issue federal banknotes.

[ 239 ] After Congress imposed a tax on private banknotes in March 1865, federal banknotes became the dominant form of paper currency.

[ 240 ] Other economic policies passed under Lincoln included the 1862 Homestead Act , which made millions of acres of government-held land in the West available for purchase at low cost. The 1862 Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act provided government grants for agricultural colleges in each state. The Pacific Railway Acts of 1862 and 1864 granted federal support for the construction of the United States' first transcontinental railroad , which was completed in 1869.

[ 241 ] Foreign policy Further information: Diplomacy of the American Civil War and History of U.S. foreign policy, 1861–1897 At the start of the war, Russia was the lone great power to support the Union, while the other European powers had varying degrees of sympathy for the Confederacy.

[ 242 ] According to the historian Dean Mahin, Lincoln had "limited familiarity with diplomatic practices" but had a "substantial influence on U.S. diplomacy" as the Union attempted to avoid war with Britain and France.

[ 243 ] Lincoln appointed diplomats to try to persuade European nations not to recognize the Confederacy.

[ 244 ] Lincoln's policy succeeded: all foreign nations were officially neutral throughout the Civil War, with none recognizing the Confederacy.

[ 245 ] Some European leaders looked for ways to exploit the inability of the U.S. to enforce the Monroe Doctrine opposing European colonial intervention in the Americas: Spain invaded the Dominican Republic in 1861, while France established a puppet regime in Mexico .

[ 246 ] However, many in Europe also hoped for a quick end to the war, both for humanitarian reasons and because of the economic disruption it caused.

[ 247 ] The European aristocracy was "absolutely gleeful in pronouncing the American debacle as proof that the entire experiment in popular government had failed", according to Don H. Doyle . Union diplomats initially had to explain that the United States was not committed to ending slavery, and instead they argued that secession was unconstitutional. Confederate spokesmen, on the other hand, were more successful by ignoring slavery and instead focusing on their struggle for independence, their commitment to free trade, and the essential role of cotton in the European economy.

[ 248 ] However, the Confederacy's hope that cotton exports would compel European interference did not come to fruition, as Britain found alternative sources and maintained economic ties with the Union.

[ 249 ] Though the issuance of the Emancipation Proclamation in January 1863 did not immediately end the possibility of European intervention, it rallied European public opinion to the Union by adding abolition as a Union war goal. Any chance of a European intervention in the war ended with the Union victories at Gettysburg and Vicksburg in July 1863, as European leaders came to believe that the Confederate cause was doomed.

[ 250 ] Native Americans Lincoln appointed William P. Dole as commissioner of the Bureau of Indian Affairs and made "extensive use of Indian Service positions to reward political supporters", according to the author Thomas Britten.

[ 251 ] [ 252 ] Lincoln's policies largely focused on assimilation of Native Americans and diminishing tribal landholdings, consistent with those of his predecessors, but his direct involvement in Native American affairs was unclear.

[ 252 ] His administration faced difficulties guarding Western settlers, railroads, and telegraph lines from Native American attacks.

[ 253 ] Tensions arose with the Dakota people due to American treaty violations, unfair trading, and government practices that led to starvation.

[ 254 ] In August 1862, the Dakota War broke out in Minnesota. Hundreds of settlers were killed and 30,000 were displaced from their homes.

[ 255 ] Some feared incorrectly that it might represent a Confederate conspiracy to start a war on the Northwestern frontier.

[ 256 ] Lincoln ordered thousands of paroled prisoners of war be sent to put down the uprising. When the Confederacy protested, Lincoln revoked the policy and none arrived in Minnesota.

[ 257 ] Lincoln sent Pope as commander of the new Department of the Northwest .

[ 258 ] Appointed as a state militia colonel, Henry Hastings Sibley eventually defeated the Dakota chief Little Crow at the Battle of Wood Lake .

[ 259 ] A war crimes trial led by Sibley sentenced 303 Dakota warriors to death; [ 257 ] the legal scholar Carol Chomsky described the trial as "a study in military injustice" designed to "guarantee an unjust outcome".

[ 254 ] Lincoln pardoned all but 39 of the condemned warriors, and, with one execution suspended, the remaining 38 were hanged in the largest mass execution in U.S. history .

[ 254 ] Congressman Alexander Ramsey told Lincoln in 1864 that he would have received more re-election support in Minnesota had he executed all 303 warriors. Lincoln responded, "I could not afford to hang men for votes." [ 260 ] Lincoln called for reform of federal Indian policy but prioritized the war and Reconstruction. Changes were made in response to the Sand Creek Massacre of November 1864, prioritizing peaceful administration of Native affairs and condemning those encroaching on Native territory, but not until after Lincoln's death.

[ 261 ] Second term Lincoln's second inaugural address at the nearly completed U.S. Capitol on March 4, 1865 Re-election Main article: 1864 United States presidential election Lincoln ran for re-election in 1864; the Republican Party selected Andrew Johnson, a War Democrat , as his running mate. To broaden his coalition to include War Democrats as well as Republicans, Lincoln ran under the label of the new National Union Party .

[ 262 ] Grant's bloody stalemates and Confederate victories such as the Battle of the Crater damaged Lincoln's re-election prospects, and many Republicans feared defeat.

[ 1 ] [ 263 ] Lincoln prepared a confidential memorandum pledging that, if he should lose the election, he would "co-operate with the President-elect, as to save the Union between the election and the inauguration; as he will have secured his election on such ground that he cannot possibly save it afterwards".

[ 1 ] [ 264 ] Victories at Atlanta in September and in the Shenandoah Valley in October turned public opinion, and Lincoln was re-elected.

[ 1 ] As Grant continued to weaken Lee's forces, efforts to discuss peace began. At one point, Alexander H. Stephens , the Confederate vice president, led a meeting with Lincoln, Seward, and others at Hampton Roads . Lincoln refused to negotiate with the Confederacy as a coequal, and the only agreement formed at the meeting concerned the exchange of prisoners.

[ 265 ] On March 4, 1865, Lincoln delivered his second inaugural address . Historian Mark Noll places the speech "among the small handful of semi-sacred texts by which Americans conceive their place in the world;" it is inscribed in the Lincoln Memorial .

[ 266 ] Lincoln closed his speech with these words: With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right, as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in; to bind up the nation's wounds; to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow, and his orphan—to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace, among ourselves, and with all nations.

[ 267 ] A month later, on April 9, Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox , signaling the end of the war.

[ 268 ] It triggered a series of subsequent surrenders across the South—in North Carolina , Alabama , and the trans-Mississippi Theater —and finally at sea with the surrender of the CSS Shenandoah in November 1865.

[ 269 ] [ 270 ] Reconstruction Main article: Reconstruction era Reconstruction preceded the war's end, as Lincoln and his associates considered the reintegration of the nation, and the fates of Confederate leaders and freed slaves. When a general asked Lincoln how the defeated Confederates were to be treated, Lincoln replied, "Let 'em up easy"; [ 271 ] he focused not on blame for the war but on rebuilding.

[ 272 ] Determined to reunite the nation and not alienate the South, Lincoln urged that speedy elections under generous terms be held. His Amnesty Proclamation of December 8, 1863, offered pardons to those who had not held a Confederate civil office and had not mistreated Union prisoners, if they signed an oath of allegiance. Lincoln led the moderates in Reconstruction policy and was opposed by the Radicals, under Thaddeus Stevens , Charles Sumner and Benjamin Wade , who otherwise remained Lincoln's allies.

[ 273 ] As Southern states fell, they needed leaders while their administrations were being restored. In Tennessee and Arkansas, Lincoln appointed Johnson and Frederick Steele , respectively, as military governors.

[ 274 ] In Louisiana, Lincoln ordered Nathaniel P. Banks to promote a plan that would reestablish statehood when 10 percent of the voters agreed, but only if the reconstructed states abolished slavery. Democratic opponents accused Lincoln of using the plan to ensure his and the Republicans' political aspirations. The Radicals denounced his policy as too lenient and passed their own plan, the 1864 Wade–Davis Bill , but Lincoln pocket-vetoed it. The Radicals retaliated by refusing to seat elected representatives from Louisiana, Arkansas, and Tennessee.

[ 275 ] An 1865 political cartoon, The 'Rail Splitter' At Work Repairing the Union , depicting Vice President Andrew Johnson , a former tailor, and Lincoln.

After implementing the Emancipation Proclamation, Lincoln increased pressure on Congress to outlaw slavery nationwide with a constitutional amendment. By December 1863 an amendment was brought to Congress.

[ 276 ] The Senate passed it on April 8, 1864, but the first vote in the House of Representatives fell short of the required two-thirds majority. Passage became part of Lincoln's re-election platform, and after his re-election, the second attempt in the House passed on January 31, 1865.

[ 277 ] After ratification by three-fourths of the states in December 1865, it became the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , abolishing "slavery [and] involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime".

[ 278 ] Lincoln announced a Reconstruction plan that involved short-term military administration, pending readmission under the control of southern Unionists. He also signed Senator Charles Sumner's Freedmen's Bureau bill that set up a temporary federal agency designed to meet the immediate needs of former slaves. The law opened land for a lease of three years with the ability for the freedmen to purchase title. In signing it, according to the historian Richard Carwardine , Lincoln "acknowledged that the government had at least some responsibility for the material needs of millions of ex-slaves", [ 279 ] although it fell short of the " forty acres and a mule " that many slaves understood they would receive from confiscated property.

[ 280 ] Eric Foner argues that "Lincoln did not see Reconstruction as an opportunity for a sweeping political and social revolution beyond emancipation. He had long made clear his opposition to the confiscation and redistribution of land." [ 281 ] However, the Lincoln scholar Phillip S. Paludan suggests that at the end of his life Lincoln was moving towards a more radical position, particularly with regards to freedmen's rights.

[ 282 ] Foner adds that, had Lincoln lived into the Reconstruction era , "It is entirely plausible to imagine Lincoln and Congress agreeing on a Reconstruction policy that encompassed federal protection for basic civil rights plus limited black suffrage, along the lines Lincoln proposed just before his death." [ 281 ] Assassination Main article: Assassination of Abraham Lincoln An illustration of Lincoln's assassination on April 14, 1865, in the presidential booth at Ford's Theatre , featuring (left to right): assassin John Wilkes Booth , Abraham Lincoln, Mary Todd Lincoln , Clara Harris , and Henry Rathbone John Wilkes Booth was a well-known actor and a Confederate spy from Maryland; though he never joined the Confederate army, he had contacts within the Confederate secret service.

[ 283 ] After attending Lincoln's last public address, on April 11, 1865, in which Lincoln stated his preference that the franchise be conferred on some Black men, specifically "on the very intelligent, and on those who serve our cause as soldiers", [ 284 ] Booth plotted to assassinate the President.

[ 285 ] When Booth learned of the Lincolns' intent to attend a play with Grant, he planned to assassinate Lincoln and Grant at Ford's Theatre .

[ 286 ] Lincoln and his wife attended the play Our American Cousin on the evening of April 14. At the last minute, Grant decided to go to New Jersey to visit his children instead of attending.

[ 287 ] At 10:15 pm, Booth entered Lincoln's theater box, crept up from behind, and fired at the back of Lincoln's head, mortally wounding him. Lincoln's guest, Major Henry Rathbone , momentarily grappled with Booth, but Booth stabbed him and escaped.

[ 288 ] [ 289 ] After being attended by Charles Leale and two other doctors, Lincoln was taken across the street to Petersen House . He remained in a coma for nine hours and died at 7:22 am on April 15.

[ 290 ] Lincoln's body was wrapped in a flag and placed in a coffin, which was loaded into a hearse and escorted to the White House by Union soldiers.

[ 291 ] Johnson was sworn in as president later that day.

[ 292 ] Two weeks later, Booth was located, shot, and killed at a farm in Virginia by Sergeant Boston Corbett .

[ 293 ] Funeral and burial Main article: State funeral of Abraham Lincoln From April 19 to 20, Lincoln lay in state, first in the White House and then in the Capitol rotunda .

[ 294 ] The caskets containing Lincoln's body and the body of his third son Willie then traveled for two weeks on a funeral train following a circuitous route from Washington D.C. to Springfield, Illinois, stopping at several cities for memorials attended by hundreds of thousands.

[ 295 ] Many others gathered along the tracks as the train passed with bands, bonfires, and hymn singing or in silent grief.

[ 296 ] Historians emphasized the widespread shock and sorrow, but noted that some who had hated Lincoln celebrated his death.

[ 297 ] Walt Whitman composed four elegies to Lincoln, including " When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd " and " O Captain! My Captain!

".

[ 298 ] Lincoln's body was buried at Oak Ridge Cemetery in Springfield and now lies within the Lincoln Tomb .

[ 299 ] Philosophy and views Abraham Lincoln (1869) Lincoln redefined the political philosophy of republicanism in the United States . Because the Declaration of Independence says that all men have an unalienable right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, he called it the " sheet anchor " of republicanism, at a time when the Constitution was the focus of most political discourse.

[ 300 ] He presented the Declaration as establishing equality as a foundational principle for the United States, which had a significant impact on social and political movements in the US into the 20th century.

[ 301 ] As a Whig activist, Lincoln was a spokesman for business interests, favoring high tariffs, banks, infrastructure improvements, and railroads, in opposition to Jacksonian democrats .

[ 302 ] Nevertheless, Lincoln admired Andrew Jackson 's steeliness and patriotism, [ 303 ] and adopted the Jacksonian "belief in the common man".

[ 304 ] According to historian Sean Wilentz , "just as the Republican Party of the 1850s absorbed certain elements of Jacksonianism, so Lincoln, whose Whiggery had always been more egalitarian than that of other Whigs, found himself absorbing some of them as well." [ 305 ] William C. Harris found that Lincoln's "reverence for the Founding Fathers, the Constitution, the laws under it, and the preservation of the Republic and its institutions strengthened his conservatism." [ 306 ] In Lincoln's first inaugural address, he denounced secession as anarchy and argued that "a majority held in restraint by constitutional checks, and limitations, and always changing easily with deliberate changes of popular opinions and sentiments, is the only true sovereign of a free people." [ 307 ] Religious skepticism and providence Further information: Religious views of Abraham Lincoln As a young man Lincoln was a religious skeptic .

[ 308 ] However, he was deeply familiar with the Bible ; [ 309 ] throughout his public career, he often quoted Scripture.

[ 310 ] His three most famous speeches—the House Divided Speech , the Gettysburg Address , and his second inaugural address —all contain such quotes. In the 1840s, Lincoln subscribed to the Doctrine of Necessity , a belief that the human mind was controlled by a higher power.

[ 311 ] [ 312 ] After the death of his son Edward in 1850 Lincoln more frequently expressed a dependence on God.

[ 313 ] He never joined a church, although he and his wife frequently attended First Presbyterian Church in Springfield, Illinois, beginning in 1852.

[ 314 ] While president, Lincoln often attended services at the New York Avenue Presbyterian Church in Washington, D.C.

[ 315 ] The death of his son Willie in February 1862 may have caused him to look toward religion for solace.

[ 316 ] Lincoln's frequent use of religious imagery and language toward the end of his life may have reflected his own personal beliefs or might have been a device to reach his audiences, who were mostly evangelical Protestants.

[ 317 ] Sources differ in how they describe his religious beliefs. His law partner William Herndon gave a lecture after Lincioln's death stating that he was an "unbeliever"; [ 318 ] James Smith, the pastor of First Presbyterian Church in Springfield, responded to this lecture with an open letter asserting that Lincoln "did avow his belief in the Divine
Authority and the Inspiration of the Scriptures".

[ 319 ] Stephen Mansfield describes "an atheist or religiously skeptical Lincoln" as "the prevailing view", although he argues that "there was a spiritual journey of some kind in Abraham Lincoln's life".

[ 320 ] Richard Carwardine writes that "Many elements of the inner Lincoln, including his personal faith ... necessarily remain a puzzle".

[ 321 ] Lincoln's last words were, as reported by his wife, "There is no place I so much desire to see as Jerusalem".

[ 322 ] Health and appearance Main article: Health of Abraham Lincoln According to Michael Burlingame, Lincoln was described as "awkward" and "gawky" as a youth.

[ 323 ] In adolescence he was tall and strong, participating in jumping, throwing, wrestling, and footraces, and demonstrating exceptional strength.

[ 324 ] Burlingame notes that Lincoln's clothes "were typically rough and suited to the frontier", with a gap between his shoes, socks, and pants that often exposed six or more inches of his shin; "he cared little about fashion".

[ 325 ] Lincoln was a slender six feet four inches, [ 325 ] with a high-pitched voice.

[ 326 ] While he is usually portrayed bearded, he did not grow a beard until 1860 at the suggestion of 11-year-old Grace Bedell ; he was the first U.S. president to do so.

[ 327 ] William H. Herndon described Lincoln's face as "long, narrow, sallow, and cadaverous", his cheeks as "leathery and saffron-colored ".

[ 328 ] Lincoln described himself as having a "dark complexion, with coarse black hair".

[ 328 ] Lincoln's detractors also remarked on his appearance. For example, the Charleston Mercury described him as having "the dirtiest complexion" and asked "Faugh! after him what decent white man would be President?" [ 329 ] Among the illnesses that Lincoln is either documented or speculated to have suffered from are depression, [ 30 ] smallpox , [ 330 ] and malaria .

[ 331 ] He took blue mass pills, which contained mercury , to treat melancholy or hypochondriasis ; this may have resulted in mercury poisoning .

[ 332 ] Several claims have been made that Lincoln's health was declining before the assassination, as photographs of Lincoln appear to show weight loss and facial changes.

[ 333 ] [ 334 ] It has been proposed that he could have had a rare genetic disorder such as Marfan syndrome or multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B .

[ 333 ] [ 335 ] Legacy Bureau of Engraving and Printing portrait of Lincoln as president Historical reputation In surveys of U.S. scholars ranking presidents since 1948, the top three presidents are generally Lincoln, George Washington , and Franklin Delano Roosevelt , although the order varies.

[ 336 ] Between 1999 and 2011, Lincoln, John F. Kennedy , and Ronald Reagan were the top-ranked presidents in eight public opinion surveys by Gallup.

[ 337 ] A 2004 study found that scholars in history and politics ranked Lincoln number one, while legal scholars placed him second after Washington.

[ 338 ] Lincoln's assassination made him a national martyr. He was viewed by abolitionists as a champion of human liberty. Many, though not all, in the South considered Lincoln to be a man of outstanding ability.

[ 339 ] In the New Deal era, liberals honored Lincoln as an advocate of the common man who they claimed would have supported the welfare state , [ 340 ] and Lincoln became a favorite of liberal intellectuals across the world.

[ 341 ] Sociologist Barry Schwartz argues that in the 1930s and 1940s, Lincoln provided the nation with "a moral symbol inspiring and guiding American life." [ 342 ] Schwartz states that Lincoln's American reputation grew slowly from the late 19th century until the Progressive Era (1900–1920s), when he emerged as one of America's most venerated heroes, even among White Southerners. The high point came in 1922 with the dedication of the Lincoln Memorial on the National Mall in Washington, D.C.

[ 343 ] However, Schwartz also argued in 2008 that since World War II Lincoln's symbolic power has lost relevance, and this "fading hero is symptomatic of fading confidence in national greatness." [ 344 ] By the 1970s, Lincoln had become a hero to political conservatives [ 345 ] —apart from neo-Confederates such as Mel Bradford , who denounced his treatment of the White South—for his nationalism, his support for business, his insistence on stopping the spread of slavery, and his perceived devotion to the principles of the Founding Fathers.

[ 346 ] The Black orator and former slave Frederick Douglass stated that in "his company, I was never reminded of my humble origin, or of my unpopular color", [ 347 ] and Lincoln has long been known as the Great Emancipator.

[ h ] By the late 1960s, however, some Black intellectuals denied that Lincoln deserved that title.

[ 349 ] [ 350 ] Lerone Bennett Jr.

won wide attention when he called Lincoln a White supremacist in 1968.

[ 351 ] He noted that Lincoln used ethnic slurs and argued that Lincoln opposed social equality and proposed that freed slaves voluntarily move to another country.

[ 352 ] Defenders of Lincoln highlighted his condemnation of slavery and his contributions to its abolition, casting his delays and racist rhetoric as concessions to political necessity rather than reflections of his personal beliefs.

[ 353 ] [ 354 ] [ 355 ] Lincoln has also been characterized as a folk hero and as "Honest Abe".

[ 356 ] David Herbert Donald opined in his 1996 biography that Lincoln was endowed with the personality trait of negative capability , attributed to extraordinary leaders who were "capable of being in uncertainties... without any irritable reaching after fact and reason".

[ 357 ] Lincoln has often been portrayed by Hollywood, almost always in a flattering light; the film historian Melvyn Stokes writes that "moviemakers have commonly used Lincoln primarily as a metaphor for ideas and values they approved".

[ 358 ] [ 359 ] Lincoln has also been admired by political figures outside the U.S., including the German political theorist Karl Marx [ 360 ] and Giuseppe Garibaldi , leader of the Italian Risorgimento , [ 361 ] and later Indian independence leader Mahatma Gandhi , German politician Willy Brandt , and Nelson Mandela , who likened the "new birth of freedom" Lincoln referenced in the Gettysburg Address to the end of apartheid in South Africa.

[ 362 ] Memorials and commemorations Main article: Memorials to Abraham Lincoln See also: Cultural depictions of Abraham Lincoln Lincoln's portrait appears on two denominations of United States currency , the penny and the $5 bill . He appears on postage stamps across the world, including in Ghana, Honduras, China, Haiti, Nicaragua, Columbia, and Argentina.

[ 363 ] He has been memorialized in many town, city, and county names, including the capital of Nebraska.

[ 364 ] The United States Navy has named three vessels after Lincoln, including the Nimitz -class aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln (CVN-72) .

[ 365 ] [ 366 ] [ 367 ] The Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., is one of the most visited National Park Service sites in the country.

[ 368 ] Memorials in Springfield, Illinois, include the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum , Lincoln's home, and his tomb.

[ 369 ] A carving of Lincoln appears with those of three other presidents on Mount Rushmore , which receives about 3 million visitors a year.

[ 370 ] A statue of Lincoln completed by Augustus Saint-Gaudens stands in Lincoln Park , Chicago, [ 371 ] with recastings given as diplomatic gifts standing in Parliament Square , London, and Parque Lincoln , Mexico City.

[ 372 ] [ 373 ] Several states commemorate " Presidents' Day " as "Washington–Lincoln Day".

[ 374 ] [ 375 ] Lincoln has also been extensively portrayed in film. Early works attempted to mythologize him, emphasizing his mercifulness, as in Abraham Lincoln's Clemency (1910). Works from the Great Depression era emphasized his early struggles and folksiness, as in Young Mr. Lincoln (1939).

[ 376 ] After a marked decrease in film portrayals between 1941 and 1999, [ 376 ] Daniel Day-Lewis won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal in Lincoln , a 2012 biographical film directed by Steven Spielberg .

[ 377 ] Lincoln's image carved into the stone of Mount Rushmore The Lincoln memorial postage stamp of 1866 was issued by the U.S. Post Office exactly one year after Lincoln's assassination.

The Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C.

The Lincoln cent , an American coin portraying Lincoln See also Biography portal Politics portal United States portal Bibliography of Abraham Lincoln Outline of Abraham Lincoln Walt Whitman and Abraham Lincoln Lincoln family Notes ^ a b Discharged from command-rank of captain and re-enlisted at rank of private.

[ 2 ] ^ / ˈ l ɪ ŋ k ən / ⓘ LINK -ən ^ Lincoln's grandmother, though uncertain, is believed to have been Bathsheba Herring, the daughter of Alexander and Abigail Herring ( née Harrison).

[ 5 ] ^ Eric Foner contrasts the abolitionists and anti-slavery Radical Republicans of the Northeast, who saw slavery as a sin, with the conservative Republicans, who thought it was bad because it hurt White people and blocked progress. Foner argues that Lincoln was in the middle, opposing slavery primarily because it violated the republicanism principles of the Founding Fathers , especially the equality of all men and democratic self-government as expressed in the Declaration of Independence .

[ 102 ] ^ Major Northern newspapers predicted victory within 90 days.

[ 166 ] ^ In 1866, when income tax applied to those with incomes above $600, only an estimated 1.3% of the national population were required to pay.

[ 223 ] ^ Government borrowing amounted to $2.8 billion by 1866.

[ 228 ] ^ The origin of the nickname is unknown.

[ 348 ] References ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o McPherson, James (September 26, 2024). "Lincoln, Abraham".

American National Biography .

doi : 10.1093/anb/9780198606697.article.0400631 .

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 67–68.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 20–22.

^ a b Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 1–4.

^ Coleman, Charles (1959). "Lincoln's Lincoln grandmother".

Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society .

52 (1): 59– 90.

JSTOR 40189910 .

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 21–22.

^ Bartelt 2008 , p. 79.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 4.

^ White 2009 , p. 18.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 22–24; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 6–8.

^ Winkle 2011 , pp. 6–7.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 22–23.

^ Bartelt 2008 , pp. 34, 156.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 24.

^ Bartelt 2008 , pp. 24, 104.

^ Bartelt 2008 , pp. 22–23, 77.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 34, 116.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 27–28.

^ Bartelt 2008 , pp. 10, 33.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 23, 29.

^ Madison 2014 , p. 110.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 30, 41.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 43–44.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 36.

^ Bartelt 2008 , p. 71.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 98.

^ Gannett, Lewis (Winter 2005).

" 'Overwhelming evidence' of a Lincoln–Ann Rutledge romance?: reexamining Rutledge family reminiscences" .

Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association .

26 (1): 28– 41.

doi : 10.5406/19457987.26.1.04 .

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 56–57.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 55–58; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 100.

^ a b c Shenk, Joshua Wolf (October 2005).

"Lincoln's great depression" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on October 9, 2011.

^ Thomas 2008 , pp. 56–57, 69–70.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 67–69.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 80–86; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 174–176.

^ Lamb & Swain 2008 , p. 3.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 182, 194–195.

^ Baker 1989 , p. 142.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 202.

^ White 2009 , pp. 179–181, 476; Manning 2016 , pp. 24, 34, 58, 73, 75, 139, 181.

^ White 2009 , p. 126.

^ Baker 1989 , p. 120; Manning 2016 , pp. 39, 42.

^ Manning 2016 , p. 12.

^ Thomas 2008 , pp. 23–53.

^ a b Winkle 2001 , pp. 86–95.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 40–41.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 67.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 72.

^ Winkle 2001 , pp. 114–116; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 71–75.

^ a b Meacham 2022 , p. 38.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 76.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 77–81, 87.

^ Kent 2022 , pp. 121–122.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 55.

^ White 2009 , p. 59.

^ Foner 2010 , pp. 17–19, 67.

^ Boritt & Pinsker 2002 , pp. 137–153.

^ Simon 1990 , p. 283.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 102.

^ Simon 1990 , p. 130.

^ "Abraham Lincoln" . Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission. Archived from the original on July 2, 2023 . Retrieved July 2, 2023 .

^ White 2009 , pp. 71, 79, 108.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 88–101.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 140–142.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 190–194.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 215–218.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 231–241.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 263–265.

^ Harris 2007 , p. 54; Foner 2010 , p. 57.

^ "Lincoln, Abraham" .

History, Art & Archives . United States House of Representatives . Retrieved July 1, 2022 .

^ Heidler & Heidler 2006 , pp. 181–183; Greenberg 2012 , pp. 250–251.

^ Holzer 2004 , p. 63.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 265.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 123–124.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 124.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 126–127.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 138–140; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 296–303.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 305–307.

^ Harris 2007 , pp. 55–57.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 96.

^ a b Emerson 2009 , pp. 27–28.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 156–157; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 253.

^ McGinty 2015 .

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 186.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 155–156, 196–197.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 150–151.

^ Donald 1996 ; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 345–346.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 560.

^ Mitgang, Herbert (February 10, 1989).

"The law; Lincoln as lawyer: transcript tells murder story" .

The New York Times .

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 150–151; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 560.

^ White 2009 , pp. 175–176.

^ White 2009 , pp. 188–190.

^ Thomas 2008 , pp. 148–152.

^ White 2009 , pp. 203–205.

^ White 2009 , p. 215.

^ McGovern 2009 , pp. 38–39.

^ White 2009 , pp. 203–204.

^ White 2009 , pp. 191–194.

^ White 2009 , pp. 203–205; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 390, 392.

^ White 2009 , pp. 205–208.

^ White 2009 , pp. 216–221.

^ White 2009 , pp. 224–228.

^ White 2009 , pp. 229–230.

^ Foner 2010 , pp. 84–88.

^ Vishneski, John (1988). "What the court decided in Dred Scott v. Sandford".

The American Journal of Legal History .

32 (4): 373– 390.

doi : 10.2307/845743 .

JSTOR 845743 .

^ White 2009 , pp. 236–238.

^ Zarefsky 1993 , pp. 69–110.

^ Jaffa 2000 , pp. 299–300.

^ a b White 2009 , pp. 247–248.

^ White 2009 , pp. 247–250.

^ White 2009 , p. 251.

^ Harris 2007 , p. 98.

^ White 2009 , p. 258.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 214–218; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 487–488.

^ Donald 1996 ; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 501–504, 527–531.

^ Carwardine 2003 , pp. 89–90.

^ White 2009 , pp. 291–293.

^ White 2009 , pp. 307–308.

^ Jaffa 2000 , p. 473.

^ Holzer 2004 , pp. 108–111.

^ Carwardine 2003 , p. 97; Holzer 2004 , p. 157.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 240.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 241.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 244.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 244–245.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 625.

^ Boritt & Pinsker 2002 , pp. 10, 13, 18.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 253.

^ Grinspan, Jon. " 'Young men for war': the Wide Awakes and Lincoln's 1860 presidential campaign".

Journal of American History .

96 (2): 377.

JSTOR 25622297 .

^ Murrin 2006 , p. 464.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 254–256.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 251–252; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 650–652.

^ Mansch 2005 , p. 61; Donald 1996 , p. 256.

^ White 2009 , p. 350.

^ Edgar 1998 , p. 350.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 267; Potter 1977 .

^ Donald 1996 , p. 267; White 2009 , p. 369.

^ White 2009 , p. 362.

^ Potter 1977 , pp. 520, 569–570.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 759.

^ White 2009 , pp. 360–361.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 268.

^ Vorenberg 2001 , p. 22; Vile 2003 , pp. 280–281.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 p. 48.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 273–279; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 32–39.

^ Sandburg 2002 , p. 212; Lincoln 1953 , p. 333.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 283–284.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 268, 279.

^ "Abraham Lincoln: administration" . Miller Center, University of Virginia. December 16, 2016.

^ Goodwin 2005 , p. 319.

^ Goodwin 2005 .

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 722.

^ Silver 1998 , p. 59.

^ Silver 1998 , pp. 64–65.

^ Silver 1998 , p. 74.

^ Silver 1998 , pp. 88–89.

^ Blue 1987 , p. 245.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 100–124.

^ McClintock 2008 , pp. 246–250.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 293.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 134–138, 154–155.

^ Heidler, Heidler & Coles 2002 , p. 174; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 141, 146–151.

^ Harris 2011 , pp. 59–71; White 2011 , pp. 38–39.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 442–443.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 302–304; Carwardine 2003 , pp. 163–164.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 315–339, 417.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 314; Carwardine 2003 , p. 178.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 295–296.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 391–392.

^ Work 2024 , p. 2.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 240–244.

^ Thomas & Hyman 1962 , pp. 71, 87, 229–230, 385.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 432–436.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 180, 320; Marvel 2008 , p. 68.

^ Boritt & Pinsker 2002 , pp. 213–214.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 321–322.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 222–227.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 318–319.

^ Sears 1999 , p. 116.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 349–352.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 303, 320, 368.

^ Work 2024 , p. 71.

^ Goodwin 2005 , pp. 478–479; Work 2024 , p. 71.

^ Goodwin 2005 , pp. 478–480.

^ Goodwin 2005 , p. 481.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 390.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 445–446.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 484–486; Donald 1996 , pp. 411–412.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 498, 503, 510–511.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 444–447.

^ Labuda, Patryk (September 2014).

"Lieber Code" .

Max Planck Encyclopedia of International Law .

^ Guelzo 1999 , pp. 290–291.

^ "The United States Congress outlaws slavery and involuntary servitude in all U.S. territories, June 20, 1862" .

This Abominable Slavery . University of Utah . Retrieved April 28, 2025 .

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 p. 357.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 364–365.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 416.

^ McPherson 1992 , p. 124; Lundberg 2019 , p. 116.

^ Guelzo 2004 , pp. 147–153.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 468–469.

^ "Emancipation Proclamation (1863)" . National Archives. August 16, 2021.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 379.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 407.

^ "The historical legacy of Juneteenth" . National Museum of African American History and Culture. June 19, 2019.

^ McPherson, James M. (March 1995). "Who freed the slaves?".

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society .

139 (1): 9.

JSTOR 986716 .

^ Weber, Jennifer (Winter 2011).

"Lincoln's critics: the Copperheads" .

Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association .

32 (1): 33– 47.

doi : 10.5406/19457987.32.1.05 .

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 p. 591.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 431.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 453–460.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 460–466; Wills 2012 , pp. 20, 27, 105, 146.

^ Bulla & Borchard 2010 , p. 222.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 471.

^ Thomas 2008 , p. 315.

^ Thomas 2008 , pp. 422–424.

^ Witt 2013 , pp. 276–277.

^ Neely, Mark E. Jr.

(2004). "Was the Civil War a total war?".

Civil War History .

50 (4): 438– 448.

doi : 10.1353/cwh.2004.0073 .

^ McPherson 2009 , p. 113.

^ Young 2013 , pp. 242–243; Tucker 2014 , p. 159.

^ Rhea, Gordon (Spring 2014).

"The Overland Campaign of 1864" .

Hallowed Ground .

^ Donald 1996 , p. 589.

^ Schaffer 1999 , p. 48.

^ Diamant & Carr 2022 , pp. 54–55.

^ Weisman 2002 , pp. 27–28.

^ Weisman 2002 , pp. 30–35, 85.

^ Paludan 1994 , pp. 111–112.

^ Pollack, Sheldon (2014). "The first national income tax, 1861–1872".

The Tax Lawyer .

67 (2): 311– 330.

JSTOR 24247751 .

^ Paludan 1994 , pp. 113–114.

^ Weisman 2002 , p. 85.

^ Weisman 2002 , pp. 37–38.

^ Paludan 1994 , pp. 109–110; Weisman 2002 , p. 37.

^ Weisman 2002 , p. 37 ^ Paludan 1994 , p. 111; Weisman 2002 , pp. 41–42.

^ a b c d e f Pollack, Sheldon D. (2014).

"The first national income tax, 1861–1872" (PDF) .

Tax Lawyer .

67 (2).

^ Weisman 2002 , pp. 40–42.

^ Weisman 2002 , pp. 81–82.

^ Paludan 1994 , pp. 109–110.

^ Weisman 2002 , pp. 84–88.

^ Weisman 2002 , pp. 90–91.

^ Brownlee 2004 , pp. 34–37.

^ Hamer, Sean (1996). "Lincoln's law: constitutional and policy issues posed by the qui tam provisions of the false claims act".

Kansas Journal of Law & Public Policy .

6 (2): 89– 106.

^ "The False Claims Act: a primer" (PDF) . U.S. Department of Justice . Retrieved March 13, 2025 .

^ Weisman 2002 , p. 82.

^ Paludan 1994 , p. 112.

^ Paludan 1994 , pp. 114–116; Reynolds 2020 , p. 663.

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 226–230.

^ Mahin 1999 , pp. 2–3.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 p. 93.

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 226–230; Mahin 1999 , p. 22.

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 224–229; Doyle 2015 , p. 8.

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 230, 240–241.

^ Doyle 2015 , pp. 5–8, 55, 69–70; Mahin 1999 , pp. 19–21.

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 235–236.

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 242–246; Mahin 1999 , pp. 22, 209.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 p. 85.

^ a b Britten, Thomas (2016).

"Abraham Lincoln as Great Father: a look at federal Indian policy, 1861–1865" .

American Indian Culture and Research Journal .

40 (3): 103– 122.

doi : 10.17953/aicrj.40.3.britten .

^ Nichols, David Allen (1974).

"The other civil war: Lincoln and the Indians" (PDF) .

Minnesota History : 4.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022.

^ a b c Chomsky, Carol (1990).

"The United States–Dakota war trials: a study in military injustice" .

Stanford Law Review .

43 (13): 13– 37.

doi : 10.2307/1228993 .

JSTOR 1228993 .

^ Clodfelter 1998 , pp. 40–41, 61.

^ Finkelman 2018 , p. 127.

^ a b Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 p. 481.

^ Finkelman 2018 , p. 121; Clodfelter 1998 , p. 45.

^ Clodfelter 1998 , pp. 49, 53–59.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 p. 483.

^ Green 2021 , pp. 38–39, 95–99.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 494–507; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 p. 642.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 658, 667.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 529.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 565; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 p. 758.

^ Noll 2002 , p. 426.

^ "Lincoln's second inaugural address" . U.S. National Park Service . Retrieved April 27, 2025 .

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 583–589.

^ Winik 2006 , p. 191.

^ Plante, Trevor (Spring 2015).

"Ending the bloodshed: the last surrenders of the Civil War" .

Prologue . Vol. 47, no. 1.

^ Thomas 2008 , pp. 509–512.

^ Koehn 2017 , p. 191.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 471–472.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 484.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 509–511; Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 594–600, 659–664.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 554.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 562–563.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 p. 751.

^ Carwardine 2003 , pp. 238–243.

^ Schwartz 2000 , p. 86.

^ a b Foner 2010 , p. 335.

^ Paludan 1994 , pp. 308–309.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 586–587.

^ "The President's last public address" .

The American Presidency Project . University of California, Santa Barbara . Retrieved May 3, 2025 .

^ Harrison 2010 , pp. 3–4.

^ Goodwin 2005 , pp. 734–735.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 594–597.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 597.

^ Martin, Paul (April 8, 2010).

"Lincoln's missing bodyguard" .

Smithsonian . Archived from the original on September 27, 2011.

^ Steers 2010 , p. 153.

^ Craughwell 2009 , p. 4.

^ Trefousse 1989 , p. 194.

^ Steers 2010 , p. 153; Donald 1996 , p. 599.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 p. 820.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 pp. 822–825.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 p. 822; Goodrich 2005 , pp. 231–238.

^ Hodes 2015 , pp. 84, 86, 96–97.

^ Peck 2015 , pp. 118–123.

^ "Survey of historic sites and buildings – Lincoln Tomb, Illinois" . U.S. National Park Service. Archived from the original on August 30, 2009 . Retrieved May 4, 2025 .

^ Jaffa 2000 , p. 399; Jividen 2011 , pp. 12–15.

^ Jividen 2011 , pp. 12–15.

^ Boritt & Pinsker 2002 , pp. 196–198, 229–231, 301.

^ Wilentz, Sean (2012).

"Abraham Lincoln and Jacksonian democracy" . Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016.

^ Work 2024 , p. 8.

^ Wilentz 2012 .

^ Harris 2007 , p. 2.

^ Belz 1998 , p. 86; Lincoln 1953 , pp. 256–257.

^ Carwardine 2003 , p. 4; Wilson 1999 , p. 84.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 48–49, 514–515.

^ Myers 2018 , p. 21.

^ Donald 1996 , pp. 48–49.

^ Guelzo 2009 , pp. 27–48.

^ Parrillo, Nicholas (2000). "Lincoln's Calvinist transformation: emancipation and war".

Civil War History .

46 (3): 227– 253.

doi : 10.1353/cwh.2000.0073 .

^ White 2009 , p. 180.

^ Mansfield 2012 , pp. 125–126.

^ Wilson 1999 , pp. 251–254.

^ Carwardine 2003 , pp. 27–55.

^ Carwardine, Richard (2014).

" 'Simply a theist': Herndon on Lincoln's religion" .

Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association .

35 (2): 18– 36.

doi : 10.5406/19457987.35.2.04 .

^ Havlik, Robert (1999). "Abraham Lincoln and the Reverend Dr. James Smith: Lincoln's Presbyterian experience in Springfield".

Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society .

92 (3): 222– 237.

JSTOR 40193225 .

^ Mansfield 2012 , p. xx.

^ Carwardine 2003 , p. xvi.

^ Mansfield 2012 , pp. xvii–xviii.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 41–42.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 pp. 33, 41.

^ a b Burlingame 2008 , vol. 1 p. 41.

^ Braden 1993 , p. 99.

^ Collea 2018 , pp. 13–14.

^ a b Neely & Holzer 2006 , p. 35.

^ Thompson 2015 , p. 96.

^ Burlingame 2008 , vol. 2 p. 578.

^ Bollet 2004 , p. 36.

^ Hirschhorn, Norbert; Feldman, Robert G.; Greaves, Ian (Summer 2001).

"Abraham Lincoln's blue pills: did our 16th president suffer from mercury poisoning?" .

Perspectives in Biology and Medicine .

44 (3): 315– 322.

doi : 10.1353/pbm.2001.0048 .

PMID 11482002 .

^ a b Verghese, Abraham (May 20, 2009).

"Was Lincoln dying before he was shot?" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on April 13, 2014.

^ Kent 2022 , p. 240.

^ Kent 2022 , p. 240; Schroeder-Lein 2012 , pp. 39–40.

^ Lindgren, James (November 16, 2000).

"Rating the Presidents of the United States, 1789–2000" . Federalist Society.

^ Newport, Frank (February 28, 2011).

"Americans say Reagan is the greatest U.S. president" .

Gallup.com . Archived from the original on March 14, 2012.

^ Taranto & Leo 2004 , p. 264.

^ Chesebrough 1994 , pp. 76, 79, 106, 110.

^ Schwartz 2008 , pp. 23, 91–98.

^ Carwardine & Sexton 2011 , pp. 7, 9–10, 54.

^ Schwartz 2008 , pp. xi, 9, 24.

^ Schwartz 2000 , p. 109.

^ Schwartz 2008 , pp. xi, 9.

^ Havers 2009 , p. 96.

^ Belz 2014 , pp. 514–518; Graebner 1959 , pp. 67–94; Smith 2010 , pp. 43–45.

^ Trefousse 1999 , p. 97.

^ Wheeler, Linda (May 17, 2001).

"A Civil War mystery: who named Lincoln the 'Great Emancipator'?" .

The Washington Post .

^ Zilversmit, Arthur (1980).

"Lincoln and the problem of race: a decade of interpretations" .

Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association .

2 (1): 22– 24.

doi : 10.5406/19457987.2.1.04 .

^ Barr, John M. (Winter 2014).

"Holding up a flawed mirror to the American soul: Abraham Lincoln in the writings of Lerone Bennett Jr" .

Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association .

35 (1): 43– 65.

doi : 10.5406/19457987.35.1.05 .

^ Bennett, Lerone Jr.

(1968).

"Was Abe Lincoln a white supremacist?" .

Ebony . Vol. 23, no. 4. pp.

35– 42.

^ Cashin 2002 , p. 61; Kelley & Lewis 2005 , p. 228.

^ Striner 2006 , p. 1.

^ Wilson, Kirt (2010). "Debating the Great Emancipator: Abraham Lincoln and our public memory".

Rhetoric and Public Affairs .

13 (3): 455– 479.

JSTOR 41936461 .

^ Ross, Dorothy (September 2009). "Lincoln and the ethics of emancipation: universalism, nationalism, exceptionalism".

Journal of American History .

96 (2): 379– 399.

doi : 10.1093/jahist/96.2.379 .

^ Corning & Schuman 2015 , pp. 66–72.

^ Donald 1996 , p. 15.

^ Spielberg, Steven ; Kushner, Tony ; Kearns Goodwin, Doris (2012). "Mr. Lincoln goes to Hollywood".

Smithsonian . Vol. 43, no. 7. pp.

46– 53.

^ Stokes, Melvyn (2011). "Abraham Lincoln and the movies".

American Nineteenth Century History .

12 (2): 203– 231.

doi : 10.1080/14664658.2011.594651 .

^ Samuels 2012 , p. 156.

^ Field 2011 , p. 51.

^ Avlon 2023 , pp. 270–271.

^ Peterson 1995 , p. 368.

^ Dennis 2018 , pp. 194, 197.

^ "History of USS Abraham Lincoln (CVN 72)" . United States Department of the Navy. Archived from the original on June 27, 2019 . Retrieved February 13, 2020 .

^ "President Lincoln, 1917–1918" . United States Department of the Navy . Retrieved July 20, 2025 .

^ "USS Abraham Lincoln I (SSBN-602), 1961–1982" . United States Department of the Navy . Retrieved July 20, 2025 .

^ Archie, Ayana (March 6, 2023).

"These were the most visited national parks and memorials in 2022" . NPR.

^ "Things to do: Lincoln Home" . U.S. National Park Service . Retrieved May 3, 2025 .

^ "Mount Rushmore National Memorial" . U.S. National Park Service.

Archived from the original on October 1, 2011 . Retrieved November 13, 2010 .

^ Tolles, Thayer (2013).

"Abraham Lincoln: The Man (Standing Lincoln): a bronze statuette by Augustus Saint-Gaudens" .

Metropolitan Museum Journal .

48 : 223– 237.

doi : 10.1086/675325 .

^ "The Standing Lincoln" . U.S. National Park Service . Retrieved May 3, 2025 .

^ Katz, Jamie (February 23, 2017).

"Why Abraham Lincoln was revered in Mexico" .

Smithsonian .

^ "Colorado Revised Statutes Title 24. Government State § 24-11-101. Legal holidays – effect" .

FindLaw . February 16, 2017.

Archived from the original on February 21, 2017 . Retrieved February 20, 2017 .

^ "1.14 Excluding first and including last day – legal holidays" .

Ohio Laws and Rules . April 10, 2001.

Archived from the original on February 19, 2017.

^ a b Stokes, Melvyn (2011). "Abraham Lincoln and the movies".

American Nineteenth Century History .

12 (2): 203– 231.

doi : 10.1080/14664658.2011.594651 .

^ Whipp, Glenn (February 24, 2013).

"Oscars 2013: Daniel Day-Lewis wins best actor for 'Lincoln' " .

Los Angeles Times .

Sources Avlon, John (2023).

Lincoln and the Fight for Peace . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 9781982108137 .

Baker, Jean H.

(1989).

Mary Todd Lincoln: A Biography . W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 9780393305869 .

Bartelt, William E.

(2008).

There I Grew Up: Remembering Abraham Lincoln's Indiana Youth . Indiana Historical Society Press.

ISBN 9780871952639 .

Belz, Herman (1998).

Abraham Lincoln, Constitutionalism, and Equal Rights in the Civil War Era . Fordham University Press.

ISBN 9780823217687 .

Belz, Herman (2014).

"Lincoln, Abraham" . In Frohnen, Bruce ; Beer, Jeremy; Nelson, Jeffrey O. (eds.).

American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia . Open Road Media.

ISBN 9781932236439 .

Blue, Frederick J. (1987).

Salmon P. Chase: A Life in Politics . Kent State University Press.

ISBN 9780873383400 .

Bollet, Alfred (2004).

Plagues & Poxes: The Impact of Human History on Epidemic Disease . Springer.

ISBN 9781888799798 .

Boritt, Gabor S.

; Pinsker, Matthew (2002). "Abraham Lincoln". In Graff, Henry (ed.).

The Presidents: A Reference History (7th ed.). Macmillan.

ISBN 9780684805511 .

Braden, Waldo (1993).

Abraham Lincoln: Public Speaker . Louisiana State University Press.

ISBN 9780807118528 .

Brownlee, W. Elliot (2004).

Federal Taxation in America: A Short History . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521545204 .

Bulla, David W.; Borchard, Gregory A. (2010).

Journalism in the Civil War Era . Peter Lang.

ISBN 9781433107221 .

Burlingame, Michael (2008).

Abraham Lincoln: A Life . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 9780801894671 .

Carwardine, Richard J.

(2003).

Lincoln . Pearson Longman.

ISBN 9780582032798 .

Carwardine, Richard; Sexton, Jay, eds. (2011).

The Global Lincoln . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195379112 .

Cashin, Joan E. (2002).

The War was You and Me: Civilians in the American Civil War . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691091747 .

Chesebrough, David B. (1994).

No Sorrow Like Our Sorrow: Northern Protestant Ministers and the Assassination of Lincoln . Kent State University Press.

ISBN 9780873384919 .

Clodfelter, Micheal (1998).

The Dakota War: The United States Army versus the Sioux, 1862–1865 . McFarland.

ISBN 9780786404193 .

Collea, Joseph D., Jr. (2018).

New York and the Lincoln Specials: The President's Pre-Inaugural and Funeral Trains Cross the Empire State . McFarland.

ISBN 9781476633244 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Corning, Amy; Schuman, Howard (2015).

Generations and Collective Memory . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226282831 .

Craughwell, Thomas (2009).

Stealing Lincoln's Body . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674029972 .

Dennis, Matthew (2018).

Red, White, and Blue Letter Days: An American Calendar . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 9781501723704 .

Diamant, Rolf; Carr, Ethan (2022).

Olmsted and Yosemite: Civil War, Abolition, and the National Park Idea . Library of America Landscape History.

ISBN 9781952620348 .

Donald, David Herbert (1996).

Lincoln . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 9780684825359 .

Doyle, Don (2015).

The Cause of All Nations: An International History of the American Civil War . Basic Books.

ISBN 9780465029679 .

Edgar, Walter B.

(1998).

South Carolina: A History . University of South Carolina Press.

ISBN 9781570032554 .

Emerson, Jason (2009).

Lincoln the Inventor . Southern Illinois University Press.

ISBN 9780809328987 .

Field, Ron (2011).

Garibaldi: Leadership, Strategy, Conflict . Osprey Publishing.

ISBN 9781849083218 .

Finkelman, Paul (2018). "Military conflict on the Minnesota homefront". In Finkelman, Paul; Kennon, Donald (eds.).

Civil War Congress and the Creation of Modern America . Ohio University Press. pp.

118– 167.

ISBN 9780821423387 .

Foner, Eric (2010).

The Fiery Trial: Abraham Lincoln and American Slavery . W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 9780393066180 .

Goodrich, Thomas (2005).

The Darkest Dawn: Lincoln, Booth, and the Great American Tragedy . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 9780253345677 .

Goodwin, Doris Kearns (2005).

Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 9780684824901 .

Graebner, Norman (1959).

"Abraham Lincoln: conservative statesman" . In Basler, Roy Prentice (ed.).

The Enduring Lincoln: Lincoln Sesquicentennial Lectures at the University of Illinois . University of Illinois Press.

OCLC 428674 .

Green, Michael S. (2021).

Lincoln and Native Americans . Southern Illinois University Press.

ISBN 9780809338252 .

Greenberg, Amy (2012).

A Wicked War: Polk, Clay, Lincoln, and the 1846 U.S. Invasion of Mexico . Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 9780307592699 .

Guelzo, Allen C.

(1999).

Abraham Lincoln: Redeemer President . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company.

ISBN 9780802838728 .

Guelzo, Allen C.

(2004).

Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation: The End of Slavery in America . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 9780743221825 .

Guelzo, Allen C. (2009). "Abraham Lincoln and the Doctrine of Necessity".

Abraham Lincoln as a Man of Ideas . Southern Illinois University. pp.

27– 48.

ISBN 9780809386376 .

Harrison, Lowell (2010).

Lincoln of Kentucky . University Press of Kentucky.

ISBN 9780813129402 .

Harris, William C.

(2007).

Lincoln's Rise to the Presidency . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 9780700615209 .

Harris, William C.

(2011).

Lincoln and the Border States: Preserving the Union . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 9780700620562 .

Havers, Grant N. (2009).

Lincoln and the Politics of Christian Love . University of Missouri Press.

ISBN 9780826218575 .

Heidler, David Stephen; Heidler, Jeanne T.; Coles, David J., eds. (2002).

Encyclopedia of the American Civil War: A Political, Social, and Military History . W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 9780393047585 .

Heidler, David Stephen; Heidler, Jeanne T. (2006).

The Mexican War . Greenwood Publishing Group.

ISBN 9780313327926 .

Herring, George (2008).

From Colony to Superpower: U.S. Foreign Relations Since 1776 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195078220 .

Hodes, Martha (2015).

Mourning Lincoln . Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300213560 .

Holzer, Harold (2004).

Lincoln at Cooper Union: The Speech That Made Abraham Lincoln President . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 9780743299640 .

Jaffa, Harry V.

(2000).

A New Birth of Freedom: Abraham Lincoln and the Coming of the Civil War . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 9780847699520 .

Jividen, Jason (2011).

Claiming Lincoln: Progressivism, Equality, and the Battle for Lincoln's Legacy in Presidential Rhetoric . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 9781501756870 .

Kelley, Robin D. G.

; Lewis, Earl (2005).

To Make Our World Anew . Vol. I: A History of African Americans to 1880. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198040064 .

Kent, David (2022).

Lincoln: The Fire of Genius . Globe Pequot.

ISBN 9781493063888 .

Koehn, Nancy (2017).

Forged in Crisis: The Making of Five Legendary Leaders . Scribner.

ISBN 9781501174445 .

Lamb, Brian P.

; Swain, Susan , eds. (2008).

Abraham Lincoln: Great American Historians on Our Sixteenth President . PublicAffairs.

ISBN 9781586486761 .

Lincoln, Abraham (1953).

Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln . Vol. 4. Rutgers University Press.

Lundberg, James M. (2019).

Horace Greeley: Print, Politics, and the Failure of American Nationhood . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 9781421432885 .

Madison, James H.

(2014).

Hoosiers: A New History of Indiana . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 9780253013088 .

Mahin, Dean (1999).

One War at a Time: The International Dimensions of the American Civil War . Brassey's.

ISBN 9781574882094 .

Manning, Alan (2016).

Father Lincoln . Lyons Press.

ISBN 9781493018239 .

Mansch, Larry D. (2005).

Abraham Lincoln, President-elect: The Four Critical Months from Election to Inauguration . McFarland.

ISBN 9780786420261 .

Mansfield, Stephen (2012).

Lincoln's Battle with God . Thomas Nelson.

ISBN 9781595553096 .

Marvel, William (2008).

Lincoln's Darkest Year: The War in 1862 . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

ISBN 9780547523866 .

McClintock, Russell (2008).

Lincoln and the Decision for War . University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 9780807886328 .

McGinty, Brian (2015).

Lincoln's Greatest Case: The River, the Bridge, and the Making of America . W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 9780871407856 .

McGovern, George S.

(2009).

Abraham Lincoln: The 16th President, 1861–1865 . Henry Holt and Company.

ISBN 9780805083453 .

McPherson, James M.

(1992).

Abraham Lincoln and the Second American Revolution . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195076066 .

McPherson, James M.

(2009).

Abraham Lincoln . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195374520 .

Meacham, Jon (2022).

And There Was Light: Abraham Lincoln and the American Struggle . Random House.

ISBN 9780553393965 .

Murrin, John (2006).

Liberty, Equality, Power: A History of the American People . Thomson Wadsworth.

ISBN 9780495915881 .

Myers, Marshall (2018).

The Rhetoric of Lincoln's Letters . McFarland.

ISBN 9781476631158 .

Neely, Mark ; Holzer, Harold (2006).

The Lincoln Family Album . Southern Illinois University Press.

ISBN 9780809327133 .

Noll, Mark A.

(2002).

America's God: From Jonathan Edwards to Abraham Lincoln . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195151114 .

Paludan, Phillip Shaw (1994).

The Presidency of Abraham Lincoln . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 9780700606719 .

Peck, Garrett (2015).

Walt Whitman in Washington, D.C.: The Civil War and America's Great Poet . The History Press.

ISBN 9781626199736 .

Peterson, Merrill (1995).

Lincoln in American Memory . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198023043 .

Potter, David M.

(1977).

The Impending Crisis: America Before the Civil War, 1848–1861 . HarperCollins.

ISBN 9780061319297 .

Reynolds, David (2020).

Abe . Penguin.

ISBN 9780698154513 .

Samuels, Shirley (2012).

The Cambridge Companion to Abraham Lincoln . Cambridge Companions to American Studies. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521193160 .

Sandburg, Carl (2002).

Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years and the War Years . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

ISBN 9780156027526 .

Schaffer, Jeffrey P. (1999).

Yosemite National Park: A Natural History Guide to Yosemite and Its Trails . Wilderness Press.

ISBN 9780899972442 .

Schroeder-Lein, Glenna R. (2012).

Lincoln and Medicine . Southern Illinois University Press.

ISBN 9780809331949 .

Schwartz, Barry (2000).

Abraham Lincoln and the Forge of National Memory . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226741970 .

Schwartz, Barry (2008).

Abraham Lincoln in the Post-Heroic Era: History and Memory in Late Twentieth-Century America . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226741888 .

Sears, Stephen W. (1999) [1988].

George B. McClellan: The Young Napoleon . Da Capo Press.

ISBN 9780306809132 .

Silver, David (1998).

Lincoln's Supreme Court . University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 9780252067198 .

Simon, Paul (1990).

Lincoln's Preparation for Greatness: The Legislative Years . University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 9780252002038 .

Smith, Robert C.

(2010).

Conservatism and Racism, and Why in America They Are the Same . State University of New York Press.

ISBN 9781438432335 .

Steers, Edward Jr.

(2010).

The Lincoln Assassination Encyclopedia . HarperCollins.

ISBN 9780061787751 .

Striner, Richard (2006).

Father Abraham: Lincoln's Relentless Struggle to End Slavery . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195183061 .

Taranto, James ; Leo, Leonard , eds. (2004).

Presidential Leadership: Rating the Best and the Worst in the White House . Free Press.

ISBN 9780743254335 .

Thomas, Benjamin P.

(2008).

Abraham Lincoln: A Biography . Southern Illinois University Press.

ISBN 9780809328871 .

Thomas, Benjamin Platt ; Hyman, Harold Melvin (1962).

Stanton: The Life and Times of Lincoln's Secretary of War . Alfred A. Knopf.

Thompson, Todd (2015).

The National Joker: Abraham Lincoln and the Politics of Satire . Southern Illinois University Press.

ISBN 9780809334230 .

Trefousse, Hans L.

(1989).

Andrew Johnson: A Biography . W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 9780393317428 .

Trefousse, Hans L.

(1999). "Lincoln and race relations". In Hubbard, Charles (ed.).

Abraham Lincoln and His Contemporaries . Mercer University Press. pp.

87– 100.

ISBN 9780865546271 .

Tucker, Spencer (2014).

Battles that Changed American History . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 9781440828621 .

Vile, John R. (2003). "Lincoln, Abraham (1809–1865)".

Encyclopedia of Constitutional Amendments: Proposed Amendments, and Amending Issues 1789–2002 (2nd ed.). ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 9781851094288 .

Vorenberg, Michael (2001).

Final Freedom: The Civil War, the Abolition of Slavery, and the Thirteenth Amendment . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521652674 .

Weisman, Steven R. (2002).

The Great Tax Wars: Lincoln to Wilson—The Fierce Battles over Money and Power That Transformed the Nation . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 9780684850689 .

White, Ronald C.

(2009).

A. Lincoln: A Biography . Random House.

ISBN 9781588367754 .

White, Jonathan W. (2011).

Abraham Lincoln and Treason in the Civil War: The Trials of John Merryman . Louisiana State University Press.

ISBN 9780807142158 .

Wills, Garry (2012).

Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words that Remade America . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 9781439126455 .

Wilson, Douglas L.

(1999).

Honor's Voice: The Transformation of Abraham Lincoln . Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 9780307765819 .

Winik, Jay (2006) [2001].

April 1865: The Month That Saved America . HarperCollins.

ISBN 9780060899684 .

Winkle, Kenneth J. (2001).

The Young Eagle: The Rise of Abraham Lincoln . Taylor Trade Publishing.

ISBN 9781461734369 .

Witt, John Fabian (2013).

Lincoln's Code: The Laws of War in American History . Free Press.

ISBN 9781416576174 .

Winkle, Kenneth J. (2011).

Abraham and Mary Lincoln . Southern Illinois University Press.

ISBN 9780809379996 .

Work, David (2024).

Lincoln's Political Generals . University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 9780252056888 .

Young, Alfred C., III (2013).

Lee's Army during the Overland Campaign: A Numerical Study . Louisiana State University Press.

ISBN 9780807151723 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Zarefsky, David (1993).

Lincoln, Douglas, and Slavery: In the Crucible of Public Debate . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226978765 .

External links Abraham Lincoln at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Library resources about Abraham Lincoln Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Abraham Lincoln Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries United States Congress.

"Abraham Lincoln (id: L000313)" .

Biographical Directory of the United States Congress .

Works by or about Abraham Lincoln at the Internet Archive Works by Abraham Lincoln at Project Gutenberg Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum Abraham Lincoln Association Abraham Lincoln: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress Papers of Abraham Lincoln Digital Library from Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library — A digitization of all documents written by or to Abraham Lincoln during his lifetime Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln – complete collected works as edited by Basler et al. (1958) – an online edition available through University of Michigan Library Digital Collections Lincoln/Net: Abraham Lincoln Historical Digitization Project – Northern Illinois University Digital Library The Alfred Whital Stern Collection of Lincolniana in the Rare Book and Special Collections Division in the Library of Congress "Writings of Abraham Lincoln" from C-SPAN 's American Writers: A Journey Through History , June 18, 2001 v t e Abraham Lincoln 16th President of the United States (1861–1865) U.S. Representative for IL–7 (1847–1849) Presidency Transition First inauguration Perpetual Union Lincoln Bible Second inauguration Civil War Proclamation 80 Confiscation Acts War based income tax Seaports blockade RMS Trent Affair Habeas Corpus suspended Emancipation Proclamation West Virginia statehood Overland Campaign strategy Hampton Roads Conference Tour of Richmond Ten percent plan Reconstruction Foreign policy 13th Amendment abolishing slavery Dakota War of 1862 Department of the Northwest Homestead Act of 1862 National Banking Acts Thanksgiving Day Fanny McCullough letter Birchard Letter Bixby letter National Academy of Sciences Department of Agriculture Pardons State of the Union Address, 1863 1864 Cabinet Judicial appointments Speeches Lyceum address (1838) Peoria speech (1854) "Lost Speech" (1856) House Divided speech (1858) Lincoln–Douglas debates (1858) Cooper Union Address (1860) Farewell Address (1861) First inaugural address (1861) Gettysburg Address (1863, event) Second inaugural address (1865) Life and views Early life and career Black Hawk War Matson Trial Spot Resolutions Boat lifting patent Hurd v. Rock Island Bridge Co.

Baltimore Plot Lincoln's beard Medical and mental health Poetry Political career, 1849–1861 Religious views Sexuality Slavery Homes and places Lincoln Birthplace Knob Creek Farm Lincoln Boyhood Memorial Lincoln State Park Little Pigeon Creek Community Lincoln Trail Homestead State Memorial Lincoln's New Salem Lincoln-Berry General Store Lincoln Home Cottage at the Soldier's Home Lincoln Bedroom Lincoln Sitting Room Lincoln Pioneer Village Lincoln Log Cabin State Historic Site Elections Republican National Convention, 1856 1860 1864 National Union Party 1860 United States presidential election 1864 1860 campaign song Assassination Ford's Theater Our American Cousin opera John Wilkes Booth " Sic semper tyrannis " Petersen House State funeral Lincoln catafalque Lincoln Tomb " O Captain! My Captain!

" " When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd " Legacy and memorials Presidential Library and Museum Papers Lincoln/Net Artifacts and relics Bibliography Birthday Photographs of Lincoln Cultural depictions films Art Currency Illinois Centennial half dollar Lincoln penny Five-dollar bill Mount Rushmore Anniversary coins Postage stamps Abraham Lincoln Association Abraham Lincoln Institute Association of Lincoln Presenters USS Abraham Lincoln (1960, 1988) Here I Grew Up mosaic Lincoln Highway Lincoln, Nebraska Lincoln Park (Chicago) Lincoln Park (D.C.) Lincoln Prize Lincoln Heritage Trail Lincoln Trail State Memorial Mount Abraham Lincoln–Kennedy coincidences Great Moments with Mr. Lincoln White House ghost Statues Lincoln Memorial statue reflecting pool Mount Rushmore Abraham Lincoln: The Man Abraham Lincoln: The Head of State Lincoln the Lawyer Young Abe Lincoln Emancipation Memorial Brooklyn relief Cincinnati D.C. City Hall Hodgenville, Kentucky Indianapolis relief Laramie, Wyoming Lincoln, Nebraska Los Angeles Louisville, Kentucky Newark, New Jersey New York City Parliament Square, London Philadelphia Rochester U.S. Capitol bust U.S. Capitol statue Wabash, Indiana Family Family tree Mary Todd Lincoln (wife) Robert Todd Lincoln (son) Edward Baker Lincoln (son) William Wallace Lincoln (son) Thomas "Tad" Lincoln III (son) Mary Todd "Mamie" Lincoln (granddaughter) Jessie Harlan Lincoln (granddaughter) Thomas Lincoln (father) Nancy Hanks Lincoln (mother) Sarah Bush Lincoln (stepmother) Sarah Lincoln Grigsby (sister) Abraham Lincoln (grandfather) Mordecai Lincoln (uncle) Mary Lincoln Crume (aunt) John Hanks (cousin) Joseph Hanks (great-grandfather) Samuel Lincoln (17th-century ancestor) Mary Lincoln Beckwith (great-granddaughter) Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith (great-grandson) Old Bob (horse) Fido (dog) ← James Buchanan Andrew Johnson → Category Outline Offices and distinctions U.S. House of Representatives Preceded by John Henry Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Illinois's 7th congressional district 1847–1849 Succeeded by Thomas Harris Party political offices Preceded by John Frémont Republican nominee for President of the United States 1860 , 1864 Succeeded by Ulysses Grant Political offices Preceded by James Buchanan President of the United States 1861–1865 Succeeded by Andrew Johnson Honorary titles Preceded by Henry Clay Persons who have lain in state or honor in the United States Capitol rotunda 1865 Succeeded by Thaddeus Stevens Articles related to Abraham Lincoln v t e Lincoln–Douglas debates Participants Abraham Lincoln Stephen A. Douglas Other 1858 United States Senate elections Freeport Doctrine 1994 reenactments Lincoln–Douglas debate format v t e Presidents of the United States Presidents and presidencies George Washington ( 1789–1797 ) John Adams ( 1797–1801 ) Thomas Jefferson ( 1801–1809 ) James Madison ( 1809–1817 ) James Monroe ( 1817–1825 ) John Quincy Adams ( 1825–1829 ) Andrew Jackson ( 1829–1837 ) Martin Van Buren ( 1837–1841 ) William Henry Harrison ( 1841 ) John Tyler ( 1841–1845 ) James K. Polk ( 1845–1849 ) Zachary Taylor ( 1849–1850 ) Millard Fillmore ( 1850–1853 ) Franklin Pierce ( 1853–1857 ) James Buchanan ( 1857–1861 ) Abraham Lincoln ( 1861–1865 ) Andrew Johnson ( 1865–1869 ) Ulysses S. Grant ( 1869–1877 ) Rutherford B. Hayes ( 1877–1881 ) James A. Garfield ( 1881 ) Chester A. Arthur ( 1881–1885 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1885–1889 ) Benjamin Harrison ( 1889–1893 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1893–1897 ) William McKinley ( 1897–1901 ) Theodore Roosevelt ( 1901–1909 ) William Howard Taft ( 1909–1913 ) Woodrow Wilson ( 1913–1921 ) Warren G. Harding ( 1921–1923 ) Calvin Coolidge ( 1923–1929 ) Herbert Hoover ( 1929–1933 ) Franklin D. Roosevelt ( 1933–1945 ) Harry S. Truman ( 1945–1953 ) Dwight D. Eisenhower ( 1953–1961 ) John F. Kennedy ( 1961–1963 ) Lyndon B. Johnson ( 1963–1969 ) Richard Nixon ( 1969–1974 ) Gerald Ford ( 1974–1977 ) Jimmy Carter ( 1977–1981 ) Ronald Reagan ( 1981–1989 ) George H. W. Bush ( 1989–1993 ) Bill Clinton ( 1993–2001 ) George W. Bush ( 2001–2009 ) Barack Obama ( 2009–2017 ) Donald Trump ( 2017–2021 ) Joe Biden ( 2021–2025 ) Donald Trump ( 2025–present ) Presidency timelines Washington J. Adams McKinley T. Roosevelt Taft Wilson Harding Coolidge Hoover F. D. Roosevelt Truman Eisenhower Kennedy L. B. Johnson Nixon Ford Carter Reagan G. H. W. Bush Clinton G. W. Bush Obama Trump Biden Category List v t e Republican Party History National Union Party Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System Presidential tickets , national conventions , and presidential primaries 1856 (Philadelphia) : Frémont / Dayton 1860 (Chicago) : Lincoln / Hamlin 1864 (Baltimore) : Lincoln / Johnson 1868 (Chicago) : Grant / Colfax 1872 (Philadelphia) : Grant / Wilson 1876 (Cincinnati) : Hayes / Wheeler 1880 (Chicago) : Garfield / Arthur 1884 (Chicago) : Blaine / Logan 1888 (Chicago) : Harrison / Morton 1892 (Minneapolis) : Harrison / Reid 1896 (Saint Louis) : McKinley / Hobart 1900 (Philadelphia) : McKinley / Roosevelt 1904 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Fairbanks 1908 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman 1912 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman / Butler primaries 1916 (Chicago) : Hughes / Fairbanks primaries 1920 (Chicago) : Harding / Coolidge primaries 1924 (Cleveland) : Coolidge / Dawes primaries 1928 (Kansas City) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1932 (Chicago) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1936 (Cleveland) : Landon / Knox primaries 1940 (Philadelphia) : Willkie / McNary primaries 1944 (Chicago) : Dewey / Bricker primaries 1948 (Philadelphia) : Dewey / Warren primaries 1952 (Chicago) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1956 (San Francisco) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1960 (Chicago) : Nixon / Lodge primaries 1964 (San Francisco) : Goldwater / Miller primaries 1968 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1972 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1976 (Kansas City) : Ford / Dole primaries 1980 (Detroit) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1984 (Dallas) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1988 (New Orleans) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1992 (Houston) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1996 (San Diego) : Dole / Kemp primaries 2000 (Philadelphia) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2004 (New York) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2008 (St. Paul) : McCain / Palin primaries 2012 (Tampa) : Romney / Ryan primaries 2016 (Cleveland) : Trump / Pence primaries 2020 (Charlotte/other locations) : Trump / Pence primaries 2024 (Milwaukee) : Trump / Vance primaries 2028 (Houston) Presidential administrations Lincoln (1861–1865) Johnson (1865–1868) Grant (1869–1877) Hayes (1877–1881) Garfield (1881) Arthur (1881–1885) Harrison (1889–1893) McKinley (1897–1901) Roosevelt (1901–1909) Taft (1909–1913) Harding (1921–1923) Coolidge (1923–1929) Hoover (1929–1933) Eisenhower (1953–1961) Nixon (1969–1974) Ford (1974–1977) Reagan (1981–1989) G. H. W. Bush (1989–1993) G. W. Bush (2001–2009) Trump ( 2017–2021 ; 2025–present ) U.S. Senate leaders and Conference chairs J. P. Hale (1859–1862) Anthony (1862–1884) Sherman (1884–1885) Edmunds (1885–1891) Sherman (1891–1897) Allison (1897–1908) E. Hale (1908–1911) Cullom (1911–1913) Gallinger (1913–1918) Lodge (1918–1924) Curtis (1924–1929) Watson (1929–1933) McNary (1933–1940) Austin (1940–1941) McNary (1941–1944) White (1944–1949) Wherry (1949–1952) Bridges (1952–1953) Taft (1953) Knowland (1953–1959) Dirksen (1959–1969) Scott (1969–1977) Baker (1977–1979) Stevens (1979–1980) Baker (1980–1985) Dole (1985–1996) Lott (1996–2003) Frist (2003–2007) McConnell (2007–2025) Thune (2025–present) U.S. House leaders , Speakers , and Conference chairs Pennington (1860–1861) Grow (1861–1863) Colfax (1863–1869) Pomeroy (1869) Blaine (1869–1875) McCrary (1875–1877) Hale (1877–1879) Frye (1879–1881) Keifer (1881–1883) Cannon (1883–1889) Reed (1889–1891) T. J. Henderson (1891–1895) Reed (1895–1899) D. B. Henderson (1899–1903) Cannon (1903–1911) Mann (1911–1919) Gillett (1919–1925) Longworth (1925–1931) Snell (1931–1939) Martin (1939–1959) Halleck (1959–1965) Ford (1965–1973) Rhodes (1973–1981) Michel (1981–1995) Gingrich (1995–1999) Hastert (1999–2007) Boehner (2007–2015) Ryan (2015–2019) McCarthy (2019–2023) Johnson (2023–present) RNC Chairs Morgan Raymond Ward Claflin Morgan Chandler Cameron Jewell Sabin Jones Quay Clarkson Campbell Carter Hanna Payne Cortelyou New Hitchcock Hill Rosewater Hilles Wilcox Hays Adams Butler Work Huston Fess Sanders Fletcher Hamilton Martin Walsh Spangler Brownell Reece Scott Gabrielson Summerfield Roberts Hall Alcorn T. Morton Miller Burch Bliss R. Morton Dole Bush Smith Brock Richards Laxalt / Fahrenkopf Fahrenkopf Atwater Yeutter Bond Barbour Nicholson Gilmore Racicot Gillespie Mehlman Martínez / Duncan Duncan Steele Priebus McDaniel Whatley Chair elections 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2024 Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Affiliated organizations Congress House Conference Legislative Digest Steering and Policy Committees Senate Conference Policy Committee Factions Freedom Caucus Problem Solvers Caucus Republican Governance Group Republican Study Committee Campaign committees National Republican Congressional Committee National Republican Redistricting Trust National Republican Senatorial Committee Republican Attorneys General Association Republican Governors Association Constituency groups College Republicans Chairmen Congressional Hispanic Conference Log Cabin Republicans National Black Republican Association Republican Hindu Coalition Republican Jewish Coalition Republican Muslim Coalition Republican National Hispanic Assembly Republicans Abroad Teen Age Republicans Young Republicans Republicans Overseas Factional groups Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Majority for Choice Republican Liberty Caucus Republican National Coalition for Life ConservAmerica Liberty Caucus Ripon Society The Wish List Related Primaries Debates Bibliography International Democracy Union Three Legged Stool Timeline of modern American conservatism Trumpism v t e Illinois 's delegation(s) to the 30th United States Congress (ordered by seniority) 30th Senate : ▌ S. Breese (D) · ▌ S. Douglas (D) House : ▌ O. Ficklin (D) ▌ J. McClernand (D) ▌ R. Smith (ID) ▌ J. Wentworth (D) ▌ A. Lincoln (W) ▌ T. Turner (D) ▌ W. Richardson (D) v t e Historical anti-slavery parties in the United States Presidential tickets Liberty Party James G. Birney / Thomas Earle ( 1840 ) James G. Birney / Thomas Morris ( 1844 ) Gerrit Smith /Charles C. Foote ( 1848 ) William Goodell /S. M. Bell ( 1852 ) Gerrit Smith /Samuel McFarland ( 1856 1860 ) Free Soil Party Martin Van Buren / Charles F. Adams ( 1848 ) John P. Hale / George W. Julian ( 1852 ) Republican Party John C. Frémont / William L. Dayton ( 1856 ) Abraham Lincoln / Hannibal Hamlin ( 1860 ) National Union Party Abraham Lincoln / Andrew Johnson ( 1864 ) National conventions 1848 Free Soil 1856 Republican 1860 Republican 1864 National Union Other party leaders Salmon P. Chase Charles Sumner Thaddeus Stevens William H. Seward Simon Cameron Edward Bates Francis P. Blair Related groups American Anti-Slavery Society Anti-Nebraska movement Barnburners Conscience Whigs North American Party Radical Abolitionist Party Radical Democratic Party v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright v t e ( ← 1852 ) 1856 United States presidential election ( 1860 → ) Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: James Buchanan Vice President: John C. Breckinridge Other candidates Lewis Cass Stephen A. Douglas Franklin Pierce (incumbent) Republican Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: John C. Frémont Vice President: William L. Dayton Other candidates Nathaniel P. Banks Abraham Lincoln John McLean Robert F. Stockton American Party Nominees President: Millard Fillmore Vice President: Andrew J. Donelson Other candidates George Law Other 1856 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1856 ) 1860 United States presidential election ( 1864 → ) Republican Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Abraham Lincoln Vice President: Hannibal Hamlin Other candidates Edward Bates Simon Cameron Salmon P. Chase William L. Dayton John McLean William H. Seward Benjamin Wade Democratic Party (Southern) ( Convention ) Nominees President: John C. Breckinridge (incumbent VP) Vice President: Joseph Lane Other candidates Daniel S. Dickinson Constitutional Union Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: John Bell Vice President: Edward Everett Other candidates John J. Crittenden William A. Graham Sam Houston William C. Rives Democratic Party (Northern) ( Conventions ) Nominees President: Stephen A. Douglas Vice President: Herschel V. Johnson Other candidates Daniel S. Dickinson James Guthrie Robert M. T. Hunter Andrew Johnson Other 1860 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1860 ) 1864 United States presidential election ( 1868 → ) National Union Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Abraham Lincoln (incumbent) Vice President: Andrew Johnson Other candidates President: Ulysses S. Grant Vice President: Benjamin Butler Daniel S. Dickinson Hannibal Hamlin (incumbent) Lovell Rousseau Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: George B. McClellan Vice President: George H. Pendleton Other candidates President: Thomas H. Seymour Vice President: George W. Cass Augustus C. Dodge Daniel W. Voorhees Other 1864 elections : House Senate v t e American Civil War Origins Origins Timeline leading to the War Bleeding Kansas Border states Compromise of 1850 John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry Kansas-Nebraska Act Lincoln–Douglas debates Missouri Compromise Nullification crisis Panic of 1857 Popular sovereignty Secession South Carolina Declaration of Secession States' rights Proclamation 80 Slavery African Americans Cornerstone Speech Crittenden Compromise Dred Scott v. Sandford Emancipation Proclamation Fire-Eaters Fugitive slave laws Plantations in the American South Positive good Slave Power Treatment of slaves in the United States Uncle Tom's Cabin Abolitionism Abolitionism in the United States Susan B. Anthony James G. Birney John Brown Frederick Douglass William Lloyd Garrison Lane Debates on Slavery Elijah Parish Lovejoy J. Sella Martin Lysander Spooner George Luther Stearns Thaddeus Stevens Charles Sumner Caning Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Combatants Theaters Campaigns Battles States Combatants Union Army Navy Marine Corps Revenue Cutter Service Confederacy Army Navy Marine Corps Theaters Eastern Western Lower Seaboard Trans-Mississippi Pacific Coast Union naval blockade Major campaigns Anaconda Plan Blockade runners New Mexico Jackson's Valley Peninsula Northern Virginia Maryland Stones River Vicksburg Tullahoma Gettysburg Morgan's Raid Bristoe Knoxville Red River Overland Atlanta Valley 1864 Bermuda Hundred Richmond-Petersburg Franklin–Nashville Price's Missouri Expedition Sherman's March Carolinas Mobile Appomattox Major battles Fort Sumter 1st Bull Run Wilson's Creek Fort Donelson Pea Ridge Hampton Roads Shiloh New Orleans Corinth Seven Pines Seven Days 2nd Bull Run Antietam Perryville Fredericksburg Stones River Chancellorsville Gettysburg Vicksburg Chickamauga Chattanooga Wilderness Fort Pillow Spotsylvania Cold Harbor Atlanta Crater Mobile Bay Franklin Nashville Five Forks Involvement States and territories Alabama Arkansas Arizona California Colorado Connecticut Dakota Territory District of Columbia Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indian Territory Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina Ohio Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Cities Atlanta Charleston Chattanooga New Orleans Richmond Washington, D.C.

Winchester Leaders Confederate Military R. H. Anderson Beauregard Bragg Buchanan Cooper Early Ewell Forrest Gorgas Hill Hood Jackson A. S. Johnston J. E. Johnston Lee Longstreet Morgan Mosby Polk Price Semmes E. K. Smith Stuart Taylor Wheeler Civilian Benjamin Bocock Breckinridge Davis Hunter Mallory Memminger Seddon Stephens Union Military Anderson Buell Burnside Butler Du Pont Farragut Foote Frémont Grant Halleck Hooker Hunt McClellan McDowell Meade Meigs Ord Pope D. D. Porter Rosecrans Scott Sheridan Sherman Thomas Civilian Adams Chase Ericsson Hamlin Lincoln Pinkerton Seward Stanton Stevens Wade Welles Aftermath Constitution Reconstruction Amendments 13th Amendment 14th Amendment 15th Amendment Reconstruction Alabama Claims Brooks–Baxter War Carpetbaggers Colfax riot of 1873 Compromise of 1877 Confederate refugees Confederados Eufaula riot of 1874 Freedmen's Bureau Freedman's Savings Bank Homestead Acts Southern Homestead Act of 1866 Timber Culture Act of 1873 Impeachment of Andrew Johnson trial efforts timeline first inquiry second inquiry impeachment managers investigation Kirk–Holden war Knights of the White Camelia Ku Klux Klan Ethnic violence Memphis riots of 1866 Meridian riot of 1871 New Orleans riot of 1866 Pulaski (Tennessee) riot of 1867 South Carolina riots of 1876 Reconstruction acts Habeas Corpus Act of 1867 Enforcement Act of 1870 Enforcement Act of February 1871 Enforcement Act of April 1871 Reconstruction era Reconstruction military districts Reconstruction Treaties Indian Council at Fort Smith Red Shirts Redeemers Scalawags South Carolina riots of 1876 Southern Claims Commission White League Post- Reconstruction Commemoration Centennial Civil War Discovery Trail Civil War Roundtables Civil War Trails Program Civil War Trust Confederate History Month Confederate Memorial Day Decoration Day Historical reenactment Robert E. Lee Day Confederate Memorial Hall Disenfranchisement Black Codes Jim Crow Historiographic issues Lost Cause mythology Modern display of the Confederate flag Red Shirts Sons of Confederate Veterans Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War Daughters of Union Veterans of the Civil War National Society Daughters of the Union 1861-1865 Southern Historical Society United Confederate Veterans United Daughters of the Confederacy Children of the Confederacy Wilmington insurrection of 1898 Monuments and memorials Union List Grand Army of the Republic memorials to Lincoln Confederate List artworks in Capitol memorials to Davis memorials to Lee Removal Cemeteries Ladies' Memorial Associations U.S. national cemeteries Veterans 1913 Gettysburg reunion 1938 Gettysburg reunion Confederate Memorial Hall Confederate Veteran Grand Army of the Republic Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S.

Old soldiers' homes Southern Cross of Honor United Confederate Veterans Related topics Military Arms Armies Campaign Medal Cavalry Confederate Home Guard Confederate railroads Confederate revolving cannon Field artillery Infantry Medal of Honor recipients Medicine Naval battles Official Records Partisan rangers POW camps Rations Signal Corps Turning point Union corps badges U.S. Balloon Corps U.S. Home Guard U.S. Military Railroad Political Committee on the Conduct of the War Confederate States presidential election of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1862 Copperheads Diplomacy Emancipation Proclamation Habeas Corpus Act of 1863 Hampton Roads Conference National Union Party Politicians killed Radical Republicans Trent Affair Union Leagues U.S. Presidential Election of 1864 War Democrats Music Battle Hymn of the Republic Dixie John Brown's Body A Lincoln Portrait Marching Through Georgia Maryland, My Maryland Names from the War When Johnny Comes Marching Home Daar kom die Alibama By ethnicity African Americans German Americans Irish Americans Italian Americans Native Americans Catawba Cherokee Choctaw Seminole Other topics Baltimore riot of 1861 Battlefield preservation Bibliography Confederate war finance Confederate States dollar Espionage Confederate Secret Service Great Hanging at Gainesville Great Revival of 1863 Gender issues Juneteenth Naming the war New York City Gold Hoax of 1864 New York City riots of 1863 Photographers Richmond riots of 1863 Salt Supreme Court cases Tokens U.S. Sanitary Commission Women soldiers Related List of films and television shows about the American Civil War Category Portal v t e Reconstruction era Participants Federal government Presidents Abraham Lincoln Andrew Johnson Ulysses S. Grant Rutherford B. Hayes Congress 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 Radical Republicans Moderate Republicans Conservative Republicans African-American senators African-American representatives Reconstruction Amendments United States Congressional Joint Committee on Reconstruction United States House Select Committee on Reconstruction Federal judiciary Taney Court Chase Court Waite Court Federal bureaucracy Edwin Stanton Freedmen's Bureau Justice Department State governments Southern United States Confederate States of America Others African Americans Free people of color Freedman Politicians Carpetbaggers Ku Klux Klan Scalawag Redeemers White League Red Shirts Democratic Party Bourbon Democrat Horatio Seymour Samuel J. Tilden Republican Party Stalwarts Charles Sumner Thaddeus Stevens Lyman Trumbull Benjamin Wade John Bingham James Mitchell Ashley Freedman's Savings Bank Women during the Reconstruction era Elections Presidential 1864 DNC National Union Convention Radical Democratic Party 1868 DNC RNC 1872 DNC RNC Liberal Republican Party Straight-Out Democratic Party Victoria Woodhull 1876 DNC RNC Greenback Convention Prohibition Convention Electoral Commission Compromise of 1877 U.S. Senate 1864–65 1866–67 1868–69 1870–71 1872–73 1874–75 1876–77 U.S. House 1864–65 1866–67 1868–69 1870–71 1872–73 1874–75 1876–77 Gubernatorial 1863 Alabama California Connecticut Kentucky Massachusetts Minnesota New Hampshire Ohio Pennsylvania Virginia Vermont Wisconsin West Virginia 1864 Connecticut Illinois Indiana Louisiana Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Missouri New Hampshire Vermont West Virginia 1865 Connecticut Florida Louisiana Massachusetts Minnesota New Jersey Ohio South Carolina Vermont Wisconsin 1866 Connecticut Delaware Massachusetts Maine Michigan North Carolina Oregon Pennsylvania Texas Vermont West Virginia 1867 California Connecticut Kentucky Massachusetts Maryland Maine Minnesota Ohio Vermont Wisconsin 1868 Alabama Connecticut Florida Illinois Indiana Kentucky (special) Louisiana Massachusetts Maine Michigan Missouri North Carolina New Jersey South Carolina Vermont West Virginia 1869 Connecticut Iowa Massachusetts Maine Minnesota Mississippi Ohio Pennsylvania Rhode Island Virginia Vermont Wisconsin 1870 Alabama Connecticut Delaware Massachusetts Maine Michigan Missouri Oregon Rhode Island South Carolina Vermont West Virginia 1871 California Connecticut Iowa Kentucky Massachusetts Maryland Maine Minnesota New Jersey Ohio Rhode Island Wisconsin 1872 Alabama Connecticut Florida Illinois Indiana Louisiana Massachusetts Maine Michigan Missouri North Carolina Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina Vermont West Virginia 1873 Connecticut Iowa Massachusetts Maine Minnesota Mississippi Ohio Texas Virginia Wisconsin 1874 Alabama Connecticut Delaware Kansas Massachusetts Maine Michigan Missouri New Jersey Nevada Oregon South Carolina Vermont 1875 California Connecticut Iowa Kentucky Massachusetts Maryland Maine Minnesota Ohio Ohio Wisconsin 1876 Alabama Colorado Connecticut April Connecticut November Florida Illinois Indiana Kansas Louisiana Massachusetts Maine Michigan Missouri North Carolina Rhode Island South Carolina Vermont West Virginia U.S. elections 1864 1866 1868 1870 1872 1874 1876 Key events Prelude American Indian Wars Slavery in the United States A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) The Equality of the Sexes and the Condition of Women (1838) Woman in the Nineteenth Century (1839) Seneca Falls Convention (1848) National Women's Rights Convention (1850) American Civil War Confiscation Act of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1862 District of Columbia Compensated Emancipation Act (1862) Militia Act of 1862 1863 Emancipation Proclamation General Order No. 143 Lincoln's presidential Reconstruction Ten percent plan National Bank Act Women's Loyal National League New York City draft riots 1863 State of the Union Address 1864 Wade–Davis Bill 1864 elections 1864 State of the Union Address 1865 13th Amendment Second inauguration of Abraham Lincoln Address Black Codes Special Field Orders No. 15 Freedmen's Bureau Freedmen's Bureau bills Confederates surrender at Appomattox Assassination of Abraham Lincoln Shaw University New Departure 1865 State of the Union Address Founding of the Ku Klux Klan 1866 Civil Rights Act of 1866 Memphis massacre of 1866 New Orleans Massacre of 1866 Swing Around the Circle Southern Homestead Act of 1866 Fort Smith Conference and Cherokee Reconstruction Treaty of 1866 Choctaw and Chickasaw Treaty of Washington of 1866 Tennessee readmitted to Union Petition for Universal Freedom National Labor Union Ex parte Garland Ex parte Milligan Slave Kidnapping Act of 1866 1866 elections 1867 Tenure of Office Act Command of Army Act Indian Peace Commission Knights of the White Camelia Pulaski riot Reconstruction Acts Reconstruction military districts Constitutional conventions of 1867 Habeas Corpus Act of 1867 Peonage Act of 1867 First impeachment inquiry into Andrew Johnson 1867 State of the Union Address 1868 14th Amendment Second impeachment inquiry into Andrew Johnson Impeachment of Andrew Johnson Timeline Impeachment trial of Andrew Johnson Impeachment managers investigation Articles of impeachment Arkansas readmitted to Union Florida readmitted to Union North Carolina readmitted to Union South Carolina readmitted to Union Louisiana readmitted to Union Alabama readmitted to Union Opelousas massacre Fourth Reconstruction Act Georgia v. Stanton 1868 elections 1868 State of the Union Address 1869 National Woman Suffrage Association American Woman Suffrage Association Alabama Claims Proposed annexation of Santo Domingo Board of Indian Commissioners Public Credit Act of 1869 Black Friday (1869) Ex parte McCardle First transcontinental railroad 1869 State of the Union Address 1870 15th Amendment Enforcement Act of 1870 Justice Department Naturalization Act of 1870 Kirk–Holden war Shoffner Act 1870 elections 1870 State of the Union Address 1871 Ku Klux Klan hearings Second Enforcement Act Ku Klux Klan Act Alcorn State University Meridian race riot of 1871 Treaty of Washington New York custom house ring Civil service commission United States expedition to Korea 1871 State of the Union Address 1872 General Mining Act of 1872 Crédit Mobilier scandal Modoc War Star Route scandal Salary Grab Act Amnesty Act 1872 elections 1872 State of the Union Address 1873 Panic of 1873 Colfax massacre Timber Culture Act Slaughter-House Cases Virginius Affair Coinage Act of 1873 Long Depression Comstock laws 1873 State of the Union Address 1874 Brooks–Baxter War Battle of Liberty Place Coushatta massacre Red River War Timber Culture Act White League Election Massacre of 1874 Vicksburg massacre Black Hills Gold Rush Sanborn incident Anti-Moiety Acts 1874 elections 1874 State of the Union Address 1875 United States v. Cruikshank Civil Rights Act of 1875 Red Shirts Mississippi Plan Clifton Riot of 1875 Yazoo City Riot of 1875 Specie Payment Resumption Act Whiskey Ring Wheeler Compromise Delano affair Pratt & Boyd 1875 State of the Union Address 1876 Hamburg massacre South Carolina civil disturbances of 1876 Ellenton massacre Great Sioux War of 1876 Battle of the Little Bighorn United States v. Reese Trader post scandal Centennial Exposition Cattellism Safe burglary conspiracy 1876 elections 1876 State of the Union Address 1877 Electoral Commission Compromise of 1877 Nez Perce War Desert Land Act Great Railroad Strike of 1877 Aftermath Posse Comitatus Act (1878) Civil Rights Cases (1883) United States v. Harris (1883) Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) Williams v. Mississippi (1898) Wilmington massacre Giles v. Harris (1903) Disenfranchisement Aspects Historiography Bibliography of the Reconstruction era James Shepherd Pike The Prostrate State (1874) James Bryce The American Commonwealth (1888) Claude G. Bowers The Tragic Era (1929) Columbia University John Burgess Walter L. Fleming Dunning School William Archibald Dunning Charles A. Beard Howard K. Beale W. E. B. Du Bois Black Reconstruction in America (1935) C. Vann Woodward Joel Williamson William R. Brock The American Crisis (1963) John Hope Franklin From Slavery to Freedom (1947) After Slavery (1965) Leon Litwack Been in the Storm So Long (1979) Eric Foner Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863–1877 (1988) Kenneth M. Stampp Steven Hahn A Nation Under Our Feet (2003) The Second Founding: How the Civil War and Reconstruction Remade the Constitution (2019) Memory Winslow Homer A Visit from the Old Mistress (1876) Thomas Dixon Jr.

The Leopard's Spots (1902) The Clansman: A Historical Romance of the Ku Klux Klan (1905) D. W. Griffith The Birth of a Nation (1915) United Daughters of the Confederacy Gone with the Wind (1939) David W. Blight Race and Reunion (2001) Legacy Women's suffrage in the United States Labor history of the United States Gilded Age Jim Crow era Civil rights movement American frontier Other topics African American founding fathers of the United States Forty acres and a mule Habeas corpus History of the United States (1865–1917) Paramilitary Race (human categorization) Reconstruction Treaties Suffrage Technological and industrial history of the United States White supremacy Whitecapping Category v t e Individuals lain in state , in honor and in repose in the United States State funerals in the United States Lain in state US Capitol rotunda Clay (1852) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) Stevens (1868) Sumner (1874) Wilson (1875) Garfield (1881) Logan (1886) McKinley (1901) L'Enfant (1909) Dewey (1917) Unknown Soldier for World War I (1921) Harding (1923) W. H. Taft (1930) Pershing (1948) R. A. Taft (1953) Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War (1958) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) MacArthur (1964) H. Hoover (1964) Eisenhower (1969) Dirksen (1969) J. E. Hoover (1972) Johnson (1973) Humphrey (1978) Blassie / Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War (1984) Pepper (1989) Reagan (2004, funeral ) Ford (2006–07, funeral ) Inouye (2012) McCain (2018) Bush (2018, funeral ) Lewis (2020) Dole (2021) Reid (2022) Carter (2024–25, funeral ) National Statuary Hall Cummings (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) Young (2022) House Chamber Hooper (1875) Herbert C. Hoover Building Brown (1996) Old Senate Chamber Chase (1873) Lain in honor US Capitol rotunda Chestnut and Gibson (1998) Parks (2005) Graham (2018) Sicknick (2021) Evans (2021) Williams (2022) Lain in repose East Room Harrison (1841) Taylor (1850) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) McKinley (1901) Harding (1923) Roosevelt (1945) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) Great Hall of the US Supreme Court Warren (1974) Marshall (1993) Burger (1995) Brennan (1997) Blackmun (1999) Rehnquist (2005) Scalia (2016) Stevens (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) O'Connor (2023) Senate Chamber Byrd (2010) Lautenberg (2013) Bold : Presidents and chief justices v t e Mount Rushmore Shrine of Democracy Construction Gutzon Borglum (sculptor) Lincoln Borglum (assistant sculptor) Luigi Del Bianco (chief carver) Walter K. Long (assisted) Doane Robinson (conceived idea) Peter Norbeck (political promoter, Norbeck-Williamson Act of 1929 ) Subjects George Washington Thomas Jefferson Theodore Roosevelt Abraham Lincoln Museum Lincoln Borglum Museum Location Black Hills of South Dakota Legacy In popular culture Mount Rushmore Anniversary coins National symbols of the United States Related Charles E. Rushmore (namesake) 2020 fireworks celebration Mount Rushmore Syndrome USS Rushmore (LSD-14) USS Rushmore (LSD-47) Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Taiwan Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland 2 Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz KulturNav Discography of American Historical Recordings FID People Netherlands US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐gdjcm
Cached time: 20250818135514
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 4.137 seconds
Real time usage: 4.730 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 48333/1000000
Revision size: 154546/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1036768/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 55886/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 56/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 812814/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.387/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23262224/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3870.261      1 -total
 17.64%  682.555    273 Template:Sfn
 15.76%  609.891    106 Template:Cite_book
 14.68%  568.035      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
 14.30%  553.361      2 Template:Reflist
  5.81%  224.959     26 Template:Navbox
  4.16%  160.985     17 Template:Infobox_officeholder/office
  4.03%  156.033    304 Template:Main_other
  3.71%  143.427     24 Template:Cite_journal
  3.44%  133.050     26 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:307:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818135514 and revision id 1306571059. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abraham_Lincoln&oldid=1306571059 " Categories : Abraham Lincoln 1809 births 1865 deaths People murdered in 1865 Politicians assassinated in the 1860s National presidents assassinated in the 19th century 19th-century presidents of the United States American lawyers admitted to the practice of law by reading law American military personnel of the Indian Wars American militia officers American nationalists Illinois postmasters American surveyors American people of English descent Assassinated presidents of the United States Burials at Oak Ridge Cemetery Candidates in the 1860 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1864 United States presidential election Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees Harrison family (Virginia) Illinois Republicans Illinois lawyers Lincoln family Members of the Illinois House of Representatives People associated with the assassination of Abraham Lincoln People from LaRue County, Kentucky People from Macon County, Illinois People from Spencer County, Indiana People murdered in Washington, D.C.

People of Illinois in the American Civil War People with mood disorders Politicians from Springfield, Illinois Presidents of the United States Republican Party (United States) presidential nominees Republican Party presidents of the United States Union (American Civil War) political leaders Whig Party members of the United States House of Representatives from Illinois Deaths by firearm in Washington, D.C.

Politicians killed in the American Civil War 19th-century members of the Illinois General Assembly 19th-century members of the United States House of Representatives Activists for African-American civil rights Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Featured articles Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use American English from November 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from July 2025 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: long volume value Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with Project Gutenberg links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 13:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abraham Lincoln 204 languages Add topic

