Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 By country Toggle By country subsection 1.1 Belarus 1.2 Belgium 1.3 Ireland 1.4 Germany 1.5 Latvia 1.6 Poland 1.6.1 History 1.6.1.1 Middle Ages and Early Modern Period 1.6.1.2 Long 19th century 1.6.1.3 After 1918 1.6.1.4 Present 1.7 Russia and Soviet Union 1.7.1 History 1.7.2 Present 1.8 United Kingdom 2 Notes 3 References 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Anti-Lithuanian sentiment Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dislike of Lithuania, its people and culture Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-Lithuanian sentiment (sometimes known as Lithuanophobia ) [ 1 ] is the hostility, prejudice , discrimination , distrust, racism or xenophobia directed against the Lithuanian people , Lithuania or Lithuanian culture . It may also include persecution, oppression or expulsion of Lithuanians as an ethnic group.

By country [ edit ] Belarus [ edit ] Some Belarusian academics are known for engaging in historical negationism and trying to culturally appropriate Lithuanian culture, national identity and history of statehood by arguing that the Belarusian word litoutsy (літоўцы) , meaning ‘Lithuanian’, historically refers to modern Belarusians instead whereas present-day Lithuanians are pretenders who should actually be identified as letuvisy (летувicы) and are accused of stealing their ethnonym as well as the historic name of their homeland.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Some Belarusian scholars consider the statehood of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania to be primordially Slavic , rejecting the notion that its origins come from Baltic Lithuanian tribes. Historian Mikola Yermalovich claimed that King Mindaugas was Belarusian whereas the epicentre of historic Lithuania was actually in central and southern Belarusian lands.

[ 4 ] During the Belarusian opposition protests in 2021 , a Lithuanian woman was arrested and beaten up by Belarusian OMON forces after they found out she was a Lithuanian citizen.

[ 5 ] Belgium [ edit ] In 2023, statistics from the previous year alone indicated that a significant number of Lithuanians were exploited or faced discrimination at work in Belgium with Federal Public Service Employment getting around 400 complaints: 168 of cases were from Lithuanians who did not receive their paycheck or it got delayed whereas 234 of them received smaller payments than their coworkers for the same work because of their background. There were also accounts of Lithuanians facing racist or humiliating comments such as being called ‘dirty’, ‘Eastern European’ or noted as coming ‘from the Soviet Union’ in their certificate of employment.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Ireland [ edit ] In 2007, a scandal began to surface as it emerged that some Irish schools forbid Lithuanian children from using their native tongue. There was a reported case of Lithuanian girls suffering physical abuse because they were considered to be more attractive than their Irish peers. Inspector for Children’s Rights Rimantė Šalaševičiūtė stated that “Lithuanian children are feeling unsafe and face discrimination” and concluded that Lithuanian and Irish children were not being treated as equals.

[ 8 ] In 2008, three Lithuanian men were beaten up because of their nationality by bouncers who claimed that people like them are not welcomed.

[ 9 ] Germany [ edit ] After the creation of the German Empire in 1871, the population of Prussian Lithuanians in East Prussia started to decline even further due to Germanisation . Many Lithuanians who wanted a better life were forced to adopt German culture and eventually abandoned their native tongue. In Prussian governance and within the clergy, German colonists were regarded as the emissaries of "the chosen people" tasked with the mission of Germanizing the Lithuanians as well as other ethnic groups. Prominent officials consistently underscored national disparities in their writings, characterizing the Lithuanian peasantry as belonging to an inferior human race predestined to serve the Germans as their slaves .

[ 10 ] They also believed their culture being superior to Lithuanian culture whereas the nation itself was considered to be politically inept. In 1916, a German science publication Der Koloss aut fonernen Fusen in Munich wrote: [T]he Lithuanian himself has a tendency to superior German culture and by taking this path, he can become a loyal citizen of the Reich . [...] those who think that a Lithuanian is already mature enough for even the most primitive form of self-governance are deeply mistaken.

[ 11 ] During World War II , in accordance with Generalplan Ost , the Nazis planned to commit a mass-scale genocide of Lithuanians — 85% were to be physically exterminated, which was the second-highest percentage of planned killings of an ethnic group in German-occupied Europe only to be surpassed by Latgalians .

[ 12 ] Latvia [ edit ] Historically, Lithuanians in Latvia were called leiši , which apart from its primary meaning was also used to refer to someone who is negligent, lazy, uneducated and illiterate. Following Latvia’s declaration of independence, this term was soon replaced by a neologism lietuvieši due to its negative connotations and official complaints from the Lithuanian Government regarding the designation of the nationality of their compatriots in Latvian passports .

Philologist Aistė Brusokaitė suggests that Latvians were the first ones to call Lithuanians zirga galva , meaning 'horse head', which was later adopted as an insult by Lithuanians themselves: Since Latvians were economically more well off than Lithuanians, Latvians that lived by the border used to take young Lithuanian workmen to serve on their farms to do all the dirty work. Latvians were Lutherans and Lutherans always paid more attention to education. Because of this, Latvians were more educated than Lithuanians, which is why less educated, illiterate Lithuanians were sometimes looked down upon and called ‘zirga galva’.

[ 13 ] Before World War II, the Government of Latvia closed Lithuanian organisations and schools, which contributed to many Lithuanians fleeing the country as they could no longer ensure proper education for their children. In the 1950s and 60s, however, economically struggling Lithuanians were once again resettling in Latvia where they faced some degree of discrimination from the locals who did not consider them to be equal or trustworthy. There were reported cases of inciting tensions and insults directed at the Lithuanian people as well as children bullied at school for having Lithuanian parents.

[ 14 ] Poland [ edit ] History [ edit ] Middle Ages and Early Modern Period [ edit ] The earliest depiction of Lithuanians, found in the few sources dating back to the 13th century, is decidedly negative. They were portrayed as semi-wild, greedy, and cruel pagans.

[ 15 ] This stereotype emerged as a result of numerous Lithuanian raids on Polish lands, which continued until the end of the 14th century.

[ 15 ] It was largely repeated by the chronicler Jan Długosz in the 15th century, who was also the first to attribute honorable Roman origins to the Lithuanians.

[ 15 ] During the Polish–Lithuanian union , interactions primarily took place at the level of the nobility. The Lithuanian nobility gradually adopted the Polish language and cultural elements, yet they were often perceived by the Polish nobility as uncouth and poor. Lithuanians were viewed as stubborn, distrustful, and cunning.

[ 16 ] Despite this, they were treated as "one of us." [ 17 ] The Lithuanian nobility, on the other hand, regarded the Crown nobility as arrogant braggarts prone to megalomania and fond of drunkenness, referring to them as "monkeys." [ 18 ] By the 18th century, there was a widespread belief in Lithuania that the Lithuanian nobility spoke Polish better than the Crown nobility.

[ 18 ] The common Lithuanian people, as well as the lower nobility, often referred to as Samogitians ( Polish : Żmudzini ), were considered by Poles as barbaric and semi-pagan, speaking an incomprehensible, "bird-like" language.

[ 17 ] Long 19th century [ edit ] In the 19th century, ethnographers and researchers became increasingly interested in the simple Lithuanian folk, who, unlike the nobility, did not use the Polish language in their daily lives.

[ 19 ] This interest was connected with the "mythologization of Lithuania" in Polish literary culture, which portrayed Lithuania as a land of peace and tolerance, where robust, simple folk lived in harmony with the Polish manor.

[ 20 ] In the Polish language, a term analogous to " chłopomania " ( lit.

' peasant mania ' ) appeared: "litwomania" ( lit.

' Lithuania mania ' ) referring to obsessive fascination with peasant Lithuanian identity.

[ 21 ] The term took on a pejorative connotation when the Lithuanian national movement emerged, which generally viewed Polish influence in Lithuania negatively.

[ 22 ] One of its demands was for Polish-speaking Lithuanians to return to the language of their ancestors and embrace an ethnic Lithuanian identity.

[ 23 ] In response, a historical theory emerged, claiming that a significant portion of Lithuania's inhabitants had Polish origins, being descendants of thousands of captives brought to Lithuania during the Middle Ages. This theory originated in the early 20th century, primarily in the writings of historians Władysław Abraham and Zygmunt Gloger . Although challenged by subsequent generations of historians, it persisted until the second half of the 20th century.

[ 24 ] In Polish public opinion, there was often a lack of understanding regarding the emerging Lithuanian movement, which was perceived as a harmful division of the Polish-Lithuanian community. Many saw it as a Russian, and later also as a German, conspiracy.

[ 25 ] Litwomans were often perceived as renegades, deliberately abandoning Polish culture and language.

[ 26 ] The possibility of Lithuanian culture functioning independently of Polish culture was frequently questioned.

[ 27 ] These traits were most evident in the writings of Poles living in Lithuania. Among them, it was common to deny the Lithuanian movement the exclusive right to use names like "Lithuania," "Lithuanians," and "Grand Duchy of Lithuania," as they felt themselves to be, at the very least, equal heirs to this legacy.

[ 28 ] Particularly in conservative and national circles, there was a dominant belief in the artificiality of Lithuanian national aspirations, which were seen as lacking any solid linguistic or historical foundations.

[ 29 ] The entire matter was often reduced to temporary social tensions between the peasant class and the nobility. For a long time, Lithuanian activists, and later the Lithuanian nation, were regarded as "younger, misguided brothers" who would eventually realize the obvious mistake of rejecting Polish identity.

[ 30 ] Despite the growing tension and new areas of conflict, a lasting anti-Lithuanian sentiment did not develop during this period. Lithuanians were still seen as a close and friendly group, with all negative traits attributed to a group of Lithuanian activists detached from reality.

[ 30 ] After 1918 [ edit ] anti-Lithuanian cartoon published in Poland.

The conflict over the auxiliary language (in addition to Latin) in churches within parishes inhabited by both Polish- and Lithuanian-speaking populations, which took place between 1904 and 1914, had a significant impact on the formation of mutual stereotypes.

[ 31 ] Many nationally-minded Lithuanian priests demanded a greater presence of the Lithuanian language, which often met with resistance from the broader clergy, who were attached to the role of the Polish language in the Catholic Church in Lithuania.

[ 32 ] On June 23, 1944, in response to the Glinciszki massacre , which was a Lithuanian revenge campaign for killing their auxiliary policemen, the Polish resistance movement Home Army killed up to 100 Lithuanian civilians [ 33 ] in the Dubingiai massacre . The victims included newborns, children, women and the elderly. They also killed 273 Lithuanians in Molėtai from 1943 to 1945.

[ 34 ] Present [ edit ] In 2013, during a football match between Lech Poznań and Žalgiris clubs in Poznań , Lech fans publicly hanged up a banner, saying “Lithuanian boor, kneel before the Polish master” ( Polish : Litewski chamie, klęknij przed polskim panem ).

[ 35 ] Thousands of Poles signed a letter of apology on Gazeta Wyborcza following the incident claiming that “in Poland, there’s no place for such primitive behaviour that insults the Lithuanian nation.” [ 36 ] Russia and Soviet Union [ edit ] History [ edit ] Russian sign: "Speaking Lithuanian is strictly forbidden." (19th century) After the partitions of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth , most of Lithuania proper fell under Russian rule. From the early 19th century, Russian ethnic policies concerning annexed land were different: unlike in Poland , Latvia , Estonia or Finland where Russians imposed more mild integration policies mainly seeking to turn them into loyal subjects of the state, Lithuanians together with Belarusians and Ukrainians faced assimilation.

[ 37 ] The unsuccessful January Uprising (1863–64) resulted in Governor General Mikhail Muravyov initiating the Programme of Restoration of Russian Beginnings that claimed Lithuanian land being Russian since ancient times.

[ 38 ] In 1863, Lithuanian publications in Latin script were banned. From 1872, only the Cyrillic script was allowed and Lithuanian was banned in schools.

[ 37 ] Following the occupation of East Prussia , around 130,000 Prussian Lithuanians suffered from ethnic cleansing as they were slaughtered by the Red Army . Thousands of local orphans also known as wolf children (In Lithuanian: vilko vaikai ) were left behind to fend for themselves, with many Prussian Lithuanian children escaping to Lithuania proper by crossing Neman .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] According to the Research Centre of Lithuania , “In Lithuania Minor and all of East Prussia, there were almost no settlements where the Soviets wouldn’t have killed and tortured the civilian population, destroyed or pillaged their property. Men were killed and women were raped .” [ 41 ] NKGB officer Kuzmyn in Klaipėda writes: In Klaipėda and Šilutė there are all-around rapes of women happening, regardless of their nationality, physical stance or age. The beautiful city of Šilutė that was left by the Germans without a battle now looks repulsive.

[ 42 ] In 1947, the Council of Lithuania Minor in Fulda , Germany , protested against the ethnic crimes and Russian colonisation of their homeland. Some historians deny accusations of genocide against Prussian Lithuanians, claiming it to be the result of soldier brutality.

[ 40 ] In 2006, this massacre has been recognised by Lithuania as genocide against the Prussian Lithuanian people carried out by the Soviet regime.

[ 43 ] During the Soviet times, the famous slogan “Lithuania shall remain but without Lithuanians” by statesman Mikhail Suslov was coined.

[ 44 ] Once Lithuania was occupied by the Soviet Union in 1940 , immediate Russification followed: the Communist Party of the Soviet Union would give administration positions in Lithuanian SSR to Russian representatives who usually could not speak Lithuanian, ethnic Russians were encouraged to resettle in Lithuania. In some governmental institutions of Soviet Lithuania, the Lithuanian language was banned. In 1948, 80% of all communists in Lithuania were Russians whereas only 18.5% of them were Lithuanians with the situation slightly improving after Stalin's death . In 1953, the leadership of the Lithuanian SSR indirectly admitted that there were attempts to Russify Lithuania and plans to eliminate politics of national character. In the 1980s, Russification intensified in public life as well: it was mandatory for the Lithuanian Communist Party to report on their progress regarding Russification. From 1972, Lithuanian names were started to be written in accordance with Eastern Slavic naming customs as patronyms were introduced.

[ 45 ] See also: Soviet deportations from Lithuania Present [ edit ] Similarly to the Soviet Union, modern Russia has also been accused of historical negationism, claiming Kaliningrad to be “primordially Russian land” despite the region sharing much closer cultural ties with its neighbouring countries and being historic Baltic land of Prussian Lithuanians and Old Prussians for centuries. Historical book The Western Part of the Lithuanian Ethnographic Territory written by Professor Pavel Kushner (Knyshev) [ ru ] exploring Baltic people’s ties to the region has been removed from all libraries of Kaliningrad and mainland Russia with possibly only a few copies in archives remaining.

[ 46 ] Lithuanian authorities have received several reports about the unfounded removal of Lithuanian monuments. In 2003, a bust of Kristijonas Donelaitis in Gusev was desecrated with oil paint before its unveiling ceremony — the periodical Kaliningradskaya Pravda did not investigate the incident. In 2022, a memorial plaque in Sovetsk dedicated to philosopher Wilhelm Storost-Vydūnas has been removed. Kaliningrad authorities have also removed a stone sculpture commemorating the famous Prussian resistance leader Herkus Monte .

[ 47 ] In the present-day political context, Lithuanians themselves are oftentimes framed as "nazis" or "fascists" by the Russian state media and press due to the Lithuanian killing squad Ypatingasis būrys carrying out atrocities against the Jewish population during the Holocaust and Lithuanian leadership defending partisans of questionable reputation.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] Russian programmes have also come under scrutiny for using deceitful language when spreading false historical narratives about Lithuania: most notable examples include insinuating that Lithuanians served in a national Waffen-SS legion [ 51 ] [ note 1 ] or labelling Antanas Smetona's regime as "fascist", from which Lithuania was then liberated by the Soviets, even though Moscow originally supported its initiators and even funded press publications owned by Nationalists .

[ 52 ] In 2015, Russian politician Vladimir Zhirinovsky threatened the territorial integrity of Lithuania by urging Russia to “take back Klaipėda and Vilnius” on national television.

[ 53 ] In 2022, the State Dume of Russia has registered a bill, which proposes repealing Russia's resolution recognising Lithuania's independence .

[ 54 ] In 2023, reacting to President of Lithuania Nausėda's encouragement to send more military aid to Ukraine, Russian television host Vladimir Solovyov made claims suggesting that Lithuania is not worthy of its independence, threatened the future of its sovereignty, and asked: “Why do we put up with their existence?” [ 55 ] There have been instances of Russian ethnically motivated violence directed against the Lithuanians living in Lithuania. In 2020, a 24-year-old Russian man who received political asylum physically assaulted a Lithuanian teacher in Visaginas for teaching Russians Lithuanian in school and called Lithuanians "man-eaters".

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Lithuanians have also been attacked for addressing Russian speakers in Lithuanian either as pedestrians or clients.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Lithuanians have reported facing double standards when seeking to come to the United Kingdom . There have been reports of Lithuanians having to pay £55 more for obtaining a UK visa than citizens from other EU countries. Despite Britain’s official explanation that the larger price is a result of Lithuania not ratifying the Social Charter of the European Commission of 1961, Embassy of Lithuania claimed this decision to be discriminatory and “not fully convincing” as the country did ratify the Social Charter of 1986, which “[f]rom a legal stance, is not a more inferior document.” Post-Brexit amendments affecting labour migration in Britain have also been seen as discriminatory against Lithuanian workers as it will cost much more for employers to employ them in comparison to other nationals. In the words of the representative for IOM Audra Sipavičienė, additional taxes for employers “may contribute to Lithuanians being discriminated against in the labour market. This means there will be no interest in taking a more expensive Lithuanian instead of a cheaper Latvian.” [ 60 ] There have been several instances of hostility towards Lithuanian migrants accompanied by property damage although motives for such attacks may vary.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] In 2016, a twelve-year-old Lithuanian boy was beaten up in Manchester because of his nationality by his British peer who was ordered to do so by his mother waiting for him in the car. Many Lithuanian families have claimed their children suffered abuse in public schools because of their nationality.

[ 64 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Lithuanian Legion of the Waffen-SS was a military formation, which has been approved by Hinrich Lohse on February 19, 1943 . However, on March 17, 1943, the unit was officially disbanded as Lithuanian men boycotted conscription.

References [ edit ] ^ Wittig-Marcinkevičiūtė, E.

"Europiečių dilema (II)" [The European Dilemma (II)] (in Lithuanian).

TV3 . Archived from original on 23 March 2013. Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Vyžintas, Arūnas (10 March 2018).

"Istorinės savimonės kuriozai arba ką iš tikrųjų švenčiame?" [The oddities of historical self-awareness or what are we actually celebrating?] (in Lithuanian).

Delfi . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Gudavičius, Edvardas (1996).

Following the Tracks of a Myth. Lithuanian Historical Studies .

Lithuanian Institute of History . p. 38. Retrieved 13 August 2023.

^ Kamuntavičius, Rūstis. (2012) .

Lietuvisai ir licvinai: naujos senos gudų istoriografijos paieškos [' Letuvisy' and 'Litsviny': The New and  Old Searches of Belarusian Historiography ] (in Lithuanian).

Vytautas Magnus University . p. 336.

^ Šapokas, Edvardas (18 January 2021).

"Baltarusijoje sumušta Lietuvos pilietė papasakojo apie patirtą siaubą: pamatę lietuvišką pasą talžė dar stipriau" [Lithuanian citizen beaten in Belarus talks about her experienced horror: after seeing my Lithuanian passport, they beat me even harder] (in Lithuanian).

LRT . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ "Lietuviai Belgijoje susiduria su darbdavių išnaudojimu: jų į tarnybas vien pernai kreipėsi apie 400" [Lithuanians in Belgium face exploitation by their employers: around 400 of them reached out to services] (in Lithuanian).

LRT . 21 May 2023. Retrieved on 28 May 2023.

^ "„O, purvini lietuviai atvažiavo“ – bene dešimtmetį Belgijoje dirbęs Jonas šiandien į šios šalies pusę nė žiūrėti nenori" ['Oh, dirty Lithuanians have arrived' — after working for a decade in Belgium, Jonas today has no desire to even look towards this country] (in Lithuanian).

LRT . 21 May 2023. Retrieved on 18 June 2023.

^ "Lietuvių vaikams Airijoje draudžiama kalbėtis lietuviškai" [Lithuanian children in Ireland are forbidden from speaking in Lithuanian] (in Lithuanian).

TV3 . 6 June 2007. Retrieved on 28 May 2023.

^ Vindžigalskis, Paulius (1 August 2008).

"Airijoje dirbantis lietuvis: buvau sumuštas vien dėl savo tautybės" [A Lithuanian working in Ireland: I was beaten up solely because of my nationality] (in Lithuanian).

TV3 . Retrieved on 28 May 2023.

^ Труды Академии наук Литовской ССР. Серия А [ Proceedings of the Academy of Sciences of the Lithuanian SSR. Vol. A ] (in Lithuanian and Russian). Lithuanian State Publishing House of Political and Scientific Literature, 1975, p. 113. Retrieved on 27 September 2023.

^ Liekis, Algimantas (17 January 2019).

"Prūsų – lietuvių žemių susigrąžinimo viltis Lietuvai" [The hope of returning Prussian–Lithuanian lands to Lithuania] (in Lithuanian).

Alkas.lt . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Misiūnas, R. J.

The Baltic States, years of dependence, 1940-1990.

Internet Archive . pp 48–49.

^ Antanavičius, Ugnius (28 April 2019).

"Kodėl kai kurie lietuviai latvius vadina „žirgo galvomis“?" [Why do some Lithuanians call Latvians 'horse-heads'?]. (in Lithuanian).

15min . Retrieved on 28 May 2023.

^ Merkienė, Regina Irena.

Latvijos lietuviai etninėje ir kultūrinėje konvergencijoje Archived 2023-05-28 at the Wayback Machine [ Latvian Lithuanians in Ethnic and Cultural Convergence ] (in Lithuanian).

Lithuanian Institute of History . pp. 123–130. Retrieved on 28 May 2023.

^ a b c Buchowski 2006 , p. 17.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 18-19.

^ a b Buchowski 2006 , p. 19.

^ a b Buchowski 2006 , p. 20.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 24.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 29.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 26.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 34-36.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 34.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 34-36.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 37-38, 90-91.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 72.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 71.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 72-73.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 83-85.

^ a b Buchowski 2006 , p. 82-83.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 62-64.

^ Buchowski 2006 , p. 62-64, 88-89.

^ Ivaškevičius, Arūnas (8 June 2005).

"Lietuviai ir lenkai: istorinės neapykantos pėdsakais [Lithuanians and Poles: in the footsteps of historical hatred]" . (in Lithuanian).

Delfi . Retrieved on 28 May 2023.

^ Bubnys, Arūnas (2015).

Pasipriešinimo judėjimai Lietuvoje Antrojo pasaulinio karo metais: lenkų pogrindis 1939–1945 m.

[ Resistance movements in Lithuania during the Second World War: the Polish underground 1939–1945 ] (in Lithuanian).

Lietuvos istorijos institutas .

ISBN 978-9955-847-96-0 ^ "Pseudokibice Lecha skazani za transparent "Litewski chamie, klęknij przed polskim panem" " .

TVN24 (in Polish). 2016-01-07 . Retrieved 2024-09-01 .

^ Nikžentaitis, Alvydas (1 July 2019).

"Alvydas Nikžentaitis: Kaip sakė V.Adamkus – gal ta unija nebuvo tokia bloga, tik mus blogai apie ją mokė" [Alvydas Nikžentaitis: as Adamkus said — maybe that union wasn't so bad, only we were badly taught about it] (in Lithuanian).

15min . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ a b Staliūnas, Dalius.

"Rusinimas" [Russification] (in Lithuanian).

Universal Lithuanian Encyclopedia . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Simanaitis, Edmundas (25 August 2004).

"Tamsiosios praeities viltinga užbaiga" [The hopeful end of a dark past] (in Lithuanian).

XXI amžius . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Leiserowitz, Ruth .

Von Ostpreußen nach Kyritz. Wolfskinder auf dem Weg nach Brandenburg [ From East Prussia to Kyritz. Wolf children on their way to Brandenburg ] (in German). Brandenburgische Zentrale für politische Bildung, Potsdam 200. p. 6.

ISBN 3-932502-33-7 .

Archived Archived 2011-07-16 at the Wayback Machine from the original on 16 July 2011.

^ a b "Neužmirštinas Mažosios Lietuvos genocidas" [Unforgettable genocide in Lithuania Minor] (in Lithuanian). 26 October 2010.

Bernadinai.lt . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Samoškaitė, Eglė (27 April 2015).

"Kodėl Raudonoji armija neatrodo išvaduotoja: elgėsi tarsi žvėrys" [Why the Red Army doesn't look like the liberator: they behaved like animals] (in Lithuanian).

Delfi . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Genocide and Resistance Research Centre of Lithuania .

"Raudonosios armijos žiaurumas Lietuvoje: žudynės, prievartavimai, plėšimai" [The cruelty of the Red Army in Lithuania: killings, rapes and looting] (in Lithuanian).

Lrytas.lt . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Dėl Lietuvos Respublikos atmintinų dienų įstatymo 1 straipsnio papildymo ir pakeitimo įstatymo projekto Nr. XP-1681 [ On Article 1 of the Commemorative Day Act of the Republic of Lithuania No. XP-1681 ] (in Lithuanian).

Seimas of the Republic of Lithuania .

^ Karalius, Saulius (27 June 2008).

"„Bus Lietuva, bet be lietuvių“" ['Lithuania shall remain but without Lithuanians'] (in Lithuanian).

Kauno diena . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ "Lietuvos sovietinimas, rusinimas ir kolonizavimas" [The Sovietization, Russification and colonisation of Lithuania] (in Lithuanian).

Universal Lithuanian Encyclopedia . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Voverienė, Ona (5 August 2020).

"Kas primins Rusijai, kad Karaliaučius jai nepriklauso?" [Who will remind Russia that Kaliningrad doesn't belong to them?] (in Lithuanian).

Alkas.lt . Retrieved on 27 May 2023.

^ Pilaitis, Gediminas (29 June 2022).

"Kaliningrado srityje keistas sujudimas – pradėjo ravėti lietuviškos kultūros dirvą" [In the Kaliningrad Oblast, a strange commotion is unfolding — it started to weed the soil of Lithuanian culture] (in Lithuanian).

Lrytas.lt . Retrieved on 8 November 2023.

^ Žemaitis, Augustinas.

"Are Lithuanians racists, fascists or Nazis?" .

TrueLithuania.com . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Kirby, Paul (8 May 2019).

"Lithuania monument for 'Nazi collaborator' prompts diplomatic row" .

BBC News . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Foti, Silvia (27 January 2021).

"No More Lies. My Grandfather Was a Nazi" .

The New York Times . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Pugačiauskas, Virgilijus (2017).

Lietuvos įvaizdžiai Rusijos žiniasklaidoje po Krymo aneksijos [ Images of Lithuania in the Russian Media Following the Annexation of Crimea ] (in Lithuanian).

General Jonas Žemaitis Military Academy of Lithuania . p. 124. Retrieved 29 November 2023.

^ Saldžiūnas, Vaidas.

"Karinis perversmas Lietuvoje: kas ir kodėl nuvertė valstiečių valdžią?" [Military coup in Lithuania: who has overthrown the Peasants' Government and why?] (in Lithuanian).

Delfi . 17 December 2016. Retrieved 29 November 2023.

^ "V. Žirinovskis grasina „atsiimti Vilnių ir Klaipėdą“" [V. Zhirinovsky threatens to "take back Vilnius and Klaipėda"] (in Lithuanian). 27 May 2015.

Delfi . Retrieved on 27 May 2023.

^ "State Duma of Russian Federation proposes to cancel recognition of Lithuania's independence." censor.net.

8 June 2022. Retrieved on 4 September 2023.

^ Cook, Ellie (2 February 2023).

"Putin Ally Explodes in TV Rant on West Arming Ukraine: 'Not Enough Anger!'" Newsweek . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Konopko, Karolina (4 March 2020).

"Visagine žiauriai sumušta mokytoja: užpuolikui nepatiko, kad moko lietuvių kalbos" [A teacher brutally beaten up in Visaginas: the attacker didn't like her teaching Lithuanian] (in Lithuanian).

Lrytas.lt . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Trainys, Vygandas (5 March 2020).

"Visagino mokytoją spardęs Rusijos tinklaraštininkas lietuvius išvadino žmogėdromis" [Russian blogger who was kicking the teacher from Visaginas called Lithuanians man-eaters] (in Lithuanian).

Lrytas.lt . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Urbonaitė-Vainienė, Ieva (15 July 2014).

"Vilniuje kalbėti lietuviškai – pavojinga" [Speaking Lithuanian in Vilnius is dangerous] (in Lithuanian).

Delfi . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ Gafurova, Justina (18 March 2023).

"Taksi vairuotojo užsipulta vilnietė: nuo kada savo šalyje negaliu kalbėti lietuviškai?" [A Vilnius local attacked by a taxi driver: since when am I not allowed to speak Lithuanian in my own country?] (in Lithuanian).

Vakarų ekspresas . Retrieved on 26 May 2023.

^ "Kaltina diskriminacija: įsidarbinti Jungtinėje Karalystėje lietuviams tapo brangiau nei kitiems" [Accused of discrimination: employment in the United Kingdom for Lithuanians became more expensive than others] (in Lithuanian).

Delfi . 17 February 2021. Retrieved on 28 May 2023.

^ Pyršmantas, Valdas (8 February 2018).

"Kaimynai lietuvės gyvenimą Didžiojoje Britanijoje pavertė pragaru" [Neighbours in Great Britain turn Lithuanian's life into hell] (in Lithuanian).

Delfi . Retrieved on 28 May 2023.

^ "Anglijoje žiauriai sumuštas lietuvis" [A Lithuanian was brutally beaten in England] (in Lithuanian).

Delfi . 30 July 2016. Retrieved on 28 May 2023.

^ "Š.Airijoje lietuvis buvo užpultas dėl tautybės" [A Lithuanian was attacked in Northern Ireland because of his nationality] (in Lithuanian).

lrytas.lt . 18 August 2009. Retrieved on 28 May 2023.

^ Pukenė, Rūta (3 July 2016).

"Atmosfera po „Brexit“ kaista: Anglijoje sumuštas dvylikametis lietuvis" [The atmosphere after Brexit is getting heated: a twelve-year-old Lithuanian was beaten up in England] (in Lithuanian).

Delfi . Retrieved on 28 May 2023.

Bibliography [ edit ] Buchowski, Krzysztof (2006).

Litwomani i polonizatorzy. Mity, wzajemne postrzeganie i stereotypy w stosunkach polsko-litewskich w pierwszej połowie XX wieku [ Litwomans and Polonizers: Myths, Mutual Perceptions, and Stereotypes in Polish-Lithuanian Relations in the First Half of the 20th Century ] (in Polish). Białystok.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Lithuanian_sentiment&oldid=1306038929 " Categories : Anti-national sentiment Anti-Lithuanian sentiment Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles containing Polish-language text CS1 maint: location missing publisher This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 15:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Lithuanian sentiment Add languages Add topic

