Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Basic properties 2 Black holes 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Penrose diagram 15 languages Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Two-dimensional diagram capturing the causal relations between different points in spacetime For the tensor diagram notation, see Penrose graphical notation .

Penrose diagram of an infinite Minkowski universe, horizontal axis u , vertical axis v In theoretical physics , a Penrose diagram (named after mathematical physicist Roger Penrose ) is a two-dimensional diagram capturing the causal relations between different points in spacetime through a conformal treatment of infinity. It is an extension (suitable for the curved spacetimes of e.g.

general relativity ) of the Minkowski diagram of special relativity where the vertical dimension represents time, and the horizontal dimension represents a space dimension. Using this design, all light rays take a 45° path ( c = 1 ) {\displaystyle (c=1)} . Locally, the metric on a Penrose diagram is conformally equivalent to the metric of the spacetime depicted. The conformal factor is chosen such that the entire infinite spacetime is transformed into a Penrose diagram of finite size, with infinity on the boundary of the diagram. For spherically symmetric spacetimes , every point in the Penrose diagram corresponds to a 2-dimensional sphere ( θ θ , ϕ ϕ ) {\displaystyle (\theta ,\phi )} .

Basic properties [ edit ] While Penrose diagrams share the same basic coordinate vector system of other spacetime diagrams for local asymptotically flat spacetime , it introduces a system of representing distant spacetime by shrinking or "triturando" distances that are further away. Straight lines of constant time and straight lines of constant space coordinates therefore become hyperbolae , which appear to converge at points in the corners of the diagram. These points and boundaries represent conformal infinity for spacetime, which was first introduced by Penrose in 1963.

[ 1 ] Penrose diagrams are more properly (but less frequently) called Penrose–Carter diagrams (or Carter–Penrose diagrams ), [ 2 ] acknowledging both Brandon Carter and Roger Penrose, who were the first researchers to employ them. They are also called conformal diagrams , or simply spacetime diagrams (although the latter may refer to Minkowski diagrams ).

Two lines drawn at 45° angles should intersect in the diagram only if the corresponding two light rays intersect in the actual spacetime. So, a Penrose diagram can be used as a concise illustration of spacetime regions that are accessible to observation. The diagonal boundary lines of a Penrose diagram correspond to the region called " null infinity ", or to singularities where light rays must end. Thus, Penrose diagrams are also useful in the study of asymptotic properties of spacetimes and singularities. An infinite static Minkowski universe , coordinates ( x , t ) {\displaystyle (x,t)} is related to Penrose coordinates ( u , v ) {\displaystyle (u,v)} by: tan ⁡ ⁡ ( u ± ± v ) = x ± ± t {\displaystyle \tan(u\pm v)=x\pm t} The corners of the Penrose diagram, which represent the spacelike and timelike conformal infinities, are π π / 2 {\displaystyle \pi /2} from the origin.

Black holes [ edit ] Penrose diagrams are frequently used to illustrate the causal structure of spacetimes containing black holes .  Singularities in the Schwarzschild solution are denoted by a spacelike boundary, unlike the timelike boundary found on conventional spacetime diagrams. This is due to the interchanging of timelike and spacelike coordinates within the horizon of a black hole (since space is uni-directional within the horizon, just as time is uni-directional outside the horizon).
The singularity is represented by a spacelike boundary to make it clear that once an object has passed the horizon it will inevitably hit the singularity even if it attempts to take evasive action.

Penrose diagrams are often used to illustrate the hypothetical Einstein–Rosen bridge connecting two separate universes in the maximally extended Schwarzschild black hole solution . The precursors to the Penrose diagrams were Kruskal–Szekeres diagrams . (The Penrose diagram adds to Kruskal and Szekeres' diagram the conformal crunching of the regions of flat spacetime far from the hole.) These introduced the method of aligning the event horizon into past and future horizons oriented at 45° angles (since one would need to travel faster than light to cross from the Schwarzschild radius back into flat spacetime); and splitting the singularity into past and future horizontally-oriented lines (since the singularity "cuts off" all paths into the future once one enters the hole).

The Einstein–Rosen bridge closes off (forming "future" singularities) so rapidly that passage between the two asymptotically flat exterior regions would require faster-than-light velocity, and is therefore impossible. In addition, highly blue-shifted light rays (called a blue sheet ) would make it impossible for anyone to pass through.

Penrose diagrams of various black hole solutions The maximally extended solution does not describe a typical black hole created from the collapse of a star, as the surface of the collapsed star replaces the sector of the solution containing the past-oriented white hole geometry and other universe.

While the basic space-like passage of a static black hole cannot be traversed, the Penrose diagrams for solutions representing rotating and/or electrically charged black holes illustrate these solutions' inner event horizons (lying in the future) and vertically oriented singularities, which open up what is known as a time-like "wormhole" allowing passage into future universes. In the case of the rotating hole, there is also a "negative" universe entered through a ring-shaped singularity (still portrayed as a line in the diagram) that can be passed through if entering the hole close to its axis of rotation. These features of the solutions are, however, not stable under perturbations and not believed to be a realistic description of the interior regions of such black holes; the true character of their interiors is still an open question .

See also [ edit ] Causality Causal structure Conformal cyclic cosmology Weyl transformation References [ edit ] ^ Penrose, Roger (15 January 1963).

"Asymptotic proprierties of fields and space-times" .

Physical Review Letters .

10 (2): 66– 68.

Bibcode : 1963PhRvL..10...66P .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.10.66 .

^ Carroll, Sean (2004).

Spacetime and Geometry – An Introduction to General Relativity . Addison Wesley. p. 471.

ISBN 0-8053-8732-3 .

D'Inverno, Ray (1992).

Introducing Einstein's relativity (Repr ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-859686-8 .

See Chapter 17 (and various succeeding sections) for a very readable introduction to the concept of conformal infinity plus examples.

Frauendiener, Jörg (2004).

"Conformal Infinity" .

Living Reviews in Relativity .

7 (1): 1.

Bibcode : 2004LRR.....7....1F .

doi : 10.12942/lrr-2004-1 .

ISSN 2367-3613 .

PMC 5256109 .

PMID 28179863 .

Carter, Brandon (1966).

"Complete Analytic Extension of the Symmetry Axis of Kerr's Solution of Einstein's Equations" .

Physical Review .

141 (4): 1242– 1247.

Bibcode : 1966PhRv..141.1242C .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRev.141.1242 .

ISSN 0031-899X .

See also on-line version (requires a subscription to access) Hawking, Stephen W.; Ellis, George F. R.; Hawking, S. W. & Ellis, G. F. R. (1973).

The large scale structure of space-time . Cambridge monographs on mathematical physics (21st ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-09906-6 .

See Chapter 5 for a very clear discussion of Penrose diagrams (the term used by Hawking & Ellis) with many examples.

Kaufmann, William J. III (1977).

The Cosmic Frontiers of General Relativity . Little Brown & Co.

ISBN 978-0-316-48341-4 .

Really breaks down the transition from simple Minkowski diagrams, to Kruskal -Szekeres diagrams to Penrose diagrams, and goes into much detail the facts and fiction concerning wormholes. Plenty of easy to understand illustrations. A less involved, but still very informative book is his Kaufmann, William J. (1979).

Black holes and warped spacetime . San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.

ISBN 978-0-7167-1152-0 .

External links [ edit ] Conformal diagrams – Introduction to conformal diagrams, series of minilectures by Pau Amaro Seoane Media related to Penrose diagrams at Wikimedia Commons v t e Relativity Special relativity Background Principle of relativity ( Galilean relativity Galilean transformation ) Special relativity Doubly special relativity Fundamental concepts Frame of reference Speed of light Hyperbolic orthogonality Rapidity Maxwell's equations Proper length Proper time Proper acceleration Relativistic mass Formulation Lorentz transformation Textbooks Phenomena Time dilation Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Length contraction Relativity of simultaneity Relativistic Doppler effect Thomas precession Ladder paradox Twin paradox Terrell rotation Spacetime Light cone World line Minkowski diagram Biquaternions Minkowski space General relativity Background Introduction Mathematical formulation Fundamental concepts Equivalence principle Riemannian geometry Penrose diagram Geodesics Mach's principle Formulation ADM formalism BSSN formalism Einstein field equations Linearized gravity Post-Newtonian formalism Raychaudhuri equation Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation Ernst equation Phenomena Black hole Event horizon Singularity Two-body problem Gravitational waves : astronomy detectors ( LIGO and collaboration Virgo LISA Pathfinder GEO ) Hulse–Taylor binary Other tests : precession of Mercury lensing (together with Einstein cross and Einstein rings ) redshift Shapiro delay frame-dragging / geodetic effect ( Lense–Thirring precession ) pulsar timing arrays Advanced theories Brans–Dicke theory Kaluza–Klein Quantum gravity Solutions Cosmological: Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker ( Friedmann equations ) Lemaître–Tolman Kasner BKL singularity Gödel Milne Spherical: Schwarzschild ( interior Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff equation ) Reissner–Nordström Axisymmetric: Kerr ( Kerr–Newman ) Weyl−Lewis−Papapetrou Taub–NUT van Stockum dust discs Others: pp-wave Ozsváth–Schücking Alcubierre Ellis In computational physics: Numerical relativity Scientists Poincaré Lorentz Einstein Hilbert Schwarzschild de Sitter Weyl Eddington Friedmann Lemaître Milne Robertson Chandrasekhar Zwicky Wheeler Choquet-Bruhat Kerr Zel'dovich Novikov Ehlers Geroch Penrose Hawking Taylor Hulse Bondi Misner Yau Thorne Weiss others Category v t e Roger Penrose Books The Emperor's New Mind (1989) Shadows of the Mind (1994) The Road to Reality (2004) Cycles of Time (2010) Fashion, Faith, and Fantasy in the New Physics of the Universe (2016) Coauthored books The Nature of Space and Time (with Stephen Hawking ) (1996) The Large, the Small and the Human Mind (with Abner Shimony , Nancy Cartwright and Stephen Hawking) (1997) White Mars or, The Mind Set Free (with Brian W. Aldiss ) (1999) Concepts Twistor theory Spin network Abstract index notation Black hole bomb Geometry of spacetime Cosmic censorship Weyl curvature hypothesis Penrose inequalities Penrose interpretation of quantum mechanics Moore–Penrose inverse Newman–Penrose formalism Penrose diagram Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems Riemannian Penrose inequality Penrose process Penrose tiling Penrose triangle Penrose stairs Penrose graphical notation Penrose transform Penrose–Terrell effect Orchestrated objective reduction / Penrose–Lucas argument FELIX experiment Trapped surface Andromeda paradox Conformal cyclic cosmology Related Lionel Penrose (father) Oliver Penrose (brother) Jonathan Penrose (brother) Shirley Hodgson (sister) John Beresford Leathes (grandfather) Illumination problem Quantum mind Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Penrose_diagram&oldid=1296995025 " Categories : Diagrams Coordinate charts in general relativity Mathematical methods in general relativity Lorentzian manifolds Roger Penrose Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 15:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Penrose diagram 15 languages Add topic

