Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Overpackaging 3 Types of packaging wastes Toggle Types of packaging wastes subsection 3.1 Glass containers 3.2 Aluminum containers and packaging 3.3 Steel containers and packaging 3.4 Paper and paperboard containers and packaging 3.5 Wood packaging 3.6 Plastic containers and packaging 4 Role of packaging waste in pollution Toggle Role of packaging waste in pollution subsection 4.1 Litter 4.2 Air pollution 4.3 Water pollution 5 Impacts on marine species and wildlife species 6 Impacts on human health 7 Actions to reduce packaging wastes Toggle Actions to reduce packaging wastes subsection 7.1 Waste management system improvements 7.2 Promotion of eco-friendly alternatives 7.3 Social awareness and education 7.4 Voluntarily actions to reduce packaging waste 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Packaging waste 10 languages العربية Deutsch Македонски Nederlands Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Post-use container and packing refuse Part of a series on Pollution Art made from packaging waste collected in New York City – 2021 Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Packaging waste , the part of the waste that consists of packaging and packaging material , is a major part of the total global waste, and the major part of the packaging waste consists of single-use plastic food packaging , a hallmark of throwaway culture .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Notable examples for which the need for regulation was recognized early, are "containers of liquids for human consumption", i.e.

plastic bottles and the like.

[ 3 ] In Europe, the Germans top the list of packaging waste producers with more than 220 kilos of packaging per capita.

[ 2 ] Background [ edit ] Plastic production by industrial sector in 2015.

[ 4 ] According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), defined containers and packaging as products that are assumed to be discarded the same year the products they contain are purchased.

[ 5 ] The majority of the solid waste are packaging products, estimating to be about 77.9 million tons of generation in 2015 (29.7 percent of total generation).

[ 5 ] Packaging can come in all shapes and forms ranging from Amazon boxes to soda cans and are used to store, transport, contain, and protect goods to keep customer satisfaction. The type of packaging materials including glass, aluminum, steel, paper, cardboard, plastic, wood, and other miscellaneous packaging.

[ 5 ] Packaging waste is a dominant contributor in today's world and responsible for half of the waste in the globe.

[ 4 ] The recycling rate in 2015 for containers and packaging was 53 percent. Furthermore, the process of burning of containers and packaging was 7.2 million tons (21.4 percent of total combustion with energy recovery ). Following the landfills that received 29.4 million tons (21.4 percent of total land filling) within the same year.

[ 5 ] As packaging waste pollutes the Earth, all life on Earth experiences negative impacts that affect their lifestyle. Marine or land-living animals are suffocating due to the pollution of packaging waste.

[ 4 ] This is a major issue for low income countries who do not have an efficient waste management system to clean up their environments and being the main sources for the global ocean pollution .

[ 4 ] But 'litter louts', individuals who lack the motivation to recycle and instead leave their waste anywhere they want are also major contributors, especially in high income nations where such facilities are available. The current location with the greatest amount of solid waste that includes most of packaging products is the Great Pacific Garbage Patch located at West Coast of North America to Japan.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] Most packaging waste that eventually goes into the ocean often comes from places such as lakes, streams, and sewage .

Possible solutions to reducing packaging waste are very simple and easy and could start with minimisation of packaging material ranging up to a zero waste strategy (package-free products [ 7 ] ). The problem is mainly in a lack of motivation to start making a change. But examples of effective ways to help reduce packaging pollution include banning the use of single-use plastics, more social awareness and education, promotion of eco-friendly alternatives, public pressure, voluntary cleaning up, and adopting reusable or biodegradable bags.

[ 8 ] Overpackaging [ edit ] Overpackaging.  Delivery of a small item in a much larger corrugated box, requiring air pillows for void-fill. A simple padded mailer would have been adequate.

Main article: Overpackaging The Institute of Packaging Professionals defines overpackaging as "a condition where the methods and materials used to package an item exceed the requirements for adequate containment, protection, transport, and sale." [ 9 ] Overpackaging is an opportunity for source reduction , reducing waste by proper package design and practice.

A classic example of a wasteful package design is a breakfast cereal box. This is typically a folding carton enclosing a plastic bag of cereal.  Cartons are typically tall and wide but very thin. This has an inefficient material-to-volume ratio; it is wasteful.  Structural packaging engineers are aware of the opportunity to save packaging costs, materials, and waste but marketers find benefit in a "billboard" style package for advertising and graphics.  An optimized folding box would use much less paperboard for the same volume of cereal, but with reduced surface area for graphics. The use of a plastic bag without an enclosing box would use less material per unit of cereal.

[ 10 ] Slackfill packaging is that which is intentionally under-filled, resulting in non-functional headspace.  Packagers doing this not only risk charges of deceptive packaging but are using excessive packaging: packaging waste.

[ 11 ] With fragile items such as consumer electronics, engineers try to match the fragility of the product with the expected stresses of distribution handling.

Package cushioning is used to help ensure safe delivery of the product.  With overpackaging, excessive cushion and a larger corrugated box are used: wasteful packaging.  Conversely, underpackaging would be the use of insufficient cushioning.   Excessive product waste caused by underpackaging may be worse for the environment than the waste of the package.

Sometimes packaging is designed to protect its product for controlled distribution to a retail store.  With online shopping or E-commerce , however, items packed for retail sale may be shipped individually by Fulfillment houses by package delivery or small parcel carriers.  Retail packages are frequently packed into a larger corrugated box for shipment.  Often these secondary boxes are much larger than needed, thus use void-fill to immobilize the contents. The rapid growth of e-commerce has increased packaging challenges, as items often require additional protective materials and oversized boxes to ensure safe transportation, which further exacerbates packaging waste.

[ 12 ] This can have the appearance of gross overpackaging but is sometimes necessary.  If the product packager designed all packaging to meet the requirements of individual  shipment, then the portion delivered to a retail store would have excessive packaging.  Sometimes two levels of packaging are needed for separate distribution, resulting in production inefficiencies.

[ 13 ] Types of packaging wastes [ edit ] Plastic waste generation in 2010.

[ 4 ] Glass containers [ edit ] Bottles and jars for drinks and storing foods or juices are examples of glass containers. It has been estimated by the EPA that 9.1 million tons of glass containers were generated in 2015, or 3.5 percent of municipal solid waste (MSW).

[ 5 ] About 70 percent of glass consumption is used for containers and packaging purposes.

[ 14 ] At least 13.2 percent of the production of glass and containers are burned with energy recovery.

[ 5 ] The amount of glass containers and packaging going into the land fill is about 53 percent.

[ 5 ] From 1960 to 2015, this graph represents the total number of tons of glass containers generated, recycled, composted, combusted with energy recovery and landfilled.

[ 5 ] Aluminum containers and packaging [ edit ] Aluminum container and packaging waste usually comes from cans from any kind of beverages, but foil can also be another that contributes it as well. It has been given that about 25 percent of aluminum is used for packaging purposes.

[ 14 ] Using the Aluminum Association Data, it has been calculated that at least  1.8 million tons of aluminum packaging were generated in 2015 or 0.8 percent MSW produced.

[ 5 ] Of those that are produced, only about 670,000 tons of aluminum containers and packaging were recycled, about 54.9 percent.

[ 5 ] And, the ones that ends up in the land fill is 50.6 percent.

[ 5 ] From 1960 to 2015, this graph represents the total number of tons of aluminum containers generated, recycled, composted, combusted with energy recovery and landfilled [ 5 ] Steel containers and packaging [ edit ] The production of steel containers and packaging mostly comes in cans and other things like steel barrels. Only about 5 percent of steel use for packaging purposes of the total world of steel consumption which makes it the least amount wasted and the most recycled.

[ 14 ] It has totaled that 2.2 million tons or 0.9 percent of MSW generated in 2015.

[ 14 ] While according to the Steel Recycling Institute, an estimate of 1.6 million tons (73 percent) of steel packaging were recycled.

[ 14 ] Adding on, the steel packaging that were combusted with energy recover was about 5.4 percent and 21.6 percent were land filled.

[ 5 ] From 1960 to 2015, this graph represents the total number of tons of steel containers generated, recycled, composted, combusted with energy recovery and landfilled [ 5 ] Paper and paperboard containers and packaging [ edit ] The most of it being generated, and within the MSW in 2015, was corrugated boxes coming with at least 31.3 million tons (11.3 percent total) produced.

[ 5 ] However, it also the top most recycled at 28.9 million tons (92.3 percent) boxes being recycled in 2015.

[ 5 ] Later on, they are then combusted which makes 0.5 million tons and landfills received 1.9 million tons.

[ 5 ] Other than corrugated boxes, cartons, bags, sacks, wrapping papers, and other boxes used for shoes or cosmetics are other examples of paper and paperboard containers and packaging. The total amount of MSW generated for paper and paperboard containers and packaging was 39.9 million tons or 15.1 percent in 2015. Although, the recycled rate is about 78.2 percent and 4.3 percent of small proportions were combusted with energy recovery and 17.6 percent in landfill.

From 1960 to 2015, this graph represents the total number of tons of paper and paperboard containers generated, recycled, composted, combusted with energy recovery and landfilled [ 5 ] Wood packaging [ edit ] Wood packaging is anything that is made out of wood used for packaging purposes (e.g., wood crates, wood chips, boards, and planks). Wood packaging is still highly used in today's world for transporting goods. According to EPA's data that were borrowed from the  Virginia Polytechnic Institute and the United States Department of Agriculture 's Forest Service Southern Research Station , 9.8 million tons (3.7 percent of total MSW) of wood packaging were made in production in 2015.

[ 5 ] Also, in 2015, the amount that was recycled 2.7 million tons.

[ 5 ] Moreover, its estimated that 14.3 percent of the wood containers and packaging waste generated was combusted with energy recovery, while the  58.6 percent went to the land filled.

From 1960 to 2015, this graph represents the total number of tons of wood containers generated, recycled, composted, combusted with energy recovery and landfilled [ 5 ] Plastic containers and packaging [ edit ] Plastic containers and packaging can be found in plastic bottles , supermarket bags , milk and water jugs, and more. EPA used data from the American Chemistry Council to estimate that 14.7 million tons (5.5 percent of MSW generation) of plastic containers and packaging were created in 2015.

[ 5 ] The overall amount that is recycled is about 2.2 million tons (14.6 percent).

[ 5 ] In addition, 16.8 percent were combusted with energy recover and 68.6 percent went straight into the land fill.

[ 5 ] Most of the plastics are made from polyethylene terephthalate (PET), high-density polyethylene (HDPE), low-density polyethylene (LDPE), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polystyrene (PS), polypropylene (PP) and other resins.

[ 5 ] That being said, the recycling rate for PET bottles and jars was 29.9 percent (890,000 tons) and the recycling of HDPE water and milk jugs was 30.3 percent (230,000 tons).

[ 5 ] From 1960 to 2015, this graph represents the total number of tons of plastic containers generated, recycled, composted, combusted with energy recovery and landfilled [ 5 ] Role of packaging waste in pollution [ edit ] Litter [ edit ] Litter mostly consists of packaging waste. Besides the disfigurement of the landscape, it also poses a health hazard for various life forms.

[ 14 ] Packaging materials such as glass and plastic bottles are the main constituents of litter.

[ 14 ] It has a huge impact on the marine environment as well, when animals are caught in or accidentally consume plastic packaging.

Air pollution [ edit ] The production of packaging material is the main source of the air pollution that is being spread globally. Some emissions comes from accidental fires or activities that includes incineration of packaging waste that releases vinyl chloride, CFC, and hexane.

[ 14 ] For a more direct course, emissions can originate in land fill sites which could release CO 2 and methane.

[ 14 ] Most CO 2 comes from steel and glass packaging manufacturing.

[ 14 ] Water pollution [ edit ] Packaging waste can come from land based or marine sources. The current location that makes up the large of amount of water pollution is the Great Pacific Garbage Patch located at West Coast of North America to Japan.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] Marine sources such as rivers that caught packaging materials eventually lead to the oceans. In global standards, about 80 percent of packaging waste in ocean comes from land based sources and 20 percent comes from marine sources.

[ 4 ] The 20 percent of packaging waste that comes from marine sources comes from the rivers of China starting from least to greatest contributors, the Hanjiang, Zhujiang, Dong, Huangpu, Xi, and Yangtze river.

[ 4 ] All other marine sources comes from rivers of Africa and Southeast Asia.

[ 4 ] Plastic ocean input from top 20 rivers in 2015.

[ 4 ] Impacts on marine species and wildlife species [ edit ] Most marine species and wildlife species suffer from the following: Entanglement: At least 344 species are entangled by packaging waste, specifically the ones that are plastics.

[ 4 ] Most of the victims are marine species like whales, seabirds, turtles, and fish.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] Ingestion : 233 marine species are recorded that had consumed  plastic packaging waste of either unintentionally, intentionally, or indirectly.

[ 4 ] Again, the following victims would be whales, fish, mammals, seabirds, and turtles.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] The effects of eating plastic packaging waste could lead to  greatly reduced stomach capacity, leading to poor appetite and false sense of satiation.

[ 4 ] Whats worse is that the size of the ingested material is ultimately limited by the size of the organism.

[ 4 ] For example, microplastics consumed by planktons and fishes can consume cigarettes boxes.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] Plastic can also obstruct or perforate the gut, cause ulcerative lesions, or gastric rupture.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] This can ultimately lead to death.

Interaction: Animals contacting with packaging waste includes collisions, obstructions, abrasions or use as substrate.

[ 4 ] Impacts on human health [ edit ] Bisphenol A (BPA), styrene and benzene can be found in certain packaging waste.

[ 6 ] [ 8 ] BPA can affect the hearts of women, permanently damage the DNA of mice, and appear to be entering the human body from a variety of unknown sources.

[ 6 ] Studies from Journal of American Association shows that higher bisphenol A levels were significantly associated with heart diseases , diabetes , and abnormally high levels of certain liver enzymes .

[ 6 ] Toxins such as these are found within our food chains. When fish or plankton consume microplastics , it can also enter our food chain.

[ 4 ] [ 8 ] Microplastics  was also found in common table salt and in both tap and bottled water .

[ 8 ] Microplastics are dangerous as the toxins can affect the human body's nervous, respiratory, and reproductive system.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] [ 14 ] Actions to reduce packaging wastes [ edit ] Waste management system improvements [ edit ] Segregation of waste at sources: plastics, organic, metals, paper, etc.

[ 8 ] Effective collection of the segregated waste, transport and safe storage [ 8 ] Cost-effective recycling of materials (including plastics) [ 8 ] Less land filling and dumping in the environment [ 8 ] Promotion of eco-friendly alternatives [ edit ] Governments working with industries could support the development and promotion of sustainable alternatives in order to phase out single-use plastics progressively.

[ 8 ] If governments were to introduce economic incentives, supporting  projects which upscale or recycle single-use items and stimulating the creation of micro-enterprises, they could contribute to the uptake of eco-friendly alternatives to single-use plastics.

[ 8 ] Social awareness and education [ edit ] Social awareness and education are also ways to help contribute to issues similar to helping reduce packaging waste. Using the media gives individuals or groups quick access to spread information and awareness concerning letting the public know what is happening in the world and how others can contribute to fixing packaging waste problems. Schools are also good for spreading education with factual knowledge and possible outcomes for the increase of packaging waste and provide ways to get individuals to give a helping hand in keeping our planet clean. Public awareness strategies can include various activities designed to persuade and educate.

[ 8 ] These strategies may focus on the reuse and recycling of resources and encouraging responsible use and minimization of waste generation and litter.

[ 8 ] Voluntarily actions to reduce packaging waste [ edit ] Reuse bags Bring reusable bags to supermarkets [ 8 ] Repair broken objects instead of throwing them away [ 8 ] Exchange packaging materials on BoxGiver Recycle Clean up in coastal areas Do community services to clean up parks and streets from packaging waste See also [ edit ] Plastic waste – Accumulation of plastic in natural ecosystems Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Waste & Resources Action Programme Packaging Recovery Note Packaging and packaging waste directive – Directive of EU Producer Responsibility Obligations (Packaging Waste) Regulations 2007 – UK waste management regulations Reusable packaging – Packaging designed for reuse Sustainable packaging – Packaging which results in improved sustainability Fast food – Mass-produced food designed for rapid service and consumption Waste minimization – Process that involves reducing the amount of waste produced in society Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Circular economy – Production model to minimise wastage and emissions Disposable food packaging References [ edit ] ^ Hall, Dave (2017-03-13).

"Waste packaging" .

the Guardian . Retrieved 2019-02-20 .

^ a b Local, DPA/The (2018-07-26).

"Germany accumulates more packaging waste per capita than any country in the EU" .

The Local . Retrieved 2019-02-20 .

^ "Packaging waste - Environment" .

European Commission . Retrieved 2019-02-20 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Ritchie, Hannah ; Roser, Max (September 1, 2018).

"Plastic Pollution" .

Our World in Data . Retrieved October 29, 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa US EPA, OLEM (September 7, 2017).

"Containers and Packaging: Product-Specific Data" .

US EPA . Retrieved October 29, 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Guren, Claire Le (November 2009).

"Plastic Pollution" .

Coastal Care . Retrieved October 30, 2019 .

^ "Please don't package it!" . 18 January 2019.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Giacovelli, Claudia (2018).

Single-use plastics, a roadmap for sustainability . Nairobi, Kenya: United Nations Environment Programme.

ISBN 9789280737059 .

OCLC 1096282673 .

^ Soroka, W.

Illustrated Glossary of Packaging Terminology (Second ed.). Institute of Packaging Professionals.

^ Fitzgerald (August 2004).

"Cereal Box Design" (PDF) .

Tech Directions : 22 . Retrieved 4 November 2021 .

^ Misleading Containers, 21CFR100.100 , archived from the original on September 29, 2006 ^ "Addressing Plastic Packaging Waste in E-commerce Retail" .

SDG Knowledge Hub . Retrieved 2024-11-16 .

^ Escursel, S (1 January 2021).

"Sustainability in e-commerce packaging: A review" .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

280 : 124314.

Bibcode : 2021JCPro.28024314E .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.124314 .

PMC 7511172 .

PMID 32989345 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Pongrácz, Eva (March 23, 2007), "The Environmental Impacts of Packaging" , Environmentally Conscious Materials and Chemicals Processing , pp.

237– 278, ISBN 9780470168219 , retrieved October 30, 2019 v t e Packaging General topics Active packaging Child-resistant packaging Contract packager Edible packaging Modified atmosphere/modified humidity packaging Overpackaging Package delivery Package pilferage Package testing Package theft Packaging engineering Resealable packaging Reusable packaging Reuse of bottles Shelf life Shelf-ready packaging Shelf-stable Sustainable packaging Tamper-evident Tamper resistance Wrap rage Product packages Alternative wine closure Ammunition box Banana box Beer bottle Box wine Case-ready meat Coffee bag Cosmetic packaging Currency packaging Disposable food packaging Drink can Egg carton Evidence packaging Field ration Flour sack Foam food container Food packaging Fuel container Gas cylinder Glass milk bottle Growler Juicebox Low plastic water bottle Luxury packaging Milk bag Optical disc packaging Oyster pail Popcorn bag Pharmaceutical packaging Pizza box Plastic milk container Purdue Improved Crop Storage bags Sand bag Seasonal packaging Self-heating food packaging Screw cap (wine) Single-serve coffee container Spray paint Toothpaste pump dispenser Unit dose Water bottle Wine bottle Containers Aerosol spray dispenser Aluminium bottle Aluminum can Ampoule Antistatic bag Bag-in-box Bag Barrel Biodegradable bag Blister pack Boil-in-bag Bottle Box Bulk box Cage Case Carboy Carton Chub Clamshell Corrugated box design Crate Disposable cup Drum Endcap Envelope Euro container Flexible intermediate bulk container Flexible tank Folding carton Glass bottle Gunny sack Inhaler Insulated shipping container Intermediate bulk container Jar Jerrycan Jug Keg Mesh bag Multilayered packaging Multi-pack Packet (container) Padded envelope Pail Paper bag Paper sack Plastic bag Plastic bottle Retort pouch Salvage drum Sachet Water sachet Security bag Shipping container Shipping tube Skin pack Spray bottle Squround Stand-up pouch Steel and tin cans Tetra Brik Thermal bag Tub (container) Tube Unit load Vial Wooden box Materials and components Adhesive Aluminium foil Bail handle Bioplastic Biodegradable plastic BoPET Bubble wrap Bung Cellophane Closure Coated paper Coating Coextrusion Container glass Corrugated fiberboard Corrugated plastic Cushioning Desiccant Double seam Flip-top Foam peanut Gel pack Hot-melt adhesive Humidity indicator card Kraft paper Label Lid Linear low-density polyethylene Liquid packaging board Living hinge Low-density polyethylene Meat absorbent pad Metallised film Modified atmosphere Molded pulp Nonwoven fabric Overwrap Oxygen scavenger Package handle Packaging gas Pallet Paper Paper pallet Paperboard Plastic-coated paper Plastic film Plastic pallet Plastic wrap Polyester Polyethylene Polypropylene Pressure-sensitive tape Pump dispenser Screw cap Screw cap (wine) Security printing Security tape Shock detector Shock and vibration data logger Shrink wrap Slip sheet Staple (fastener) Strapping Stretch wrap Susceptor Tamper-evident band Tear tape Temperature data logger Time temperature indicator Tinplate Velostat Processes Aseptic processing Authentication Automatic identification and data capture Blow fill seal Blow molding Calendering Canning Coating Containerization Converting Corona treatment Curtain coating Die cutting Die forming (plastics) Electronic article surveillance Extrusion Extrusion coating Flame treatment Glass production Graphic design Hazard analysis and critical control points Hermetic seal Induction sealing Injection moulding Lamination Laser cutting Molding Package tracking Papermaking Plastic extrusion Plastic welding Printing Product development Production control Quality assurance Radio-frequency identification Roll slitting Shearing (manufacturing) Thermoforming Track and trace Ultrasonic welding Vacuum forming Vacuum packaging Verification and validation Machinery Barcode printer Barcode reader Bottling line Calender Can seamer Cap torque tester Cartoning machine Case sealer Check weigher Conveyor system Drum pump Extended core stretch wrapper Filler Heat gun Heat sealer Industrial robot Injection molding machine Label printer applicator Lineshaft roller conveyor Logistics automation Material-handling equipment Mechanical brake stretch wrapper Multihead weigher Orbital stretch wrapper Packaging machinery Pallet inverter Palletizer Rotary wheel blow molding systems Seed-counting machine Shrink tunnel Staple gun Tape dispenser Turntable stretch wrapper Vertical form fill sealing machine Environment, post-use Biodegradation Can collecting Closed-loop box reuse Environmental engineering Extended producer responsibility Glass recycling Industrial ecology Life-cycle assessment Litter Packaging waste Paper recycling PET bottle recycling Plastic recycling Recycling Reusable packaging Reverse logistics Source reduction Sustainable packaging Waste management Category: Packaging v t e Biosolids , waste , and waste management Major types Agricultural wastewater Biodegradable waste Biomedical waste Brown waste Chemical waste Construction waste Demolition waste Electronic waste by country Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Heat waste Industrial waste Industrial wastewater Litter Marine debris Mining waste Municipal solid waste Open defecation Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Radioactive waste Scrap metal Sewage Sharps waste Surface runoff Toxic waste Processes Anaerobic digestion Balefill Biodegradation Composting Durable good Ecological design Garden waste dumping Illegal dumping Incineration Landfill Landfill mining Mechanical biological treatment Mechanical sorting Photodegradation Reclaimed lumber Recycling appliance recycling battery recycling bottle recycling fluorescent lamp recycling land recycling plastic recycling textile recycling timber recycling tire recycling water heat recycling water recycling shower Repurposing Resource recovery Reusable packaging Right to repair Sewage treatment Urban mining Waste collection Waste sorting Waste trade Waste treatment Waste-to-energy Countries Afghanistan Albania Armenia Australia Belgium Bangladesh Brazil Bosnia and Herzegovina Egypt Georgia Hong Kong India Israel Japan Kazakhstan New Zealand Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Switzerland Syria Tanzania Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States Agreements Bamako Convention Basel Convention EU directives batteries Recycling framework incineration landfills RoHS vehicles waste water WEEE London Convention Oslo Convention OSPAR Convention Occupations Sanitation worker Street sweeper Waste collector Waste picker Other topics Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future China's waste import ban Cleaner production Downcycling Eco-industrial park Extended producer responsibility High-level radioactive waste management History of waste management Landfill fire Sewage regulation and administration Supervised injection site Toxic colonialism Upcycling Waste hierarchy Waste legislation Waste minimisation Zero waste Environment portal Category: Waste Index Journals Lists Organizations Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Packaging_waste&oldid=1299007844 " Categories : Packaging Waste Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 01:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Packaging waste 10 languages Add topic

