Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 German philosophy Toggle German philosophy subsection 1.1 Immanuel Kant 1.2 Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel 1.3 Ludwig Feuerbach 1.4 Rupture with German idealism and the Young Hegelians 2 English and Scottish political economy Toggle English and Scottish political economy subsection 2.1 Adam Smith and David Ricardo 3 French socialism Toggle French socialism subsection 3.1 Jean-Jacques Rousseau 3.2 Charles Fourier and Henri de Saint-Simon 3.3 Pierre-Joseph Proudhon 4 Other influences Toggle Other influences subsection 4.1 Lewis H. Morgan 4.2 Friedrich Engels 4.3 Charles Darwin 4.4 Classical materialism 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Influences on Karl Marx 2 languages فارسی Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Influences on Karl Marx" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Karl Marx in 1875 Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Influences on Karl Marx are generally thought to have been derived from three main sources, namely German idealist philosophy , French socialism and English and Scottish political economy .

German philosophy [ edit ] Immanuel Kant [ edit ] Immanuel Kant is believed to have had a greater influence than any other philosopher of modern times.

Kantian philosophy was the basis on which the structure of Marxism was built—particularly as it was developed by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel .

Hegel's dialectical method , which was taken up by Karl Marx , was an extension of the method of reasoning by antinomies that Kant used.

[ 1 ] [ better source needed ] Philip J. Kain believes Kant was especially influential on Young Marx 's ethical views.

[ 2 ] Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel [ edit ] By the time of his death, Hegel was the most prominent philosopher in Germany. His views were widely taught and his students were highly regarded. His followers soon divided into right-wing and left-wing Hegelians . Theologically and politically, the right-wing Hegelians offered a conservative interpretation of his work. They emphasized the compatibility between Hegel's philosophy and Christianity ; they were orthodox . The left-wing Hegelians eventually moved to an atheistic position. In politics, many of them became revolutionaries . This historically important left-wing group included Ludwig Feuerbach , Bruno Bauer , Friedrich Engels and Marx himself.

[ 3 ] They were often referred to as the Young Hegelians.

Marx's view of history, which came to be called historical materialism , is certainly influenced by Hegel's claim that reality and history should be viewed dialectically. Hegel believed that the direction of human history is characterized in the movement from the fragmentary toward the complete and the real (which was also a movement towards greater and greater rationality). Sometimes, Hegel explained that this progressive unfolding of the Absolute involves gradual, evolutionary accretion, but at other times requires discontinuous, revolutionary leaps—episodal upheavals against the existing status quo . For example, Hegel strongly opposed slavery in the United States during his lifetime and envisioned a time when Christian nations would radically eliminate it from their civilization.

[ citation needed ] While Marx accepted this broad conception of history, Hegel was an idealist and Marx sought to rewrite dialectics in materialist terms. He summarized the materialistic aspect of his theory of history in the 1859 preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy : In the social production of their existence, men inevitably enter into definite relations, which are independent of their will, namely relations of production appropriate to a given stage in the development of their material forces of production . The totality of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real foundation, on which arises a legal and political superstructure and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness. The mode of production of material life conditions the general process of social, political and intellectual life. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but their social existence that determines their consciousness.

In this brief popularization of his ideas, Marx emphasized that social development sprang from the inherent contradictions within material life and the social superstructure . This notion is often understood as a simple historical narrative: primitive communism had developed into slave states . Slave states had developed into feudal societies . Those societies in turn became capitalist states and those states would be overthrown by the self-conscious portion of their working class , or proletariat , creating the conditions for socialism and ultimately a higher form of communism than that with which the whole process began. Marx illustrated his ideas most prominently by the development of capitalism from feudalism and by the prediction of the development of communism from capitalism.

Ludwig Feuerbach [ edit ] See also: Marx's theory of alienation Die Freien by Friedrich Engels , a group of Young Hegelians formed at the University of Berlin . Attendees included Max Stirner , Bruno Bauer , Arnold Ruge , Friedrich Engels and Karl Marx.

Ludwig Feuerbach was a German philosopher and anthropologist. Feuerbach proposed that people should interpret social and political thought as their foundation and their material needs. He held that an individual is the product of their environment and that the whole consciousness of a person is the result of the interaction of sensory organs and the external world. Marx and Engels saw in Feuerbach's emphasis on people and human needs a movement toward a materialistic interpretation of society.

[ 4 ] In The Essence of Christianity (1841), Feuerbach argued that God is really a creation of man and that the qualities people attribute to God are really qualities of humanity. Accordingly, Marx argued that it is the material world that is real and that our ideas of it are consequences, not causes, of the world. Thus, like Hegel and other philosophers, Marx distinguished between appearances and reality. However, he did not believe that the material world hides from us the real world of the ideal; on the contrary, he thought that historically and socially specific ideology prevented people from seeing the material conditions of their lives clearly.

What distinguished Marx from Feuerbach was his view of Feuerbach's humanism as excessively abstract and so no less ahistorical and idealist than what it purported to replace, namely the reified notion of God found in institutional Christianity that legitimized the repressive power of the Prussian state . Instead, Marx aspired to give ontological priority to what he called the real life process of real human beings as he and Engels said in The German Ideology (1846): In direct contrast to German philosophy, which descends from heaven to earth, here we ascend from earth to heaven. That is to say, we do not set out from what men say, imagine, conceive, nor from men as narrated, thought of, imagined, conceived, in order to arrive at men in the flesh. We set out from real, active men, and on the basis of their real life process we demonstrate the development of the ideological reflexes and echoes of this life process. The phantoms formed in the human brain are also, necessarily, sublimates of their material life process, which is empirically verifiable and bound to material premises. Morality, religion, metaphysics, all the rest of ideology and their corresponding forms of consciousness, thus no longer retain the semblance of independence. They have no history, no development; but men, developing their material production and their material intercourse, alter, along with this, their real existence, their thinking, and the products of their thinking. Life is not determined by consciousness, but consciousness by life.

In his " Theses on Feuerbach " (1844), he also writes that "the philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways, the point is to change it". This opposition between firstly various subjective interpretations given by philosophers, which may be in a sense compared with Weltanschauung designed to legitimize the current state of affairs; and secondly, the effective transformation of the world through praxis , which combines theory and practice in a materialist way, is what distinguishes Marxist philosophers from the rest of philosophers. Indeed, Marx's break with German idealism involves a new definition of philosophy as Louis Althusser , founder of structural Marxism in the 1960s, would define it as class struggle in theory . Marx's movement away from university philosophy and towards the workers' movement is thus inextricably linked to his rupture with his earlier writings, which pushed Marxist commentators to speak of a young Marx and a mature Marx , although the nature of this cut poses problems. A year before the Revolutions of 1848 , Marx and Engels thus wrote The Communist Manifesto , which was prepared to an imminent revolution and ended with the famous cry: " Proletarians of all countries, unite!

". However, Marx's thought changed again following Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte 's 2 December 1851 coup , which put an end to the French Second Republic and created the Second Empire which would last until the 1870 Franco-Prussian War . Marx thereby modified his theory of alienation exposed in the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 and would later arrive to his theory of commodity fetishism , exposed in the first chapter of the first book of Das Kapital (1867). This abandonment of the early theory of alienation would be amply discussed, several Marxist theorists, including Marxist humanists such as the Praxis School , would return to it. Others such as Althusser would claim that the epistemological break between the young Marx and the mature Marx was such that no comparisons could be done between both works, marking a shift to a scientific theory of society.

Rupture with German idealism and the Young Hegelians [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Marx did not study directly with Hegel, but after Hegel's death he studied under one of Hegel's pupils, Bruno Bauer , a leader of the circle of Young Hegelians to whom Marx attached himself. However, Marx and Engels came to disagree with Bauer and the rest of the Young Hegelians about socialism and also about the usage of Hegel's dialectic. From 1841, the young Marx progressively broke away from German idealism and the Young Hegelians. Along with Engels, who observed the Chartist movement in the United Kingdom , he cut away with the environment in which he grew up and encountered the proletariat in France and Germany.

He then wrote a scathing criticism of the Young Hegelians in two books, The Holy Family (1845) and The German Ideology in which he criticized not only Bauer, but also Max Stirner 's The Ego and Its Own (1844), considered as one of the founding book of individualist anarchism . Stirner claimed that all ideals were inherently alienating and that replacing God by the humanity—as did Ludwig Feuerbach in The Essence of Christianity —was not sufficient. According to Stirner, any ideals , God , humanity , the nation , or even the revolution alienated the Ego. In The Poverty of Philosophy (1845), Marx also criticized Pierre-Joseph Proudhon , who had become famous with his cry " Property is theft!

".

Marx's early writings are thus a response towards Hegel, German idealism and a break with the rest of the Young Hegelians. Marx stood Hegel on his head in his own view of his role by turning the idealistic dialectic into a materialistic one in proposing that material circumstances shape ideas instead of the other way around. In this, Marx was following the lead of Feuerbach. His theory of alienation , developed in the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 (published in 1932), inspired itself from Feuerbach's critique of the alienation of man in God through the objectivation of all his inherent characteristics (thus man projected on God all qualities which are in fact man's own quality which defines human nature ). Marx also criticized Feuerbach for being insufficiently materialistic—as Stirner himself had point out—and explained that the alienation described by the Young Hegelians was in fact the result of the structure of the economy itself. Furthermore, he criticized Feuerbach's conception of human nature in his sixth thesis on Feuerbach as an abstract "kind" which incarnated itself in each singular individual: "Feuerbach resolves the essence of religion into the essence of man [ menschliche Wesen , human nature]. But the essence of man is no abstraction inherent in each single individual. In reality, it is the ensemble of the social relations". Thereupon, instead of founding itself on the singular, concrete individual subject as did classic philosophy, including contractualism ( Thomas Hobbes , John Locke and Jean-Jacques Rousseau ), but also political economy , Marx began with the totality of social relations: labour, language and all which constitute our human existence. He claimed that individualism was an essence the result of commodity fetishism or alienation. Although some critics have claimed that meant that Marx enforced a strict social determinism which destroyed the possibility of free will , Marx's philosophy in no way can be reduced to such determinism as his own personal trajectory makes clear.

In 1844–1845, when Marx was starting to settle his account with Hegel and the Young Hegelians in his writings, he critiqued the Young Hegelians for limiting the horizon of their critique to religion and not taking up the critique of the state and civil society as paramount. Indeed, by the look of Marx's writings in that period (most famous of which is the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 , a text that most explicitly elaborated his theory of alienation ), Marx's thinking could have taken at least three possible courses, namely the study of law, religion and the state, the study of natural philosophy and the study of political economy. He chose the last as the predominant focus of his studies for the rest of his life, largely on account of his previous experience as the editor of the newspaper Rheinische Zeitung on whose pages he fought for freedom of expression against Prussian censorship and made a rather idealist, legal defense for the Moselle peasants' customary right of collecting wood in the forest (this right was at the point of being criminalized and privatized by the state). It was Marx's inability to penetrate beneath the legal and polemical surface of the latter issue to its materialist, economic and social roots that prompted him to critically study political economy.

English and Scottish political economy [ edit ] Political economy predates the 20th century division of the two disciplines of politics and economics , treating social relations and economic relations as interwoven. Marx built on and critiqued the most well-known political economists of his day, the British classical political economists.

Adam Smith and David Ricardo [ edit ] Adam Smith David Ricardo From Adam Smith came the idea that the grounds of property is labour. Marx critiqued Smith and David Ricardo for not realizing that their economic concepts reflected specifically capitalist institutions, not innate natural properties of human society; and therefore could not be applied unchanged to all societies. He proposed a systematic correlation between labour-values and money prices. He claimed that the source of profits under capitalism is value added by workers not paid out in wages. This mechanism operated through the distinction between labour power , which workers freely exchanged for their wages; and labour , over which asset-holding capitalists thereby gained control.

This practical and theoretical distinction was Marx's primary insight and allowed him to develop the concept of surplus value , which distinguished his works from that of Smith and Ricardo. Workers create enough value during a short period of the working day to pay their wages for that day (necessary labour), yet they continue to work for several more hours and continue to create value ( surplus labour ). This value is not returned to them, but appropriated by the capitalists (the bourgeoisie ). Thus, it is not the capitalist ruling class that creates wealth, but the workers—the capitalists then appropriating this wealth to themselves. Some of Marx's insights were seen in a rudimentary form by the Ricardian socialist school).

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] He developed this theory of exploitation in Das Kapital , a dialectical investigation into the forms value relations take.

Marx's theory of business cycles; of economic growth and development, especially in two sector models; and of the declining rate of profit, or crisis theory are other important elements of Marx's political economy. Marx later made tentative movements towards econometric investigations of his ideas, but the necessary statistical techniques of national accounting only emerged in the following century. In any case, it has proved difficult to adapt Marx's economic concepts, which refer to social relations, to measurable aggregated stocks and flows. In recent decades, a loose "quantitative" school of Marxist economists has emerged. While it may be impossible to find exact measures of Marx's variables from price data, approximations of basic trends are possible.

French socialism [ edit ] Jean-Jacques Rousseau [ edit ] Rousseau was one of the first modern writers to seriously attack the institution of private property and therefore is sometimes considered a forebear of modern socialism and communism, though Marx rarely mentions Rousseau in his writings. He argued that the goal of government should be to secure freedom , equality and justice for all within the state, regardless of the will of the majority. From Rousseau came the idea of egalitarian democracy.

Charles Fourier and Henri de Saint-Simon [ edit ] In 1833, France was experiencing a number of social problems arising out of the Industrial Revolution . A number of sweeping plans of reform were developed by thinkers on the left . Among the more grandiose were the plans of Charles Fourier and the followers of Henri de Saint-Simon . Fourier wanted to replace modern cities with utopian communities while the Saint-Simonians advocated directing the economy by manipulating credit. Although these programs did not have much support, they did expand the political and social imagination of their contemporaries, including Marx.

[ 7 ] Pierre-Joseph Proudhon [ edit ] Proudhon participated in the February 1848 uprising and the composition of what he termed the first republican proclamation of the new republic. However, he had misgivings about the new government because it was pursuing political reform at the expense of the socio-economic reform, which Proudhon considered basic. Proudhon published his own perspective for reform, Solution du problème social , in which he laid out a program of mutual financial cooperation among workers. He believed this would transfer control of economic relations from capitalists and financiers to workers. It was Proudhon's book What Is Property?

that convinced the young Marx that private property should be abolished.

In one of his first works, The Holy Family , Marx said: "Not only does Proudhon write in the interest of the proletarians, he is himself a proletarian, an ouvrier. His work is a scientific manifesto of the French proletariat". However, Marx disagreed with Proudhon's anarchism and later published vicious criticisms of Proudhon. Marx wrote The Poverty of Philosophy as a refutation of Proudhon's The Philosophy of Poverty (1847). In his socialism, Proudhon was followed by Mikhail Bakunin . After Bakunin's death, his libertarian socialism diverged into anarcho-communism and collectivist anarchism , with notable proponents such as Peter Kropotkin and Joseph Déjacque .

Other influences [ edit ] Lewis H. Morgan [ edit ] Lewis Henry Morgan 's descriptions of "communism in living" as practiced by the Haudenosaunee of North America, through research enabled by and coauthored with Ely S. Parker , had a large influence on the work and political philosophy of Marx and Engels.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Though the belief of this " primitive communism " as based on Morgan's work is flawed [ 10 ] due to Morgan's misunderstandings of Haudenosaunee society and his, since proven wrong, theory of social evolution .

[ 11 ] Marx wrote a collection of notebooks from his reading of Morgan but did not develop them in to published works before his death.

Friedrich Engels [ edit ] An early photograph of Engels from around the time he wrote The Condition of the Working Class in England , thought to show him aged 20–25 (c. 1840–45) [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Marx's revision of Hegelianism was also influenced by Engels' 1845 book, The Condition of the Working Class in England , which led Marx to conceive of the historical dialectic in terms of class conflict and to see the modern working class as the most progressive force for revolution. Thereafter, Marx and Engels worked together for the rest of Marx's life so that the collected works of Marx and Engels are generally published together, almost as if the output of one person. Important publications, such as The German Ideology and The Communist Manifesto , were joint efforts. Engels says that "I cannot deny that both before and during my 40 years' collaboration with Marx I had a certain independent share in laying the foundation of the theory, and more particularly in its elaboration". However, he adds: But the greater part of its leading basic principles, especially in the realm of economics and history, and, above all, their final trenchant formulation, belong to Marx. What I contributed — at any rate with the exception of my work in a few special fields — Marx could very well have done without me. What Marx accomplished I would not have achieved. Marx stood higher, saw further, and took a wider and quicker view than all the rest of us. Marx was a genius; we others were at best talented. Without him the theory would not be by far what it is today. It therefore rightly bears his name.

— Frederick Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy – Part 4: Marx Charles Darwin [ edit ] In late November 1859, Engels acquired one of the first 1,250 copies of Charles Darwin 's The Origin of Species and then he sent a letter to Marx telling: "Darwin, by the way, whom I'm just reading now, is absolutely splendid". The following year, Marx wrote back to his colleague telling that this book contained the natural-history foundation of the historical materialism viewpoint: [ 16 ] [ 17 ] These last four weeks, I have read all sorts of things. Among others, Darwin's book on natural selection . Although it is developed in the crude English style, this is the book which contains the basis on natural history for our view.

— Karl Marx, 19 December 1860 [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Next month, Marx wrote to his friend Ferdinand Lassalle : Darwin's work is most important and suits my purpose in that it provides a basis in natural science for the historical class struggle .

— Karl Marx, 16 January 1861 [ 20 ] By June 1862, Marx had already read The Origin of Species again, finding a connection between Thomas Robert Malthus 's work and Darwin's ideas: I am amused at Darwin, into whom I looked again, when he says that he applies the " Malthusian " theory also to plants and animals.

— Karl Marx in a letter to Friedrich Engels, 18 June 1862 [ 21 ] In 1863, he quoted Darwin again within his Theories of Surplus Value (2:121), saying: "In his splendid work, Darwin did not realize that by discovering the 'geometrical progression' in the animal and plant kingdom, he overthrew Malthus theory".

[ 22 ] Having read about Darwinian evolution along with Marx, German communist Wilhelm Liebknecht later said that "when Darwin drew the conclusions from his research work and brought them to the knowledge of the public, we spoke of nothing else for months but Darwin and the enormous significance of his scientific discoveries".

[ 23 ] Historian Richard Weikart points out that Marx had started to attend "a series of lectures by Thomas Henry Huxley on evolution".

[ 24 ] In August 1866, Marx referred to Pierre Trémaux 's Origine et transformations de l'homme et des autres êtres (1865) in another letter to Engels as "a very important advance over Darwin".

[ 25 ] He went further to claim that "in its historical and political application" the book was "much more important and copious than Darwin".

[ 26 ] Although there is no mention of Darwin in The Communist Manifesto (published eleven years prior to The Origin of Species ), Marx includes two explicit references to Darwin and evolution in the second edition of Das Kapital , in two footnotes where he relates Darwin's theory to his opinion about production and technology development. In the Volume I, Chapter 14: "The Detail Labourer and his implements", Section 2, Marx referred to Darwin's Origin of Species as an "epoch-making work" [ 27 ] [ 28 ] while in Chapter 15, Section I took on the comparison of organs of plants to animals and tools.

[ 29 ] In a book review of the first volume of Das Kapital , Engels wrote that Marx was "simply striving to establish the same gradual process of transformation demonstrated by Darwin in natural history as a law in the social field".

[ 29 ] In this line of thought, several authors such as William F. O'Neill, have seen that "Marx describes history as a social Darwinist ' survival of the fittest ' dominated by the conflict between different social classes" and moving to a future in which social conflict will ultimately disappear in a 'classless society'" [ 30 ] [ 31 ] while some Marxists try to dissociate Marx from social Darwinism.

Nonetheless, it is evident that Marx had a strong liking for Darwin's theory and a clear influence on his thought. Furthermore, when the second German edition of Das Kapital , was published (two years after the publication of Darwin's Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex ), Marx sent Darwin a copy of his book with the following words: [ 32 ] Mr. Charles Darwin On the part of his sincere admirer Karl Marx — London, 16 June 1873 [ 33 ] [ 34 ] Darwin wrote back to Marx in October, thanking him for having sent his work and saying "I believe that we both earnestly desire the extension of knowledge".

[ 35 ] According to scholar Paul Heyer, "Marx believed that Darwin provided a materialistic perspective compatible with his own", although being applied in another context.

[ 36 ] In his book Darwin in Russian Thought (1989), Alexander Vucinich claims that "Engels gave Marx credit for extending Darwin's theory to the study of the inner dynamics and change in human society".

[ 37 ] Classical materialism [ edit ] Marx was influenced by classical materialism, especially Epicurus (to whom Marx dedicated his thesis "Difference of Natural Philosophy Between Democritus and Epicurus", 1841) for his materialism and theory of clinamen which opened up a realm of liberty.

References [ edit ] ^ "MSN Encarta – Kant" . Archived from the original on 11 July 2004.

^ Kain, P. J. "Aristotle, Kant, and the Ethics of the Young Marx," in Marx and Aristotle. Ed. G.E. McCarthy. Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefield, 1992, 213-42.

^ "MSN Encarta – Hegel" . Archived from the original on 30 October 2009.

^ "MSN Encarta – Feuerbach" . Archived from the original on 29 August 2009.

^ "Utopian Socialists" .

^ "The Classical Ricardians" .

^ "MSN Encarta – France" . Archived from the original on 28 October 2009.

^ Morgan, Lewis Henry (1881).

Houses and House-Life of the American Aborigines . Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press .

^ Engels, Friedrich (1972) [First published 1884].

The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State, in the Light of the Researches of Lewis H. Morgan .

International Publishers .

ISBN 978-0-7178-0359-0 .

^ Darmangeat, Christophe (2009).

Le Communisme primitif n'est plus ce qu'il était [ Primitive Communism is not what it used to be ] (in French). Collectif d'édition Smolny.

^ Morgan (1964) ; Service et al. (1981) ; Hersey (1993) ; Smith (2009) ; Haller Jr. (1971) ; Hume (2011) ; Yang (2012) ^ Hunt, Tristram (2009).

The Frock-Coated Communist: The Revolutionary Life of Friedrich Engels . Metropolitan/Henry Holt & Co.

ISBN 9780805080254 .

OCLC 263983621 .

^ Henderson, W. O. (1976).

The Life of Friedrich Engels . Vol. 1.

Routledge .

ISBN 9780415431668 – via Google Books .

^ Dash, Mike (1 August 2013).

"How Friedrich Engels' Radical Lover Helped Him Father Socialism: Mary Burns exposed the capitalist's son to the plight of the working people of Manchester" .

Smithsonian Institution .

^ Green, John (2008).

A Revolutionary Life: Biography of Frederick Engels . Artery Publications.

ISBN 978-0955822803 .

^ The essential Marx: the non-economic writings, a selection (1979), New American Library, p. 359 ^ Saul K. Padover, Karl Marx (1977), On history and people, McGraw-Hill, p. 171.

^ Staski, Edward; Marks, Jonathan B. (1992).

Evolutionary anthropology: an introduction to physical anthropology and archaeology . Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers. p. 96.

^ Bellamy Foster, John (2000).

Marx's Ecology: Materialism and Nature . p. 197.

^ "Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle in Berlin" .

^ Karl Marx, Saul Kussiel Padover (1979), The letters of Karl Marx, Prentice-Hall, p. 157.

^ Lane, David (2009).

Complexity Perspectives in Innovation and Social Change . Springer. p. 122.

ISBN 978-1-4020-9663-1 – via Google Books .

^ Institut Marksizma-Leninzma (1968), Reminiscences of Marx and Engels , Foreign Languages Publishing House, p. 106.

^ Richard Weikart (1999), "Socialist Darwinism: evolution in German socialist thought from Marx to Bernstein", International Scholars Publications, p. 18.

^ Conway Zirkle (1959), "Evolution, Marxian Biology, and the Social Scene", University of Pennsylvania Press, p. 91.

^ The essential Marx: the non-economic writings, a selection, New American Library, 1979, p. 361.

^ John Spargo (1910), Karl Marx: His Life and Work, B.W. Huebsch, p. 200.

^ Stanley Edgar Hyman (1974), The tangled bank: Darwin, Marx, Frazer and Freud as imaginative writers, Atheneum, p. 121.

^ a b I. Bernard Cohen (1985), Revolution in Science, Harvard University Press, p. 345.

^ (1981), William F. O'Neill, "Educational Ideologies: Contemporary Expressions of Educational Philosophy", Goodyear Publishing Company, p. 74.

^ William F. O'Neill (1983), "Rethinking education: selected readings in the educational ideologies", Kendall/Hunt Pub. Co., p. 18.

^ Carter, Richard.

"Marx of Respect" Archived 2006-03-14 at the Wayback Machine (2000).

^ Howard E. Gruber, Charles Darwin, Paul H. Barrett (1974), Darwin on man: a psychological study of scientific creativity , Wildwood House, p. 72.

^ Heinrich Lüssy (1995), Die Krise der Neuzeit, oder, Das Drama der prometheischen Selbstsetzung, Beerenverlag, p. 902.

^ John Bellamy Foster, Marx's Ecology: Materialism and Nature, p. 207.

^ Paul Heyer, Nature, human nature, and society: Marx, Darwin, biology, and the human sciences (1982), Greenwood Press, p. 13.

^ Vucinich, Alexander (1988).

Darwin in Russian Thought . Berkeley: University of California Press .

Bibliography [ edit ] Haller Jr., John S. (1971).

"Race and the Concept of Progress in Nineteenth Century American Ethnology" .

American Anthropologist .

73 (3): 710– 724.

doi : 10.1525/aa.1971.73.3.02a00120 .

Hersey, Mason (1993).

"Lewis Henry Morgan and the Anthropological Critique of Civilization" .

Dialectical Anthropology .

18 (1).

Springer : 53– 70.

doi : 10.1007/BF01301671 .

JSTOR 29790527 .

S2CID 144701125 .

Hume, Brad D. (January 2011).

"Evolutionisms: Lewis Henry Morgan, Time, and the Question of Sociocultural Evolutionary Theory" .

Histories of Anthropology Annual .

7 (1): 91– 126.

doi : 10.1353/haa.2011.0009 .

S2CID 170478166 .

Archived from the original on 28 October 2021.

Morgan, Lewis H.

(1964) [1877].

Ancient Society .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 9780674865662 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Service, Elman R.

; Barnard, Alan; Bodemann, Y. Michal ; Fleuret, Patrick; Fried, Morton ; Harding, Thomas G.; Köcke, Jasper; Krader, Lawrence ; Kuper, Adam ; Legros, Dominique; Makarius, Raoul; Moore, John H.

; Pilling, Arnold R.; Skalník, Peter; Strathern, Andrew ; Tooker, Elisabeth; Whitecotton, Joseph W.

(February 1981).

"The Mind of Lewis H. Morgan" .

Current Anthropology .

22 (1): 25– 43.

doi : 10.1086/202601 .

JSTOR 2742415 .

S2CID 163464337 .

Smith, Stuart (2009).

"Lewis Henry Morgan" .

University of California, Santa Barbara .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 3 February 2021 .

Yang, Manuel (September 2012). "Specter of the commons: Karl Marx, Lewis Henry Morgan, and nineteenth-century European stadialism".

Borderlands .

11 (2).

Gale Academic OneFile .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐c6jwg
Cached time: 20250814221125
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.828 seconds
Real time usage: 1.017 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3452/1000000
Revision size: 39626/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 133898/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4026/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 105686/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.538/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17129912/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  838.890      1 -total
 28.09%  235.658      1 Template:Reflist
 16.44%  137.930      1 Template:Marxism
 15.96%  133.878      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.81%  124.276     11 Template:Lang
 13.14%  110.246      6 Template:Cite_web
  8.89%   74.561      1 Template:Short_description
  8.50%   71.322      1 Template:Sidebar
  7.50%   62.893     11 Template:Cite_book
  7.47%   62.675      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6152834:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221125 and revision id 1300600547. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Influences_on_Karl_Marx&oldid=1300600547 " Categories : Karl Marx Marxism Issues of cultural influence Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing additional references from September 2013 All articles needing additional references All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from October 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles containing German-language text Articles needing additional references from January 2023 Articles containing French-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 08:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Influences on Karl Marx 2 languages Add topic

