Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of the title 2 Editions 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Commentaries 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Magna Moralia 9 languages Català Español Français Íslenska Italiano മലയാളം 日本語 Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the work by Gregory the Great, see Moralia in Job .

The Magna Moralia ( Latin for "Great Ethics") is a treatise on ethics traditionally attributed to Aristotle , though the consensus now is that it represents an epitome of his ethical thought by a later, if sympathetic, writer. Several scholars have disagreed with this, taking the Magna Moralia to be an authentic work by Aristotle, notably Friedrich Schleiermacher , Hans von Arnim , and J. L. Ackrill .  In any case, it is considered a less mature piece than Aristotle's other ethical works, viz. the Nicomachean Ethics and the Eudemian Ethics .

There is some debate as to whether they follow more closely the Eudemian or the Nicomachean version of the Ethics .

History of the title [ edit ] The name " Magna Moralia " cannot be traced further back in time than the reign of Marcus Aurelius .  Henry Jackson suggested that the work acquired its name from the fact that the two rolls into which it is divided would have loomed large on the shelf in comparison to the eight rolls of the Eudemian Ethics , even though the latter are twice as long.

[ 1 ] The title has been translated to Greek as " Ἠθικὰ Μεγάλα ." [ 2 ] Editions [ edit ] Losada (Spanish) paperback edition, ISBN 950-03-9305-0 Translation by Thomas Taylor (1812), OCLC 16627936 Harvard University Press hardcover edition (with the Metaphysics ), ISBN 0-674-99317-9 "Magna Moralia" translated by St. George Stock (Internet Archive, 1915) Free Audiobook Version of "Magna Moralia" translated by St. George Stock (Librivox) See also [ edit ] Minima Moralia References [ edit ] ^ G. Cyril Armstrong, Introduction to the "Magna Moralia" in Aristotle, Metaphysics X-XIV, Oeconomica, and Magna Moralia , Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, MA:  Harvard University Press, 1947), 427–8.

^ Pietro Tomasi, Una nuova lettura dell'Aristotele di Franz Brentano alla luce di alcuni inediti , Editrice UNI Service, 2009, p. 55.

Commentaries [ edit ] Magna Moralia. Übersetzt und erläutert von Franz Dirlmeier , Berlin 1958.

ISBN 3-05-001193-9 External links [ edit ] Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Ἠθικὰ Μεγάλα Magna Moralia public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 National Germany United States France BnF data Greece Vatican 2 3 4 Israel Other IdRef 2 This article about a book on ethics is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Magna_Moralia&oldid=1269337668 " Categories : Ethics books Works by Aristotle Ethics book stubs Hidden categories: Articles containing Greek-language text Articles with LibriVox links All stub articles This page was last edited on 14 January 2025, at 05:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Magna Moralia 9 languages Add topic

