Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Origins 3 Organization of the Oracle Toggle Organization of the Oracle subsection 3.1 Priestess 3.2 Other officiants 3.3 Oracular procedure 3.4 Experience of supplicants 3.5 The Role of Consultants 3.6 The collaboration during Oracular Productions 3.7 Modern Interpretations of the Pythia 4 Temple of Apollo Toggle Temple of Apollo subsection 4.1 Comparative Oracular Traditions 5 Scientific explanations Toggle Scientific explanations subsection 5.1 Fumes and vapors 5.2 Excavations 5.3 Illusions in the adyton 5.4 Political and Diplomatic Role of the Oracle 6 See also 7 Citations 8 General and cited references Toggle General and cited references subsection 8.1 Ancient sources 8.2 Modern sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Pythia 48 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Lëtzebuergesch Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Delphic Oracle ) Priestess of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi Not to be confused with Python (mythology) .

For other uses, see Pythia (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Anthropology of religion Basic concepts Afterlife Animism Augury Communitas Comparative religion Divination Divine language Evolutionary origin of religion Fetishism Great Spirit Henotheism Initiation Laying on of hands Liminality Magic Mana Monotheism Nympholepsy Oracle Pilgrimage Polytheism Rite of passage Ritual Sacred language Sacred–profane dichotomy Sacred site Shamanism Soul dualism Superstition Theories about religion Totem Transtheism Veneration of the dead Case studies Magic Coral Gardens and Their Magic Treatise on the Apparitions of Spirits and on Vampires or Revenants Neo-Paganism Ritual Angakkuq Babaylan Bobohizan Bomoh Bora Dukun Miko Jhākri Pawang Slametan Wu Revitalization movements Cargo cult Ghost Dance Handsome Lake Related articles The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life Purity and Danger Myth and ritual Archaeology of religion and ritual Poles in mythology Lived religion Elite religion Major theorists Augustin Calmet Akbar S. Ahmed Talal Asad Joseph Campbell Mary Douglas Émile Durkheim Mircea Eliade Arnold van Gennep René Girard E. E. Evans-Pritchard James Frazer Fustel de Coulanges Clifford Geertz Robin Horton Claude Lévi-Strauss Robert Marett Steven Ozment Roy Rappaport Saba Mahmood Marshall Sahlins Melford Spiro Stanley Tambiah Victor Turner Edward Burnett Tylor Daniel Martin Varisco Anthony F. C. Wallace Journals Folklore The Hibbert Journal The Journal of Religion Oceania Religions Ethnic and folk religions Afro-American religion Alaska Native religion Anito Atua Böö mörgöl Chinese folk religion Hanitu Hausa Kejawèn Native American religion Noaidi Shindo Shamanism in Siberia Shinto Tengrism African traditional religions Buddhism Mahayana Nichiren Pure Land Shingon Theravada Tiantai Tibetan Vajrayana Zen Christianity Adventism Anglicanism Armenian Apostolic Church Baptists Calvinism Catholic Church Coptic Orthodoxy Eastern Orthodoxy Ethiopian Orthodoxy Greek Orthodoxy Lutheranism Methodism Nestorianism Oriental Orthodoxy Pentecostalism Protestantism Quakers Russian Orthodoxy Hinduism Hindu denominations Shaivism Shaktism Smartism Vaishnavism Ayyavazhi Islam Ahmadiyya Ibadi Mahdavia Non-denominational Quranists Shia Sufism Sunni Yazdânism Judaism Conservative Haredi Hasidic Haymanot Karaite Orthodox Reform Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sikhism Social and cultural anthropology v t e Pythia ( / ˈ p ɪ θ i ə / ; [ 1 ] Ancient Greek : Πυθία [pyːˈtʰíaː] ) was the title of the high priestess of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi . She specifically served as its oracle and was known as the Oracle of Delphi . Her title was also historically glossed in English as the Pythoness .

[ 2 ] The Pythia was established at the latest in the 8th century BC [ 3 ] (though some estimates date the shrine to as early as 1400 BC), [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and was widely credited for her prophecies uttered under divine possession ( enthusiasmos ) by Apollo . The Pythian priestess emerged pre-eminent by the end of the 7th century BC and continued to be consulted until the late 4th century AD.

[ 7 ] During this period, the Delphic Oracle was the most prestigious and authoritative oracle among the Greeks, and she was among the most powerful women of the classical world. The oracle is one of the best-documented religious institutions of the classical Greeks. Authors who mention the oracle include Aeschylus , Aristotle , Clement of Alexandria , Diodorus , Diogenes , Euripides , Herodotus , Julian , Justin , Livy , Lucan , Nepos , Ovid , Pausanias , Pindar , Plato , Plutarch , Sophocles , Strabo , Thucydides , and Xenophon .

Nevertheless, details of how the Pythia operated are scarce, missing, or non-existent, as authors from the classical period (6th to 4th centuries BC) treat the process as common knowledge with no need to explain. Those who discussed the oracle in any detail are from 1st century BC to 4th century AD and give conflicting stories.

[ 8 ] One of the main stories claimed that the Pythia delivered oracles in a frenzied state induced by vapours rising from a chasm in the rock, and that she spoke gibberish which priests interpreted as the enigmatic prophecies and turned them into poetic dactylic hexameters preserved in Greek literature.

[ 9 ] This idea, however, has been challenged by scholars such as Joseph Fontenrose and Lisa Maurizio, who argue that the ancient sources uniformly represent the Pythia speaking intelligibly, and giving prophecies in her own voice.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Herodotus , writing in the fifth century BC, describes the Pythia speaking in dactylic hexameters.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Name [ edit ] The name Pythia is derived from " pythia hiereia " ( Greek : πυθία ἱέρεια ), meaning ' priestess of the Pythian Apollo ' ; it is related to Pythios ( Πύθιος ), an epithet of Apollo , itself deriving from Pytho , which in myth was the original name of Delphi .

[ 14 ] As such, the word is likely related to Python , the name of the mythical snake that was slain by Apollo near Delphi.

[ 15 ] Etymologically, the Greeks derived this place name from the verb πύθειν ( púthein ) 'to rot', [ 16 ] which refers to the sickly sweet smell from the decomposing body of the monstrous Python after it was slain by Apollo.

[ 17 ] Origins [ edit ] The Temple of Apollo at Delphi The Delphic oracle may have been present in some form from 1400 BC, in the middle period of Mycenaean Greece (1750–1050 BC).

[ 18 ] There is evidence that Apollo supposedly took over the shrine with the arrival of priests from Delos in the 8th century, from an earlier dedication to Gaia .

[ 19 ] The 8th-century reformulation of the Oracle at Delphi as a shrine to Apollo seems associated with the rise in importance of the city of Corinth and the importance of sites in the Corinthian Gulf .

[ 20 ] The earliest account of the origin of the Delphic oracle is provided in the Homeric Hymn to Delphic Apollo, which recent scholarship dates within a narrow range, c. 580–570 BC.

[ 21 ] It describes in detail how Apollo chose his first priests, whom he selected in their "swift ship"; they were " Cretans from Minos ' city of Knossos " who were voyaging to sandy Pylos . But Apollo, who had Delphinios as one of his cult epithets, [ 22 ] leapt into the ship in the form of a dolphin ( delphys , gen.

delphinos ). Dolphin-Apollo revealed himself to the terrified Cretans and bade them follow him up to the "place where you will have rich offerings". The Cretans "danced in time and followed, singing Iē Paiēon , like the paeans of the Cretans in whose breasts the divine Muse has placed "honey-voiced singing".

[ 22 ] "Paean" seems to have been the name by which Apollo was known in Mycenaean times.

[ citation needed ] The omphalos in the museum of Delphi G. L. Huxley observes: "If the hymn to (Delphic) Apollo conveys a historical message, it is above all that there were once Cretan priests at Delphi." [ 23 ] Robin Lane Fox notes that Cretan bronzes are found at Delphi from the eighth century onwards, and Cretan sculptures are dedicated as late as c. 620–600 BC: "Dedications at the site cannot establish the identity of its priesthood, but for once we have an explicit text to set beside the archaeological evidence." [ 24 ] An early visitor to these "dells of Parnassus ", at the end of the eighth century, was Hesiod , who was shown the omphalos .

[ citation needed ] There are many later stories of the origins of the Delphic Oracle. One late explanation, which is first related by the 1st century BC writer Diodorus Siculus , tells of a goat herder named Coretas, who noticed one day that one of his goats, who fell into a crack in the earth, was behaving strangely. On entering the chasm, he found himself filled with a divine presence and the ability to see outside of the present, into the past and the future. Excited by his discovery, he shared it with nearby villagers. Many started visiting the site to experience the convulsions and inspirational trances, though some were said to disappear into the cleft due to their frenzied state.

[ 25 ] A shrine was erected at the site, where people began worshipping in the late Bronze Age , by 1600 BC. After the deaths of a number of men, the villagers chose a single young woman as the liaison for the divine inspirations. Eventually, she came to speak on behalf of the gods.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] According to earlier myths, [ 28 ] the office of the oracle was initially possessed by the goddesses Themis and Phoebe , and the site was initially sacred to Gaia . Subsequently, it was believed to be sacred to Poseidon , the god of earthquakes. During the Greek Dark Age , from the 11th to the 9th century BC, [ 29 ] a new god of prophecy, Apollo, was said to have seized the temple and expelled the twin guardian serpents of Gaia, whose bodies he wrapped around the caduceus . Later myths stated that Phoebe or Themis had "given" the site to Apollo, rendering its seizure by priests of the new god justified, but presumably having to retain the priestesses of the original oracle because of the long tradition. It is possible that the myths portray Poseidon as mollified by the gift of a new site in Troizen .

[ citation needed ] Diodorus explained how, initially, the Pythia was an appropriately clad young virgin , for great emphasis was placed on the Oracle's chastity and purity to be reserved for union with the god Apollo.

[ 30 ] But he reports one story as follows: [ 31 ] Echecrates the Thessalian , having arrived at the shrine and beheld the virgin who uttered the oracle, became enamoured of her because of her beauty, carried her away and violated her; and that the Delphians because of this deplorable occurrence passed a law that in the future a virgin should no longer prophesy but that an elderly woman of fifty would declare the Oracles and that she would be dressed in the costume of a virgin, as a sort of reminder of the prophetess of olden times.

The scholar Martin Litchfield West writes that the Pythia shows many traits of shamanistic practices, likely inherited or influenced from Central Asian practices, although there is no evidence of any such association at this time. He cites the Pythia sitting in a cauldron on a tripod, while making her prophecies in an ecstatic trance state, like shamans , and her utterings unintelligible.

[ 32 ] According to William Godwin, the tripod was perforated with holes, and as she inhaled the vapors, her figure would seem to enlarge, her hair stood on end, her complexion changed, her heart panted, her bosom swelled, and her voice became seemingly more than human.

[ 33 ] Organization of the Oracle [ edit ] Priestess [ edit ] See also: Hiereia The Oracle of Delphi Entranced by Heinrich Leutemann Since the first operation of the oracle of the Temple of Delphi, it was believed that the god lived within a laurel (his holy plant) and gave oracles for the future with the rustling of the leaves. It was also said that the art of divination had been taught to the god by the three winged sisters of Parnassus, the Thriae, at the time when Apollo was grazing his cattle there. The Thriae used to have a Kliromanteion (oracle by lot) in that area in the past and it is possible that such was the first oracle of Delphi, i.e. using the lot (throwing lots in a container and pulling a lot, the color and shape of which were of particular importance).

Three oracles had successively operated in Delphi – the chthonion using egkoimisi (a procedure that involved sleeping in the holy place, so as to experience a revealing dream), the Kliromanteion and finally the Apollonian, with the laurel. But ever since the introduction of the cult of Dionysus at Delphi, the god that brought his followers into ecstasy and madness, the Delphic god gave oracles through Pythia, who also fell into a trance under the influence of vapors and fumes coming from the opening, the inner sanctum of the Oracle. Pythia sat on top of a tall gilded tripod that stood above the opening. In the old days, Pythia was a virgin, young girl, but after Echecrates of Thessaly kidnapped and violated a young and beautiful Pythia in the late 3rd century BC, a woman older than fifty years old was chosen, who dressed and wore jewelry to resemble a young maiden girl. According to tradition, Phemonoe was the first Pythia.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Though little is known of how the priestess was chosen, the Pythia was probably selected, at the death of her predecessor, from amongst a guild of priestesses of the temple. These women were all natives of Delphi and were required to have had a sober life and be of good character.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Although some were married, upon assuming their role as the Pythia, the priestesses ceased all family responsibilities, marital relations, and individual identity. In the heyday of the oracle, the Pythia may have been a woman chosen from an influential family, well educated in geography, politics, history, philosophy, and the arts. During later periods, however, uneducated peasant women were chosen for the role, which may explain why the poetic pentameter or hexameter prophecies of the early period were later made only in prose . Often, the priestess's answers to questions would be put into hexameter by a priest.

[ 38 ] The archaeologist John Hale reports that: the Pythia was (on occasion) a noble of aristocratic family, sometimes a peasant, sometimes rich, sometimes poor, sometimes old, sometimes young, sometimes a very lettered and educated woman to whom somebody like the high priest and the philosopher Plutarch would dedicate essays, other times who could not write her own name. So it seems to have been aptitude rather than any ascribed status that made these women eligible to be Pythias and speak for the god.

[ 39 ] The job of a priestess, especially the Pythia, was a respectable career for Greek women. Priestesses enjoyed many liberties and rewards for their social position, such as freedom from taxation, the right to own property and attend public events, a salary and housing provided by the state, a wide range of duties depending on their affiliation, and often gold crowns.

[ 40 ] During the main period of the oracle's popularity, as many as three women served as Pythia, another vestige of the triad, with two taking turns in giving prophecy and another kept in reserve.

[ 41 ] Only one day of the month could the priestess be consulted.

[ 38 ] Plutarch said [ 42 ] that the Pythia's life was shortened through the service of Apollo. The sessions were said to be exhausting. At the end of each period the Pythia would be like a runner after a race or a dancer after an ecstatic dance, which may have had a physical effect on the health of the Pythia.

Other officiants [ edit ] Several other officiants served the oracle in addition to the Pythia.

[ 43 ] After 200 BC, at any given time, there were two priests of Apollo, who were in charge of the entire sanctuary; Plutarch, who served as a priest during the late first century and early second century AD, gives us the most information about the organization of the oracle at that time. Before 200 BC, while the temple was dedicated to Apollo, there was probably only one priest of Apollo. Priests were chosen from among the main citizens of Delphi, and were appointed for life. In addition to overseeing the oracle, priests would also conduct sacrifices at other festivals of Apollo, and had charge of the Pythian Games . Earlier arrangements, before the temple became dedicated to Apollo, are not documented.

The other officiants associated with the oracle are less well known. These are the hosioi ( ὅσιοι , 'holy ones') and the prophētai ( προφῆται , singular prophētēs ).

Prophētēs is the origin of the English word prophet , with the meaning 'one who forespeaks, one who foretells'. The prophetai are referred to in literary sources, but their function is unclear; it has been suggested that they interpreted the Pythia's prophecies, or even reformatted her utterances into verse, but it has also been argued that the term prophētēs is a generic reference to any cult officials of the sanctuary, including the Pythia.

[ 44 ] There were five hosioi , whose responsibilities are unknown, but may have been involved in some manner with the operation of the oracle.

Oracular procedure [ edit ] In the traditions associated with Apollo, the oracle gave prophecies during the nine warmest months of each year. During winter months, Apollo was said to have deserted his temple, his place being taken by his divine half-brother Dionysus , whose tomb was also within the temple. It is not known whether the Oracle participated with the Dionysian rites of the Maenads or Thyades in the Korykion cave on Mount Parnassos, although Plutarch [ 45 ] informs us that his friend Clea was both a Priestess to Apollo and to the secret rites of Dionysus. The male priests seem to have had their own ceremonies to the dying and resurrecting god. Apollo was said to return at the beginning of spring, on the seventh day of the month of Bysios, his birthday. This would reiterate the absences of the great goddess Demeter in winter also, which would have been a part of the earliest traditions.

Once a month, thereafter, the oracle would undergo purification rites, including fasting, to ceremonially prepare the Pythia for communications with the divine. On the seventh day of each month, she would be led by two attended oracular priests, with her face veiled in purple.

[ 46 ] A priest would then declaim: Servant of the Delphian Apollo Go to the Castallian Spring Wash in its silvery eddies, And return cleansed to the temple.

Guard your lips from offence To those who ask for oracles.

Let the God's answer come Pure from all private fault.

The Pythia would then bathe naked in the Castalian Spring , then drink the holier waters of the Cassotis , which flowed closer to the temple, where a naiad possessing magical powers was said to live. Euripides described this ritual purification ceremony, starting first with the priest Ion dancing on the highest point of Mount Parnassus, going about his duties within the temple, and sprinkling the temple floor with holy water. The purification ceremonies always were performed on the seventh day of the month, which was sacred to and associated with the god Apollo.

[ 47 ] Then, escorted by the hosioi , an aristocratic council of five, with a crowd of oracular servants, they would arrive at the temple. Consultants, carrying laurel branches sacred to Apollo, approached the temple along the winding upward course of the Sacred Way, bringing a young goat for sacrifice in the forecourt of the temple, and a monetary fee.

Inscribed on a column in the pronaos (forecourt) of the temple were an enigmatic "E" and three maxims: [ 48 ] [ 49 ] Know thyself Nothing to excess Surety brings ruin, or "make a pledge and mischief is nigh" ( ἐγγύα πάρα δ'ἄτα ) [ 50 ] These seem to have played an important part in the temple ritual. According to Plutarch's essay on the meaning of the "E at Delphi" (the only literary source for the E inscription), there have been various interpretations of this letter.

[ 51 ] In ancient times, the origin of these phrases was attributed to one or more of the Seven Sages of Greece .

[ 52 ] Pythia would then remove her purple veil. She would wear a short plain white dress. At the temple fire to Hestia , a goat would be set in front of the altar and be sprinkled with water. If the goat shook off the water it was considered a good omen for the oracle, but if it did not, the enquirer was considered to have been rejected by the god and the consultation was terminated.

[ 53 ] If it were a good omen, however, the goat would subsequently be sacrificed to Apollo. In turn, the animal's organs, particularly its liver, were examined to ensure the signs were favorable , and then burned outside on the altar of Chios . The rising smoke was a signal that the oracle was open. The Oracle then descended into the adyton (Greek for 'inaccessible') and mounted her tripod seat, holding laurel leaves and a dish of Kassotis spring water into which she gazed. Nearby was the omphalos (Greek for 'navel'), which was flanked by two solid gold eagles representing the authority of Zeus , and the cleft from which emerged the sacred pneuma .

Petitioners drew lots to determine the order of admission, but representatives of a city-state or those who brought larger donations to Apollo were secured a higher place in line. Each person approaching the oracle was accompanied with a proxenos specific to the state of the petitioner, whose job was to identify the citizen of their polis . This service, too, was paid for.

[ citation needed ] Plutarch describes the events of one session in which the omens were ill-favored, but the Oracle was consulted nonetheless. The priests proceeded to receive the prophecy, but the result was a hysterical uncontrollable reaction from the priestess that resulted in her death a few days later.

At times when the Pythia was not available, consultants could obtain guidance by asking simple yes-or-no questions to the priests. A response was returned through the tossing of colored beans, one color designating "yes", another "no". Little else is known of this practice.

[ 54 ] Between 535 and 615 of the Oracles (statements) of Delphi are known to have survived since classical times, of which over half are said to be accurate historically (see List of oracular statements from Delphi for examples).

[ 55 ] Cicero noted no expedition was undertaken, no colony sent out, and no affair of any distinguished individuals went on without the sanction of the oracle.

[ citation needed ] The early fathers of the Christian church believed demons were allowed to assist them to spread idolatry, so that the need for a savior would be more evident.

[ 56 ] Experience of supplicants [ edit ] View of Delphi with Sacrificial Procession by Claude Lorrain In antiquity, the people who went to the Oracle to ask for advice were known as "consultants", literally, "those who seek counsel".

[ 57 ] It would appear that the supplicant to the oracle would undergo a four-stage process, typical of shamanic journeys.

Step 1: Journey to Delphi —Supplicants were motivated by some need to undertake the long and sometimes arduous journey to Delphi in order to consult the oracle. This journey was motivated by an awareness of the existence of the oracle, the growing motivation on the part of the individual or group to undertake the journey, and the gathering of information about the oracle as providing answers to important questions.

Step 2: Preparation of the supplicant —Supplicants were interviewed in preparation of their presentation to the Oracle, by the priests in attendance. The genuine cases were sorted and the supplicant had to go through rituals involving the framing of their questions, the presentation of gifts to the Oracle and a procession along the Sacred Way carrying laurel leaves to visit the temple, symbolic of the journey they had made.

Step 3: Visit to the Oracle —The supplicant would then be led into the temple to visit the adyton , put his question to the Pythia, receive his answer and depart. The degree of preparation already undergone would mean that the supplicant was already in a very aroused and meditative state, similar to the shamanic journey elaborated on in the article.

Step 4: Return home —Oracles were meant to give advice to shape future action, which was meant to be implemented by the supplicant, or by those that had sponsored the supplicant to visit the Oracle. The validity of the Oracular utterance was confirmed by the consequences of the application of the oracle to the lives of those people who sought Oracular guidance.

[ 58 ] The Role of Consultants [ edit ] The relationship between the Pythia, Delphic officials, and consultants who sought advice at the temple is shown in contemporary research on the Delphic Oracle. Individuals, city-states, and political officials were among the advisors. Additionally, they have actively contributed to the influence of the Pythia's oracular pronouncements. This interpretation challenges earlier views that considered the Delphic Oracle as a centralized political force that helps to exert a unilateral influence across the Greek and Mediterranean region. Instead, the production and interpretation of oracles emerge as collaborative processes involving multiple stakeholders.

The idea that Delphi’s prominence as a religious and cultural center was strengthened by its reputation as the “navel of the world” (omphalos). The Pythia was seen as providing a channel and connect between the divine and human realms, her words imbued with the authority of Apollo. Scholars such as Simon Hornblower suggest that the Delphic Oracle’s influence extended beyond religion, serving as a mechanism for conflict resolution, interstate diplomacy, and political legitimation.

[ 59 ] However, this view often considered as overestimating the power of the Pythia and her attendant priests. Hence reducing the level of influence of the consultants to passive recipients of divine messages. Recent studies challenge this assumption by highlighting the role of consultants played in framing questions, interpreting responses, and implementing decisions during the process.

In modern theories, consultants shaped the form and content of oracles through their own political, social, and personal contexts.

[ 60 ] This dynamic undermines the notion of the oracle as an independent political force, instead stressing the shared agency between Delphic officials and those who sought the god’s counsel.

The collaboration during Oracular Productions [ edit ] In order to provide an oracle, procedures that focused on cooperation between consultants and the Delphic priest will be carried out. Before posing their queries to the Pythia, consultants would engage in a purification and sacrifice ritual. These questions were carefully adjusted, often with guidance from the priests (prophētai), to align with the expectations of Apollo’s wisdom. The Pythia that induced by divine possession or inhale sacred fumes will enter a trance state, hence delivered responses that were often ambiguous or cryptic.

[ 61 ] Scholars argues that the Pythia’s utterances were not unintelligible gibberish, as traditionally believed, but meaningful statements requiring collaborative decoding.

[ 62 ] The interpretation of these responses was shaped by the consultants’ framing under the guidance of the priests. And hence to impact in sociopolitical context. The process helps to build connection between human and the divine, hence reducing the gap between people and gods.

The oracular text was not only a fixed and authoritative pronouncement. It was also subject to negotiation and reinterpretation. A well-documented example is the oracle granted to King Croesus of Lydia, which stated, "If you cross the Halys, you will destroy a great empire." The king misinterpreted the statement, and Croesus started a catastrophic war that resulted in the collapse of his own empire after mistaking the words for a promise of triumph.

[ 63 ] This episode illustrates the ambiguity inherent in many oracles, which consultants often interpreted in ways that fulfills their desires or expectations. The text might be falsely interpreted for one's sake.

Consultants were instrumental in shaping oracles by framing questions and selectively interpreting responses. This tackle questions conventional views of oracles as unilateral declarations of divine will, presenting them instead as dialogical and context dependent.

[ 60 ] Modern Interpretations of the Pythia [ edit ] Modern interpretations of the Pythia emphasize her symbolic and ritualistic importance but sometimes neglect her direct involvement in political decision-making. Catherine Morgan notes that the Pythia’s role was deeply embedded in the religious and cultural fabric of Greek society, serving as both a mediator of divine will and a symbol of Apollo’s authority.

[ 64 ] This shift reflects a deeper understanding of ancient Greek religion, recognizing the complexity of the Pythia’s role as both a channel for Apollo’s voice and an active participant in oracular practices.

Temple of Apollo [ edit ] Modern photograph of the ruins of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi The ruins of the Temple of Delphi visible today date from the 4th century  BC, and are of a peripteral Doric building. It was erected on the remains of an earlier temple, dated to the 6th century BC, which itself was erected on the site of a 7th-century-BC construction attributed to the architects Trophonios and Agamedes.

[ 65 ] The 6th-century BC temple was named the "Temple of Alcmaeonidae " in tribute to the Athenian family who funded its reconstruction following a fire, which had destroyed the original structure. The new building was a Doric hexastyle temple of 6 by 15 columns. This temple was destroyed in 373  BC by an earthquake. The pediment sculptures are a tribute to Praxias and Androsthenes of Athens . Of a similar proportion to the second temple it retained the 6 by 15 column pattern around the stylobate .

[ 65 ] Inside was the adyton , the centre of the Delphic oracle and seat of Pythia. The temple had the statement " Know thyself ", one of the Delphic maxims , carved into it (and some modern Greek writers say the rest were carved into it), and the maxims were attributed to Apollo and given through the Oracle and/or the Seven Sages of Greece ("know thyself" perhaps also being attributed to other famous philosophers).

The temple survived until AD 390, when the Roman emperor Theodosius I silenced the oracle by destroying the temple and most statues and works of art to remove all traces of paganism.

[ 66 ] Comparative Oracular Traditions [ edit ] The characteristic of collaboration of oracular practices at Delphi were found to be similar with other ancient traditions. For example, at Dodona, oracles were delivered through the rustling of oak leaves. Then priests will be required to interpret the signs. Similarly, the oracle at Didyma involved the interpretation of cryptic utterances by the priestess. This demonstrate that oracles across the ancient world relied on a interaction between divine inspiration which are signs from god, priestly mediation, and human interpretation.

[ 67 ] By situating the Delphic Oracle within this broader context, scholars highlight its unique features while acknowledging its shared characteristics with other oracular traditions.

Scientific explanations [ edit ] Fumes and vapors [ edit ] Priestess of Delphi (1891) by John Collier , showing the Pythia sitting on a tripod with vapor rising from a crack in the earth beneath her There have been many attempts to find a scientific explanation for the Pythia's inspiration. Most commonly, [ 68 ] these refer to an observation made by Plutarch , who presided as high priest at Delphi for several years, who stated that the oracular powers of the sybil appeared to be associated with vapors from the Kerna spring waters that flowed under the temple. It has often been suggested that these vapors may have been hallucinogenic gases.

[ citation needed ] Recent geological investigations have suggested that gas emissions from a geologic chasm in the earth could have inspired the Delphic Oracle to "connect with the divine". Some researchers suggest the possibility that ethylene gas caused the Pythia's state of inspiration, based on the matching symptoms, ethylene's use as an anesthetic, and the smell of the chamber, as described by Plutarch.

[ 68 ] Traces of ethylene have been found in the waters of the Castallian spring, which is now largely diverted for the town water supply of the town of modern Delphi . However, Lehoux argues [ 69 ] that ethylene is "impossible" and benzene is "crucially underdetermined". Others argue instead that methane might have been the gas emitted from the chasm, or CO 2 and H 2 S , arguing that the chasm itself might have been a seismic ground rupture.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] Oleander , in contemporary toxicological literature, has also been considered responsible for contributing symptoms similar to those of the Pythia. The Pythia used oleander as a complement during the oracular procedure, chewing its leaves and inhaling their smoke. The toxic substances of oleander results in symptoms similar to those of epilepsy, the "sacred disease", which could have amounted to the possession of the Pythia by the spirit of Apollo, rendering Pythia his spokesperson and prophetess. The oleander fumes (the "spirit of Apollo") could have originated in a brazier located in an underground chamber (the antron) and have escaped through an opening (the "chasm") in the temple's floor. This hypothesis fits the findings of the archaeological excavations that revealed an underground space under the temple. This explanation sheds light on the alleged spirit and chasm of Delphi, that have been the subject of intense debate and interdisciplinary research for the last hundred years.

[ 72 ] Regardless of which fumes existed in the chasm, winter months would bring cooler weather, decreasing release of gases in the chamber. This offers a plausible explanation for the absence of summer deities in winter months. A toxic gas also explains the reason why the Pythia could only venture into her oracular chamber once a month, both to coincide with the correct concentration of gases, [ 73 ] and to prolong the already-short lifespan of the Pythia by limiting her exposure to such fumes.

Excavations [ edit ] Beginning during 1892, a team of French archaeologists directed by Théophile Homolle of the Collège de France excavated the site at Delphi. Contrary to ancient literature, they found no fissure and no possible means for the production of fumes.

Adolphe Paul Oppé published an influential article [ 74 ] in 1904, which made three crucial claims: No chasm or vapor ever existed; no natural gas could create prophetic visions; and the recorded incidents of a priestess undergoing violent and often deadly reactions was inconsistent with the more customary reports. Oppé explained away all the ancient testimony as being reports of gullible travelers fooled by wily local guides who, Oppé believed, invented the details of a chasm and a vapor in the first place.

[ 75 ] In accordance with this definitive statement, such scholars as Frederick Poulson, E. R. Dodds, Joseph Fontenrose, and Saul Levin all stated that there were no vapors and no chasm. For the decades to follow, scientists and scholars believed the ancient descriptions of a sacred, inspiring pneuma to be fallacious. During 1950, the French hellenist Pierre Amandry , who had worked at Delphi and later directed the French excavations there, concurred with Oppé's pronouncements, claiming that gaseous emissions were not even possible in a volcanic zone such as Delphi. Neither Oppé nor Amandry were geologists, though, and no geologists had been involved in the debate up to that point.

[ 74 ] Subsequent re-examination of the French excavations, however, has shown that this consensus may have been mistaken. Broad (2007) demonstrates that a French photograph of the excavated interior of the temple clearly depicts a springlike pool as well as a number of small vertical fissures, indicating numerous pathways by which vapors could enter the base of the temple.

[ 76 ] During the 1980s, the interdisciplinary team of geologist Jelle Zeilinga de Boer, [ 77 ] archaeologist John R. Hale, [ 78 ] forensic chemist Jeffrey P. Chanton, [ 79 ] and toxicologist Henry R. Spiller [ 80 ] investigated the site at Delphi using this photograph and other sources as evidence, as part of a United Nations survey of all active faults in Greece.

[ 75 ] Jelle Zeilinga de Boer saw evidence of a fault line in Delphi that lay under the ruined temple.
During several expeditions, they discovered two major fault lines, one lying north–south, the Kerna fault, and the other lying east–west, the Delphic fault, which parallels the shore of the Corinthian Gulf . The rift of the Gulf of Corinth is one of the most geologically active sites on Earth; shifts there impose immense strains on nearby fault lines, such as those below Delphi. The two faults cross one another, and they intersect right below where the adyton was probably located. (The actual, original oracle chamber had been destroyed by the moving faults, but there is strong structural evidence that indicates where it was most likely located.) [ 81 ] They also found evidence for underground passages and chambers, and drains for spring water. Additionally, they discovered at the site formations of travertine , a form of calcite created when water flows through limestone and dissolves calcium carbonate , which is later redeposited. Further investigation revealed that deep beneath the Delphi region lies a bituminous deposit, rich in hydrocarbons and full of pitch, that has a petrochemical content as high as 20%. Friction created by earthquakes heat the bituminous layers resulting in vaporization of the hydrocarbons which rise to the surface through small fissures in the rock.

[ 81 ] Illusions in the adyton [ edit ] It has been disputed as to how the adyton was organized, but it appears clear that this temple was unlike any other in ancient Greece . The small chamber was located below the main floor of the temple and offset to one side, perhaps constructed specifically over the crossing faults.

[ 82 ] The intimate chamber allowed the escaping vapors to be contained in quarters close enough to provoke intoxicating effects. Plutarch reports that the temple was filled with a sweet smell when the "deity" was present: Not often nor regularly, but occasionally and fortuitously, the room in which they seat the god's consultants is filled with a fragrance and breeze, as if the adyton were sending forth the essences of the sweetest and most expensive perfumes from a spring — Plutarch , Moralia 437c).

De Boer's research caused him to propose ethylene as a gas known to possess this sweet odor.

[ 83 ] Toxicologist Henry R. Spiller stated that inhalation of even a small amount of ethylene can cause both benign trances and euphoric psychedelic experiences. Other effects include physical detachment, loss of inhibitions, the relieving of pain, and rapidly changing moods without dulling consciousness. He also noted that excessive doses can cause confusion, agitation, delirium, and loss of muscle coordination.

[ 84 ] Anesthesiologist Isabella Coler Herb found that a dose of ethylene gas up to 20% induced a trance in which subjects could sit up, hear questions and answer them logically, though with altered speech patterns, and they might lose some awareness and sensitivity in their hands and feet. After recovery, they had no recollection of what had happened. With a dose higher than 20%, the patients lost control over their limbs and might thrash wildly, groaning and staggering. All these hallucinogenic symptoms match Plutarch's description of the Pythia, whom he had witnessed many times.

[ 85 ] During 2001, water samples from the Kerna spring, uphill from the temple and now diverted to the nearby town of Delphi, yielded evidence of 0.3 parts per million of ethylene.

[ 86 ] It is likely that in ancient times, higher concentrations of ethylene or other gases emerged in the temple from these springs.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] While likely in the context of the ethylene gas theory, there is no evidence to support the diminishing ethylene concentration statement.

[ 89 ] Frequent earthquakes produced by Greece's location at the clashing intersection of three tectonic plates could have caused the observed cracking of the limestone, and the opening of new channels for hydrocarbons entering the flowing waters of the Kassotis. This would cause the admixture of ethylene to fluctuate, increasing and decreasing the potency of the drug. It has been suggested that the waning of the Oracle after the era of Roman Emperor Hadrian was due in part to a long period without earthquakes in the area.

Political and Diplomatic Role of the Oracle [ edit ] For the oracle, the shrine’s pan-Hellenic reputation relied on its perceived neutrality, which it maintained by avoiding overt favoritism toward specific city-states or factions. However, since the oracles tended to be neutral, which means it often resulted to be ambiguous. Such oracles will allow people to have different interpretations or often misinterpret the words. For example, during the Persian Wars, the Delphic Oracle initially advised submission to the Persians. It is a stance reflecting the pro-Persian sentiments of some Delphic officials. However, the Athenian leaders reinterpreted subsequent oracles to rally Greek resistance.

[ 61 ] This adaptability shows Delphic Oracle’s role as a mediator rather than a direct political force. Consultants’ interpretations often shaped the oracle’s political impact, correlating its ambiguous messages with their agendas.

Modern scholarship continues to debate the Pythia’s role in ancient Greek society. The discovery of geological explanations for her trance states has provided a scientific explanation for ancient myths in modern understanding.

This evolving interpretation of the Pythia reflects the growing understanding towards ancient religion, helping people to understand the complexity of the relations between God and people in ancient times. By re-evaluating the Pythia’s role, they can be seen both a sacred symbol and an active participant in the oracular process.

See also [ edit ] The Apollonian and Dionysian , concept of human dichotomy The Delphian Club , named for the Oracle of Delphi Delphic maxims Hiereiai List of oracular statements from Delphi Theia mania , Pythia's divine inspiration in Plato's c.

370 BC dialogue Phaedrus Xenoclea Citations [ edit ] ^ " 'Pythia main entry Random House Dictionary (American), further down Dictionary (British)" . Dictionary.com.

Archived from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2015-02-23 .

^ wiktionary:Pythoness ^ Morgan, C. (1990).

Athletes and Oracles: The Transformation of Olympia and Delphi in the Eighth Century BC . p. 148.

^ "The Greeks - The Oracle at Delphi" .

www.pbs.org .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-26 . Retrieved 2021-05-24 .

^ October 2006, Heather Whipps 31 (31 October 2006).

"New Theory on What Got the Oracle of Delphi High" .

livescience.com .

Archived from the original on 16 September 2020 . Retrieved 15 September 2020 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Delphic Oracle's Lips May Have Been Loosened by Gas Vapors" .

Science . August 14, 2001. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021.

^ Michael Scott.

Delphi: A History of the Center of the Ancient World . Princeton University Press, p. 30.

^ Michael Scott.

Delphi: A History of the Center of the Ancient World . Princeton University Press, p. 11.

^ For an example, see Lewis Farnell, The Cults of the Greek States Archived 2023-06-20 at the Wayback Machine , 1907, vol. IV, p. 189. "But all this came to be merely considered as an accessory, leading up to the great moment when the Pythoness ascended into the tripod, and, filled with the divine afflatus which at least the latter ages believed to ascend in vapour from a fissure in the ground, burst forth into wild utterance, which was probably some kind of articulate speech, and which the Ὅσιοι [Osioi], 'the holy ones', who, with the prophet, sat around the tripod, knew well how to interpret. ... What was essential to Delphic divination, then, was the frenzy of the Pythoness and the sounds which she uttered in this state which were interpreted by the Ὅσιοι [Osioi] and the 'prophet' according to some conventional code of their own." ^ Fontenrose 1978 , pp. 196–227.

^ Maurizio 2001a , pp. 38–54.

^ Mikalson, Jon D.

Herodotus and Religion in the Persian Wars . Univ of North Carolina Press, 2003.

ISBN 9780807827987 . p. 55.

^ Herodotus.

The Histories . Godley, A. D., translator.  Harvard University Press. 1920. Book one, chapter 65. (1922) ^ Harper, Douglas.

"Pythia" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Harper, Douglas.

"python" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Harper, Douglas.

"python" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Homeric Hymn to Apollo 363–369.

^ Dietrich, Bernard C. (1992-01-01).

"Divine Madness and Conflict at Delphi" .

Kernos - Revue internationale et pluridisciplinaire de religion grecque antique [Kernos - International and multidisciplinary review of ancient Greek religion] .

5 (5).

doi : 10.4000/kernos.1047 .

ISSN 0776-3824 .

^ Fontenrose, Joseph (1959). "Python: A Study of Delphic Myth and Its Origins". New York, Biblio & Tannen.

^ Forrest, W.G. (1957), "Colonisation and the Rise of Delphi" (Historia: Zeitschrift für Alte Geschichte Bd. 6, H. 2 (Apr., 1957), pp. 160–175) ^ Martin L. West, Homeric Hymns , pp 9–12, gives a summary for this dating, at or soon after the inauguration of chariot-racing at the Pythian Games , 582 BC; M. Chappell, "Delphi and the Homeric Hymn to Apollo ", Classical Quarterly 56 (2006:331-48) ^ a b As Robin Lane Fox observes in discussing this origin of the Delphic priesthood, in Travelling Heroes in the Epic Age of Homer , 2008:341ff.

^ Huxley, "Cretan Paiawones ".

Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies 16 (1975:119-24) p. 122, noted by Fox 2008:343.

^ Fox 2008:342.

^ Diodorus Siculus 16.26.1–4.

^ Broad 2007 , p. 21.

^ It was also said that the young woman was given a tripod on which to be seated, which kept her from falling during her frenzied states.

^ Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology notes on this point Ovid, Metamorphoses i. 321, iv. 642; Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica iv. 800; Servius, commentary on the Aeneid iv. 246; pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheke i. 4. § 1; Pausanias x. 5. § 3; Aeschylus, The Eumenides opening lines; see excerpts in translation at Theoi Project: Themis .

^ D. S. Robertson, "The Delphian Succession in the Opening of the Eumenides" The Classical Review 55 . 2 (September 1941, pp. 69–70) p. 69, reasoning that in the three great allotments of oracular powers at Delphi, corresponding to the three generations of the gods, "Ouranos, as was fitting, gave the oracle to his wife Gaia and Kronos appropriately allotted it to his sister Themis." In Zeus' turn to make the gift, however, Aeschylus could not report that the oracle was given directly to Apollo, who had not yet been born, Robertson notes, and thus Phoebe was interposed. However, the usual modern reconstruction of the sacred site's pre-Olympian history does not indicate dedications to these earlier gods.

^ Broad 2007 , p. 30-31.

^ Diod. Sic. 16.26.6 ^ Martin Litchfield West , The Orphic Poems , p.147. "The Pythia resembles a shamaness at least to the extent that she communicates with her [deity] while in a state of trance, and conveys as much to those present by uttering unintelligible words. [cf. Spirit Language, Mircea Eliade].

It is particularly striking that she sits on a cauldron supported by a tripod, reiterating the triad of the great goddess. This eccentric perch can hardly be explained except as a symbolic boiling, and, as such, it looks very much like a reminiscence of the initiatory boiling of the shaman translated from hallucinatory experience into concrete visual terms. It was in this same cauldron, probably, that the Titans boiled Dionysus in the version of the story known to Callimachus and Euphorion, and his remains were interred close by".

^ William Godwin (1876).

Lives of the Necromancers . London, F. J. Mason. p.

11 .

^ Πάνος Βαλαβάνης, Ιερά και Αγώνες στην Αρχαία Ελλάδα – Νέμεα – Αθήνα, Αθήνα, 2004, 176.

^ Γιάννης Λάμψας, Λεξικό του Αρχαίου Κόσμου, τ. Α', Αθήνα, εκδόσεις Δομή, 1984, 758.

^ Broad 2007 , p. 31-32.

^ Herbert W Parke, History of the Delphic Oracle and H.W. Parke and D.E.W. Wormell The Delphic oracle , 1956 Volume 1: The history attempt the complicated reconstruction of the oracle's institutions; a recent comparison of the process of select at Delphi with Near Eastern oracles is part of Herbert B. Huffman, "The Oracular Process: Delphi and the Near East" Vetus Testamentum 57 .4, (2007:449–60).

^ a b Godwin 1876 , p. 11.

^ quoted in an interview on the radio program "The Ark", transcript available Archived 2007-06-02 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Broad 2007 , p. 32.

^ Plutarch Moralia 414b.

^ "Plutarch • On the Failure of Oracles" . Penelope.uchicago.edu.

Archived from the original on 2024-02-13 . Retrieved 2012-03-19 .

^ On the temple personnel, see Roux 1976, pp. 54–63.

^ Bowden 2005, pp. 15–16; see also Herodotus 8.36, Euripides Ion 413–416.

^ Plutarch, op cit ^ Vandenberg, Phillip, (2007) "Mysteries of the Oracles (Tauris Parke Publications) ^ Broad 2007 , p. 34-36.

^ Plato Charmides 165 ^ Allyson Szabo Longing For Wisdom: The Message Of The Maxims 2008 ISBN 1438239769 p8 ^ Eliza G. Wilkins (April 1927).

"ΕΓΓΥΑ, ΠΑΡΑ ΔΑΤΗ in Literature" .

(subscription required) Archived 2024-02-13 at the Wayback Machine Classical Philology Volume 22, Number 2, p. 121.

doi : 10.1086/360881 .

JSTOR 263511 .

^ Hodge, A. Trevor. "The Mystery of Apollo's E at Delphi", American Journal of Archaeology , Vol. 85, No. 1. (January 1981), pp. 83–84.

^ Plato , Protagoras 343a–b.

^ Jon D. (2011).

Ancient Greek Religion . John Wiley & Sons. p. 99.

ISBN 978-1-4443-5819-3 .

^ Broad 2007 , p. 38-40.

^ Fontenrose, op cit ^ Godwin 1876 , p. 12.

^ "The Delphic Oracle | Wise Counsel Research Associates" . Archived from the original on 2013-12-26 . Retrieved 2013-05-14 .

sighted 14/5/2013 ^ Fontenrose, Joseph (1981), "Delphic Oracle: Its Responses and Operations". (University of California Press) ^ Hornblower, Simon; Morgan, Catherine (2007).

Pindar's poetry, patrons, and festivals: from Archaic Greece to the Roman Empire . Oxford: Oxford university press.

ISBN 978-0-19-929672-9 .

^ a b Dobyns, Norita Dalene (2005).

Power, performance and the Pythia: the political use of Delphic oracles (Thesis). The Ohio State University.

^ a b Fontenrose 1978 .

^ Maurizio, Lisa (2001b).

"The Voice at the Center of the World" .

The Voice At The Center Of The World: The Pythias' Ambiguity And Authority . Princeton University Press. pp.

38– 54.

JSTOR j.ctv36zqbc.8 . Retrieved 2025-03-27 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ Herodotus (1998-03-05), Waterfield, Robin; Dewald, Carolyn (eds.), "Histories" , Oxford World's Classics: Herodotus: The Histories , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/oseo/instance.00271233 , ISBN 978-0-19-953566-8 , retrieved 2025-03-27 ^ Hornblower, Simon; Morgan, Catherine, eds. (2007-02-07).

Pindar's Poetry, Patrons, and Festivals . Oxford University PressOxford.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780199296729.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-929672-9 .

^ a b Temple of Apollo at Delphi Archived 2010-11-16 at the Wayback Machine , Ancient-Greece.org ^ Trudy Ring, Robert M. Salkin, Sharon La Bod, International Dictionary of Historic Places: Southern Europe ; Page 185; [1] Archived 2023-05-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ Broad 2007 .

^ a b J.Z. De Boer, and J. R. Hale. "The Geological Origins of the Oracle of Delphi, Greece", in W. G. McGuire, D. R. Griffiths, P Hancock, and I. S. Stewart, eds.

The Archaeology of Geological Catastrophes . (Geological Society of London) 2000. Popular accounts in A&E Television Networks. History Channel documentary Oracle at Delphi, Secrets Revealed, 2003, and in William J. Broad, The Oracle: The Lost Secrets and Hidden Message of Ancient Delphi . (New York: Penguin) 2006.

^ Lehoux, 2007 The delphic oracle and the ethylene-intoxication hypothesis.

Archived 2018-01-25 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 4 December 2017.

^ Piccardi, 2000; Spiller et al., 2000; de Boer, et al., 2001; Hale et al. 2003; Etiope et al., 2006; Piccardi et al., 2008.

^ Mason, Betsy.

The Prophet of Gases Archived 2008-12-08 at the Wayback Machine in ScienceNow Daily News 2 October 2006. Retrieved 11 October 2006.

^ Harissis 2015 ^ Stadter, Phillip A. (18 December 2014).

"Plutarch and Apollo of Delphi" .

Plutarch and his Roman Readers . pp.

82– 97.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198718338.003.0006 .

ISBN 978-0-19-871833-8 .

Archived from the original on 8 December 2022 . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

^ a b Delphi, the Oracle of Apollo Archived 2012-04-02 at the Wayback Machine from Adventures in Archaeology ^ a b The Oracle at Delphi Archived 2012-04-02 at the Wayback Machine Medb hErren ^ Broad 2007 , p. 146-147: "[A] French photo of the temple's interior showed not only a spring-like pool but fissures... in the bedrock, suggesting a specific pathway by which intoxicating gases could have risen into the oracle's sanctum... What delighted de Boer so much was not the verification of the spring-like pool at the heart of the chasm, as the revelation of the bedrock's composition... there right above the waterline, the photograph clearly showed vertical fissures running through the bedrock.  No denial could hide that fact, no scholarly disclaimer could deny the reality.... [The] cracks ...[showed] evidence of tectonic jolts and protracted flows of mineralized water." ^ Jelle Zeilinga de Boer Archived 2006-05-06 at the Wayback Machine – Retrieved on 2006-10-01.

^ John R. Hale Archived 2006-07-14 at the Wayback Machine – Retrieved on 2006-10-01.

^ Jeffrey P. Chanton Archived 2005-04-07 at archive.today – Retrieved on 2006-10-01.

^ Henry R. Spiller – Retrieved on 2006-10-01.

Dead link Archived ^ a b Broad 2007 , p. 155-157.

^ In the French excavation report on the temple, Fernand Courby shows that the adyton was unlike those found in other temples as it was not central, but on the southwestern side, interrupting the normal symmetry of the Doric temple.  It was divided into two areas, one small area 9 by 16 feet for the oracle, one for the supplicant.  Modern research reported by Broad (p. 37) suggests that both the supplicant and the Pythia descended a flight of five steps into a small room within the temple with its own low ceiling.

Walter Miller has argued that the stone block of 3.5–4 feet that Courby described as being part of the floor was in fact the site where the oracle sat. It showed a square 6-inch hole, widening to 9 inches, immediately under the triangular grooves for the tripod.  Strange channels, possibly to carry water from the spring, surrounded the tripodal grooves. That these had in fact carried waters for long periods was confirmed by the layers of travertine that encrusted it.  Nothing like this has been found at any other Greek temple. Holland (1933) argues that these channels and the hollow nature of the omphalos found by the French would channel the vapors of intoxicant gases.

^ Broad 2007 , p. 172.

^ Broad 2007 , p. 212-214.

^ Interview with John R. Hale on the Delphic Oracle Archived 2007-06-02 at the Wayback Machine , ABC News, Australia – (Retrieved on 2006-04-20) ^ Broad 2007 , p. 198. Methane (15.3 parts per million) and ethane (0.2 ppm) were also detected in the Kerna sample. However, the intoxicating effects of ethylene are more powerful than those of methane or ethane.

^ "the Kerna spring, once alive but now vanished since Greek engineers had re-routed its waters to supply the town of Delphi"  Tests from nearby sites showed that the concentration of ethylene at Kerna was ten times that at other nearby springs.  In an interview reported in Broad (2006, p. 152), de Boer stated that "the Kerna sample, because of the spring's rerouting, had to be drawn from a city's holding tank... letting some of the gas escape as it sat... and lessened the water concentrations.  If so the actual levels of the methane , ethane and ethylene that came out of the ground would have been higher".

^ Broad 2007 , p. 194-195.

^ Foster, Jay; Lehoux, Daryn (January 2008). "A mighty wind".

Clinical Toxicology .

46 (10): 1098– 1099.

doi : 10.1080/15563650802334028 .

ISSN 1556-3650 .

PMID 18821146 .

General and cited references [ edit ] Ancient sources [ edit ] Herodotus , The Histories , at the Perseus Project Homeric Hymn to Apollo , at the Perseus Project Pausanias , Description of Greece , (ed. and translated with commentary by Sir James Frazer ), 1913 edition. Cf. v.5 Plutarch , De defectu oraculorum ("On the Decline of Oracles"), De Pythiae Oraculis ("On the Oracles of the Pythia"), and De E apud Delphos ("On the E at Delphi") in Moralia , vol. 5 (Loeb Library, Harvard University Press) Modern sources [ edit ] Bouché-Leclercq, Auguste (1879–1882).

Histoire de la divination dans l'Antiquité . Paris: Ernest Leroux.

Volume I-IV.

Bowden, Hugh (2005).

Classical Athens and the Delphic Oracle: Divination and Democracy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-53081-1 .

Broad, William J.

(2007).

The Oracle: Ancient Delphi and the Science Behind Its Lost Secrets . New York: Penguin Press.

ISBN 978-0-14-303859-7 .

Burkert, Walter (1985).

Greek Religion: Archaic and Classical . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-674-36280 2 .

Orig. in German (1977).

Connelly, Joan Breton (2007).

Portrait of a Priestess: Women and Ritual in Ancient Greece . New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-12746-0 .

Courby, Fernand (1927).

Feuilles de Delphi: Tome 2, Topographie et Architecture, La Terrace du Temple . Paris: E. de Boccard.

de Boer, Jelle Zeilinga; Hale, John Rigby; Chaton, Jeffrey P. (2001). "New Evidence for the Geological Origins of the Ancient Delphic Oracle".

Geology .

29 (8): 707– 711.

doi : 10.1130/0091-7613(2001)029<0707:NEFTGO>2.0.CO;2 .

Dempsey, T. (1918).

The Delphic oracle, its early history, influence and fall . Oxford: B.H. Blackwell.

Dodds, E. R.

(1963).

The Greeks and the Irrational . Berkeley: University of California Press.

Etiope, G., D. Christodoulou, M. Geraga, P. Favali, & G. Papatheodorou, "The geological links of the ancient Delphic Oracle (Greece): a reappraisal of natural gas occurrence and origin", Geology , 34, 821–824 (2006) Farnell, Lewis Richard (1896–1909).

The Cults of the Greek States . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Cf. especially, volume IV on the Pythoness and Delphi.

Fontenrose, Joseph Eddy (1980) [1959].

Python: a study of Delphic myth and its origins . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-04091-0 .

Fontenrose, Joseph Eddy (1978).

The Delphic oracle, its responses and operations, with a catalogue of responses . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-03360-4 .

Foster, J.; Lehoux, D. (2007). "The Delphic Oracle and the ethylene-intoxication hypothesis".

Clinical Toxicology .

45 (1): 85-89.

doi : 10.1080/15563650601120800 .

Golding, William , The Double Tongue , London, Faber (1995). Posthumous, fictional novel by the Nobel prize winner about a Pythia in the 1st century BCE.

Goodrich, Norma Lorre, Priestesses , New York : F. Watts, ISBN 0-531-15113-1 (1989); Harper Collins, Perennial, ISBN 0-06-097316-1 (1990) Guthrie, William Keith Chambers , The Greeks and Their Gods (1950) Hale, John R.; de Boer, Jelle Zeilinga; Chanton, Jeffrey P.; Spiller, Henry A. (2003). "Questioning the Delphic Oracle".

Scientific American .

289 (2).

Hall, Manly Palmer , The Secret Teachings of All Ages , cf.

Chapter 14 , (1928) Harissis, Haralampos V. (2014). "A Bittersweet Story: The True Nature of the Laurel of the Oracle of Delphi".

Perspectives in Biology and Medicine .

57 (3): 351-360.

doi : 10.1353/pbm.2014.0032 .

Holland, Leicester B., "The Mantic Mechanism at Delphi", American Journal of Archaeology 37 pp. 201–214 (1933) Lehoux, Daryn (2007). "Drugs and the Delphic Oracle".

Classical World .

101 (1): 41-56.

Maass, E., De Sibyllarum Indicibus , Berlin (1879) Maurizio, Lisa (2001a). "The Voice at the Centre of the World: The Pythia's Ambiguity and Authority". In Lardinois, Andre; McClure, Laura (eds.).

Making Silence Speak: Women's Voices in Greek Literature and Society . New Jersey: Princeton University Press. pp.

46– 50.

Mikalson, Jon D. (2022).

Ancient Greek Religion (3rd ed.). Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-119-56562-8 .

Miller, Water, Daedalus and Thespis Vol 1, (1929) Mitford, William , The History of Greece (1784); cf. v.1, Chapter III, Section 2, p. 177, "Origin and Progress of the Oracles" Morgan, Catherine.

Athletes and Oracles , Cambridge (1990) Nilsson, Martin P. (1972).

Cults, Myths, Oracles, and Politics in Ancient Greece. With Two Appendices: The Ionian Phylae, the Phratries . New York: Cooper Square Publishers.

Parke, Herbert William (1939).

A History of the Delphic Oracle . Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

ASIN B002NZWT0Y .

Parke, Herbert William (1992) [1988].

Sibyls and Sibylline Prophecy in Classical Antiquity . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-07638-8 .

Piccardi, Luigi, "Active faulting at Delphi: seismotectonic remarks and a hypothesis for the geological environment of a myth", Geology , 28, 651–654 (2000) Piccardi L.,  C. Monti, F. Tassi O. Vaselli, D. Papanastassiou & K. Gaki-Papanastassiou,  "Scent of a myth: tectonics, geochemistry and geomythology at Delphi (Greece)", Journal of the Geological Society , London, 165, 5–18 (2008) Potter, David Stone (1990).

Prophecy and history in the crisis of the Roman Empire: a Historical Commentary on the Thirteenth Sibylline Oracle . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Cf. Chapter 3 Poulson, Frederick.

Dephi Gleydenhall, London (1920) Rohde, Erwin , Psyche: The Cult of Souls and the Belief in Immortality among the Greeks , trans. from the 8th edn. by W. B. Hillis, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, (1925); reprinted by Routledge (2000); full text in English Spiller, Henry A.; Hale, John R.; De Boer, Jelle Z. (2002). "The Delphic Oracle: A Multidisciplinary Defense of the Gaseous Vent Theory".

Clinical Toxicology .

40 (2): 189-196.

doi : 10.1081/CLT-120004410 .

West, Martin Litchfield (1983).

The Orphic Poems . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0-19-814854-2 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pythia .

"Delphic Oracle's Lips May Have Been Loosened by Gas Vapors" .

National Geographic . August 14, 2001.

"The Oracle of Delphi: Ancient Greece’s Enigmatic Prophetic Site by Ed Santos" . March 1, 2025.

v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wvmkh
Cached time: 20250817222854
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.150 seconds
Real time usage: 1.380 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7611/1000000
Revision size: 71148/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 438810/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8153/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 199964/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.655/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22278804/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1059.768      1 -total
 22.96%  243.275      1 Template:Reflist
 13.45%  142.506     21 Template:Navbox
 10.88%  115.329     24 Template:Cite_book
 10.36%  109.802      9 Template:Cite_web
  9.14%   96.852      2 Template:Langx
  7.00%   74.139      1 Template:Greek_religion
  6.77%   71.799      1 Template:Short_description
  6.70%   70.979      1 Template:Anthropology_of_religion
  6.54%   69.294      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:53258:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222854 and revision id 1302255935. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pythia&oldid=1302255935 " Categories : 390 disestablishments 390s disestablishments in the Roman Empire 8th-century BC establishments in Greece Ancient Delphi Ancient Greek priestesses Classical oracles Mythological Greek seers Sibyls Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 errors: periodical ignored Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with Ancient Greek (to 1453) IPA Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 08:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pythia 48 languages Add topic

