Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Classical tradition 10 languages العربية Ελληνικά Español فارسی Interlingua Lingua Franca Nova Papiamentu Português Shqip 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Reception of classical Greco-Roman antiquity by the post-classical Western world Not to be confused with Classicism .

Vergil leading Dante on his journey in the Inferno , an image that dramatizes the continuity of the classical tradition [ 1 ] ( Dante and Vergil in Hell by Delacroix , 1823) The Western classical tradition is the reception of classical Greco-Roman antiquity by later cultures, especially the post-classical West, [ 2 ] involving texts, imagery, objects, ideas, institutions, monuments, architecture, cultural artifacts, rituals, practices, and sayings.

[ 3 ] Philosophy , political thought , and mythology are three major examples of how classical culture survives and continues to have influence.

[ 4 ] The West is one of a number of world cultures regarded as having a classical tradition, including the Indian , Chinese , and Islamic traditions.

[ 5 ] The study of the classical tradition differs from classical philology , which seeks to recover "the meanings that ancient texts had in their original contexts." [ 6 ] It examines both later efforts to uncover the realities of the Greco-Roman world and "creative misunderstandings" that reinterpret ancient values, ideas and aesthetic models for contemporary use.

[ 7 ] The classicist and translator Charles Martindale has defined the reception of classical antiquity as "a two-way process ... in which the present and the past are in dialogue with each other." [ 8 ] History [ edit ] The beginning of a self-conscious classical tradition is usually located in the Renaissance , with the work of Petrarch in 14th-century Italy .

[ 9 ] Although Petrarch believed that he was recovering an unobstructed view of a classical past that had been obscured for centuries, the classical tradition in fact had continued uninterrupted during the Middle Ages .

[ 10 ] There was no single moment of rupture when the inhabitants of what was formerly the Roman Empire went to bed in antiquity and awoke in the medieval world; rather, the cultural transformation occurred over centuries. The use and meaning of the classical tradition may seem, however, to change dramatically with the emergence of humanism .

[ 11 ] Aeneas carrying his father and leading his son from fallen Troy , a popular image in the Renaissance for the retrieval of the past as a way to make possible the future; the figure of his wife, Creusa , who did not survive, represents that which was lost [ 12 ] ( Federico Barocci , 1598) The phrase "classical tradition" is itself a modern label, articulated most notably in the post-World War II era with The Classical Tradition: Greek and Roman Influences on Western Literature of Gilbert Highet (1949) and The Classical Heritage and Its Beneficiaries of R. R. Bolgar (1954). The English word "tradition", and with it the concept of "handing down" classical culture, derives from the Latin verb trado, tradere, traditus , in the sense of "hand over, hand down." [ 13 ] Writers and artists influenced by the classical tradition may name their ancient models, or allude to their works. Often scholars infer classical influence through comparative methods that reveal patterns of thought. Sometimes authors' copies of Greek and Latin texts will contain handwritten annotations that offer direct evidence of how they read and understood their classical models; for instance, in the late 20th century the discovery of Montaigne 's copy of Lucretius enabled scholars to document an influence that had long been recognized.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Horatio Greenough 's George Washington (1840), modeled after a statue of Zeus Classics Classical reception studies Classical republicanism Greek mythology in western art and literature Legacy of the Roman Empire List of films based on Greco-Roman mythology List of films based on Greek drama Matter of Rome Neoclassicism Quarrel of the Ancients and the Moderns Transmission of the Classics Ancient Egypt in the Western imagination References [ edit ] ^ Anthony Grafton, Glenn W. Most, and Salvatore Settis, preface to The Classical Tradition (Harvard University Press, 2010), pp. viii–ix.

^ Anthony Grafton , Glenn W. Most , and Salvatore Settis, preface to The Classical Tradition (Harvard University Press, 2010), pp. vii–viii.

^ Grafton, Most, and Settis, preface to The Classical Tradition , p. viii.

^ Grafton, Most, and Settis, entry on "mythology", in The Classical Tradition , p. 614 et passim .

^ Grafton, Most, and Settis, preface to The Classical Tradition , p. x.

^ Craig W. Kallendorf, introduction to A Companion to the Classical Tradition (Blackwell, 2007), p. 2.

^ Grafton, Most, and Settis, preface to The Classical Tradition , p. vii; Kallendorf, introduction to Companion , p. 2.

^ Charles Martindale, "Reception", in A Companion to the Classical Tradition (2007), p. 298.

^ Kallendorf, introduction to Companion , p. 1.

^ Kallendorf, introduction to Companion , p. 2.

^ Kallendorf, introduction to Companion , pp. 1–2.

^ Peter Gillgren, Siting Federico Barocci and the Renaissance Aesthetic (Ashgate, 2011), pp. 165–167.

^ Kallendorf, introduction to Companion , p. 1.

^ Kallendorf, introduction to Companion , p. 2.

Further reading [ edit ] Barkan, Leonard.

Unearthing the Past: Archaeology and Aesthetics in the Making of Renaissance Culture.

Yale University Press, 1999).

Cook, William W., and Tatum, James.

African American Writers and Classical Tradition . University of Chicago Press, 2010.

Kuzmanović, Zorica; Mihajlović, Vladimir D. (2015).

"Roman Emperors and Identity Constructions in Modern Serbia" .

Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power .

22 (4): 416– 432.

Walker, Lewis.

Shakespeare and the Classical Tradition: An Annotated Bibliography 1961–1991.

Routledge, 2002.

v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Classical_tradition&oldid=1293859997 " Categories : Classical antiquity Cultural heritage Cultural appropriation Admiration of foreign cultures Western culture Western art Latin-language literature History of poetry History of literature Medieval literature Renaissance literature Renaissance humanism Legacy of the Roman Empire Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 02:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Classical tradition 10 languages Add topic

