Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 Footnotes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Contextualism 15 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands 日本語 Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Topic of inquiry in philosophy and linguistics, also known as epistemic contextualism This article is about epistemic contextualism. For semantic contextualism, see Context principle .

Part of a series on Linguistics Outline History Index General linguistics Diachronic Lexicography Morphology Phonology Pragmatics Semantics Syntax Syntax–semantics interface Typology Applied linguistics Acquisition Anthropological Applied Mathematical Computational Conversation analysis Corpus linguistics Discourse analysis Determinism Distance Documentation Ethnography of communication Ethnomethodology Forensic History of linguistics Interlinguistics Neurolinguistics Philology Philosophy of language Phonetics Psycholinguistics Sociolinguistics Text Translating and interpreting Writing systems Theoretical frameworks Formalist Constituency Dependency Distributionalism Generative Glossematics Functional Cognitive Construction grammar Functional discourse grammar Grammaticalization Interactional linguistics Prague circle Systemic functional Usage-based Structuralism Topics Autonomy of syntax Compositionality Conservative and innovative language Descriptivism Etymology Iconicity Internet linguistics LGBTQ linguistics Origin of language Orismology Orthography Philosophy of linguistics Prescriptivism Second-language acquisition Theory of language Terminology Portal v t e Contextualism , also known as epistemic contextualism , is a family of views in philosophy which emphasize the context in which an action, utterance , or expression occurs. Proponents of contextualism argue that, in some important respect, the action, utterance, or expression can only be understood relative to that context.

[ 1 ] Contextualist views hold that philosophically controversial concepts, such as "meaning P ", "knowing that P ", "having a reason to A ", and possibly even "being true" or "being right" only have meaning relative to a specified context. Other philosophers [ 2 ] contend that context-dependence leads to complete relativism .

[ 3 ] In ethics , "contextualist" views are often closely associated with situational ethics , or with moral relativism .

[ 4 ] Contextualism in architecture is a theory of design where modern building types are harmonized with urban forms usual to a traditional city.

[ 5 ] In epistemology , contextualism is the treatment of the word 'knows' as context-sensitive .  Context-sensitive expressions are ones that "express different propositions relative to different contexts of use".

[ 6 ] For example, some terms generally considered context-sensitive are indexicals , such as 'I', 'here', and 'now'; while 'I' has a constant linguistic meaning in all contexts of use, whom it refers to varies with context. Similarly, epistemic contextualists argue that the word 'knows' is context sensitive, expressing different relations in some different contexts.

Overview [ edit ] Contextualism was introduced, in part, to undermine skeptical arguments that have this basic structure: I don't know that I am not in a skeptical scenario H (e.g., I'm not a brain in a vat) If I don't know that H is not the case, then I don't know an ordinary proposition O (e.g., I have hands) Conclusion: Therefore, I don't know O The contextualist solution is not to deny any premise, nor to say that the argument does not follow, but link the truth value of (3) to the context, and say that we can refuse (3) in context—like everyday conversational context—where we have different requirements to say we know.

The main tenet of contextualist epistemology is that knowledge attributions are context-sensitive, and the truth values of "know" depend on the context in which it is used. A statement like 'I know that I have hands' would be false. The same proposition in an ordinary context—e.g., in a cafe with friends— would be truth, and its negation would be false. When we participate in philosophical discourses of the skeptical sort, we seem  to lose our knowledge; once we leave the skeptical context, we  can truthfully say we have knowledge.

That is, when we attribute knowledge to someone, the context in which we use the term 'knowledge' determines the standards relative to which "knowledge" is being attributed (or denied).  If we use it in everyday conversational contexts, the contextualist maintains, most of our claims to "know" things are true, despite skeptical attempts to show we know little or nothing.  But if the term 'knowledge' is used when skeptical hypotheses are being discussed, we count as "knowing" very little, if anything.  Contextualists use this to explain why skeptical arguments can be persuasive, while at the same time protecting the correctness of our ordinary claims to "know" things. This theory does not allow that someone can have knowledge at one moment and not the other, which would not be a satisfying epistemological answer. What contextualism entails is that in one context an utterance of a knowledge attribution can be true, and in a context with higher standards for knowledge, the same statement can be false.  This happens in the same way that 'I' can correctly be used (by different people) to refer to different people at the same time.

What varies with context is how well-positioned a subject must be with respect to a proposition to count as "knowing" it.  Contextualism in epistemology then is a semantic thesis about how 'knows' works in English, not a theory of what knowledge, justification, or strength of epistemic position consists in.

[ 7 ] However, epistemologists combine contextualism with views about what knowledge is to address epistemological puzzles and issues, such as skepticism , the Gettier problem , and the Lottery paradox .

Contextualist accounts of knowledge became increasingly popular toward the end of the 20th century, particularly as responses to the problem of skepticism .  Contemporary contextualists include Michael Blome-Tillmann, Michael Williams , Stewart Cohen, Keith DeRose , David Lewis , Gail Stine , and George Mattey.

The standards for attributing knowledge to someone, the contextualist claims, vary from one user's context to the next. Thus, if I say "John knows that his car is in front of him", the utterance is true if and only if (1) John believes that his car is in front of him, (2) the car is in fact in front of him, and (3) John meets the epistemic standards that my (the speaker's) context selects. This is a loose contextualist account of knowledge, and there are many significantly different theories of knowledge that can fit this contextualist template and thereby come in a contextualist form.

For instance, an evidentialist account of knowledge can be an instance of contextualism if it's held that strength of justification is a contextually varying matter.  And one who accepts a relevant alternative's account of knowledge can be a contextualist by holding that what range of alternatives are relevant is sensitive to conversational context. DeRose adopts a type of modal or "safety" (as it has since come to be known) account on which knowledge is a matter of one's belief as to whether or not p is the case matching the fact of the matter, not only in the actual world, but also in the sufficiently close possible worlds: Knowledge amounts to there being no "nearby" worlds in which one goes wrong with respect to p. But how close is sufficiently close? It's here that DeRose takes the modal account of knowledge in a contextualist direction, for the range of "epistemically relevant worlds" is what varies with context: In high standards contexts one's belief must match the fact of the matter through a much wider range of worlds than is relevant to low standards contexts.

It is claimed that neurophilosophy has the goal of contextualizing .

[ 8 ] Contextualist epistemology has been criticized by several philosophers.  Contextualism is opposed to any general form of Invariantism , which claims that knowledge is not context-sensitive (i.e. it is invariant).  More recent criticism has been in the form of rival theories, including Subject-Sensitive Invariantism (SSI), mainly due to the work of John Hawthorne (2004), and Interest-Relative Invariantism (IRI), due to Jason Stanley (2005).  SSI claims that it is the context of the subject of the knowledge attribution that determines the epistemic standards, whereas Contextualism maintains it is the attributor.  IRI, on the other hand, argues that it is the context of the practical interests of the subject of the knowledge attribution that determines the epistemic standards.  Stanley writes that bare IRI is "simply the claim that whether or not someone knows that p may be determined in part by practical facts about the subject's environment." [ 9 ] ("Contextualism" is a misnomer for either form of Invariantism, since "Contextualism" among epistemologists is considered to be restricted to a claim about the context-sensitivity of knowledge attributions (or the word "knows").  Thus, any view which maintains that something other than knowledge attributions are context-sensitive is not, strictly speaking, a form of Contextualism.) An alternative to contextualism called contrastivism has been proposed by Jonathan Schaffer . Contrastivism, like contextualism, uses semantic approaches to tackle the problem of skepticism.

[ 10 ] Recent [ when?

] work in experimental philosophy has taken an empirical approach to testing the claims of contextualism and related views. This research has proceeded by conducting experiments in which ordinary non-philosophers are presented with vignettes, then asked to report on the status of the knowledge ascription. The studies address contextualism by varying the context of the knowledge ascription, e.g. how important it is that the agent in the vignette has accurate knowledge.

In the studies completed up to 2010, no support for contextualism has been found: [ 11 ] stakes have no impact on evidence. More specifically, non-philosophical intuitions about knowledge attributions are not affected by the importance to the potential knower of the accuracy of that knowledge.

See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Anekantavada Degrees of truth Exclusive disjunction False dilemma Fuzzy logic Logical disjunction Logical value Multi-valued logic Perspectivism Principle of bivalence Propositional attitude Propositional logic Relativism Rhizome (philosophy) Semiotic anthropology Truth Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Price (2008).

^ Feldman (1999).

^ Mackie (1977) ^ Timmons (1998).

^ Jencks, p. 78-79 ^ Stanley (2005), p. 16.

^ Stanley (2005), p. 17.

^ Northoff, Georg (2014) p. 351 ^ Stanley (2005), p. 85.

^ Schaffer (2004).

^ See Feltz and Zarpentine (2010), May, Sinnott-Armstrong, Hull, and Zimmerman (2010), and Buckwatler (2010) References [ edit ] Annis, David. 1978. "A Contextualist Theory of Epistemic Justification", in American Philosophical Quarterly , 15: 213–219.

Buckwalter, Wesley (2010). "Knowledge Isn't Closed on Saturday: A Study in Ordinary Language".

Review of Philosophy and Psychology .

1 (3): 395– 406.

doi : 10.1007/s13164-010-0030-3 .

S2CID 144530801 .

Cappelen, H. & Lepore, E. 2005.

Insensitive Semantics: A Defense of Semantic Minimalism and Speech Act Pluralism , Blackwell Publishing.

Cohen, Stuart. 1998. "Contextualist Solutions to Epistemological Problems: Scepticism, Gettier, and the Lottery." Australasian Journal of Philosophy , 76: 289–306.

Cohen Stuart.  1999. "Contextualism, Skepticism, and Reasons", in Tomberlin 1999.

DeRose, Keith. 1992. "Contextualism and Knowledge Attributions", Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 52: 913–929.

DeRose, Keith. 1995. "Solving the Skeptical Problem," Philosophical Review 104: 1-52.

DeRose, Keith. 1999. "Contextualism: An Explanation and Defense", in Greco and Sosa 1999.

DeRose, Keith. 2002. "Assertion, Knowledge, and Context," Philosophical Review 111: 167–203.

DeRose, Keith. 2009.

The Case for Contextualism: Knowledge, Skepticism and Context, Vol. 1 , Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Feldman, Richard. 1999. "Contextualism and Skepticism", in Tomberlin 1999.

Feltz, Adam; Zarpentine, Chris (2010). "Do You Know More When It Matters Less?".

Philosophical Psychology .

23 (5): 683– 706.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.174.4685 .

doi : 10.1080/09515089.2010.514572 .

S2CID 15444124 .

Greco, J. & Sosa, E. 1999.

Blackwell Guide to Epistemology , Blackwell Publishing.

Hawthorne, John. 2004.

Knowledge and Lotteries , Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Jencks, Charles (2002).

New Paradigm In Architecture (7th ed.). Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-09512-8 .

Mackie, J.L. 1977, "Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong", Viking Press, ISBN 0-14-013558-8 .

May, Joshua, Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter, Hull, Jay G. & Zimmerman, Aaron. 2010. " Practical Interests, Relevant Alternatives, and Knowledge Attributions: An Empirical Study ", Review of Philosophy and Psychology (formerly European Review of Philosophy ), special issue on Psychology and Experimental Philosophy ed. by Edouard Machery, Tania Lombrozo, & Joshua Knobe, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 265–273.

Northoff, Georg (2014).

"Neurophilosophy of consciousness: from mind to consciousness" .

Minding the Brain: A Guide to Philosophy and Neuroscience . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 351.

ISBN 9781137406057 .

[ permanent dead link ] Price, A. W. 2008. ' 'Contextuality in Practical Reason' ', Oxford University Press.

Schaffer, Jonathan; Knobe, Joshua (2011). "Contrastive Knowledge Surveyed".

Noûs .

46 (4): 675– 708.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.641.7164 .

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0068.2010.00795.x .

Schaffer, Jonathan. 2004. "From Contextualism to Contrastivism," Philosophical Studies 119: 73–103.

Schiffer, Stephen. 1996. "Contextualist Solutions to Scepticism", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society , 96:317-33.

Stanley, Jason. 2005.

Knowledge and Practical Interests . New York: Oxford University Press.

Timmons Mark, 1998 "Morality Without Foundations: A Defense of Ethical Contextualism Oxford University Press US.

Tomberlin, James (ed.). 1999.

Philosophical Perspectives 13, Epistemology , Blackwell Publishing.

External links [ edit ] A Brief History of Contextualism Archived 2013-01-18 at archive.today - DeRose on the history of contextualism in epistemology.

Contextualism in Epistemology - an article by Tim Black on the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Epistemic contextualism at PhilPapers Rysiew, Patrick.

"Epistemic Contextualism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

.

Epistemic contextualism at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Contextualism&oldid=1293142036 " Categories : Consensus reality Metaethics Metatheory Relativism Philosophical skepticism Systemic functional linguistics Ethical theories Theories of justification Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from August 2019 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template archiveis links This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 23:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Contextualism 15 languages Add topic

