Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Identification 3 References 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca 4 languages Deutsch Ελληνικά Hrvatski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°31′15″N 13°23′47″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.5208°N 13.3964°E ﻿ / 52.5208; 13.3964 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Roman statue from the 3rd century AD Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca Year AD 200–250 Type sculpture Medium Marble Dimensions 27 cm (11 in) Location Altes Museum , Berlin View of Socrates and the herms at the former location in the Pergamonmuseum The Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca is an ancient Roman statue from the first half of the third century AD. The herm depicts the Greek philosopher Socrates on one side, and the Roman Stoic Seneca the Younger on the other. It currently belongs to the Antikensammlung Berlin , found in the Altes Museum .

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] The two philosophers are joined together at the back of the head; their chests are in the shape of a herm . Both men have the usual cloak of a philosopher or orator above their left shoulder, although Socrates also wears an undershirt. The bearded Socrates is given a satyr -like form, as in literary descriptions and other portraits. Seneca, on the other hand, is depicted as clean-shaven with a receding hairline. His small, full-lipped mouth is pursed. It is speculated that the depiction of Seneca derives from a work created between AD 50 and 60—within the lifetime of the philosopher.

In ancient art, double herms were a common statue type. While in Greece they were displayed in public rooms, in the Roman Empire they were shown in private spaces.

[ citation needed ] Thus, the combination of the two philosophers here owed something to the personal inclinations of the person who commissioned it, even if it is not clear why these two philosophers were linked in particular. Probably it has to do with the fact that they were both forced to commit suicide. The presentation of philosophers (and poets) as double herms was the most common use of this genre. This parallel presentation is also seen in literature, for example in the Parallel Lives of Plutarch .

Identification [ edit ] The double herm is important to scholarship since it is the only image that can certainly be said to depict Seneca. The attribution is proven by a Latin inscription on the left side of the bust (from the point of view of someone looking at Seneca), while Socrates is identified by a Greek inscription on the right hand side.  The identification of Socrates can be considered certain based on comparison with many other depictions of Socrates, many of which are of much better quality. The portrait of Seneca on the other hand is used today to identify other portraits and statues of Seneca.

References [ edit ] ^ Inventory number SK 391 (R 106) Bibliography [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Double herma of Socrates and Seneca .

Max Kunze . "Doppelherme des Sokrates und Seneca," in Staatliche Museen zu Berlin. Preußischer Kulturbesitz. Antikensammlung (ed.), Die Antikensammlung im Pergamonmuseum und in Charlottenburg . von Zabern, Mainz 1992, ISBN 3-8053-1187-7 , pp. 215f.

Socrates and Seneca . in Königliche Museen zu Berlin (ed.), Alexander Conze (foreword): Beschreibung der antiken Skulpturen mit Ausschluss der pergamenischen Fundstücke . Spemann, Berlin 1891, urn : nbn:de:bsz:16-diglit-34567 , pp. 158–159. (Directory-No. 391) v t e Socrates Bibliography Cultural depictions Life Trial of Socrates Socratic problem Concepts Social gadfly Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic questioning Phrases " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Family Sophroniscus (father) Phaenarete (mother) Xanthippe (wife) Lamprocles (son) Menexenus (son) Myrto (wife) Works that include Socrates Art Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca (3rd-century sculpture) The Death of Socrates (1787 painting) Socrates (1950 sculpture) Stage The Clouds (423 BC play) Der geduldige Socrates (1721 opera) Socrates (1759 play) Socrate (1919 oratorio) Socrates on Trial (2007 play) Literature De genio Socratis (1st-century essay) On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates (1841 thesis) The Plot to Save Socrates (2006 novel) Other Serenade after Plato's "Symposium" (1954 serenade) Barefoot in Athens (1966 film) Socrates (1970 film) Dialogues Plato Apology Axiochus Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Demodocus Epinomis Eryxias Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hipparchus Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Lysis Menexenus Meno Minos On Justice On Virtue Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Theages Timaeus Xenophon Apology Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Other Halcyon Socratic Letters Related Euthyphro dilemma Form of the Good Peritrope Religious skepticism Category v t e Seneca the Younger Philosophy Dialogues De Beneficiis De Brevitate Vitae De Clementia De Constantia Sapientis De Ira De Otio De Providentia De Tranquillitate Animi De Vita Beata Letters Letters to Lucilius Consolations Seneca's Consolations ( ad Helviam Matrem, ad Marciam, ad Polybium ) Natural philosophy Naturales quaestiones Literature Extant plays Agamemnon Hercules Furens Medea Oedipus Phaedra Phoenissae Thyestes Troades Plays of questionable authorship Hercules Oetaeus Octavia Satire Apocolocyntosis Other Letters of Paul and Seneca (spurious) Related Senecan tragedy Stoicism Portraits Socrates and Seneca Double Herm Pseudo-Seneca The Death of Seneca (1773 painting) Family Seneca the Elder (father) Gallio (brother) Pompeia Paulina (wife) Lucan (nephew) 52°31′15″N 13°23′47″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.5208°N 13.3964°E ﻿ / 52.5208; 13.3964 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Double_Herm_of_Socrates_and_Seneca&oldid=1272179864 " Categories : Archaeological discoveries in Italy 3rd-century Roman sculptures Altes Museum Cultural depictions of Socrates Cultural depictions of Seneca the Younger Busts of writers Classical sculptures in the Staatliche Museen zu Berlin Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using infobox artwork with the material parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014 Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 January 2025, at 13:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca 4 languages Add topic

