Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary 2 Kant's comments 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful 14 languages Български Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Македонски 日本語 Português Русский Suomi Тоҷикӣ 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from On the Sublime and Beautiful ) 1757 treatise on aesthetics by Edmund Burke On the Sublime and Beautiful A philosophical enquiry into the origin of our ideas of the sublime and beautiful.

Author Edmund Burke Original title A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful Publication date 1757, 2nd edition 1759 Publication place Great Britain Text On the Sublime and Beautiful at Wikisource A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful is a 1757 treatise (2nd edition 1759) on aesthetics written by the Anglo-Irish politician Edmund Burke . It was the first complete philosophical exposition for separating the beautiful and the sublime into their own respective rational categories. It attracted the attention of prominent thinkers such as Denis Diderot and Immanuel Kant .

Summary [ edit ] According to Burke, the Beautiful is that which is well-formed and aesthetically pleasing, whereas the Sublime is that which has the power to compel and destroy us. The preference for the Sublime over the Beautiful was to mark the transition from the Neoclassical to the Romantic era.

The work includes criticism of the idea that beauty is dependent on proportion: "Beauty hath usually been said to consist in certain proportions of parts. On considering the matter, I have great reason to doubt, whether beauty be at all an idea belonging to proportion." [ 1 ] The origins of our ideas of the beautiful and the sublime, for Burke, can be understood by means of their causal structures . According to Aristotelian physics and metaphysics , causation can be divided into formal, material, efficient and final causes. The formal cause of beauty is the passion of love; the material cause concerns aspects of certain objects such as smallness, smoothness, delicacy, etc.; the efficient cause is the calming of our nerves; the final cause is God 's providence. What is most peculiar and original to Burke's view of beauty is that it cannot be understood by the traditional bases of beauty: proportion, fitness, or perfection. The sublime also has a causal structure that is unlike that of beauty. Its formal cause is thus the passion of fear (especially the fear of death); the material cause is equally aspects of certain objects such as vastness, infinity, magnificence, etc.; its efficient cause is the tension of our nerves; the final cause is God having created and battled Satan , as expressed in John Milton 's great epic Paradise Lost .

Kant's comments [ edit ] Immanuel Kant critiqued Burke for not understanding the causes of the mental effects that occur in the experience of the beautiful or the sublime. According to Kant, Burke merely gathered data so that some future thinker could explain them.

To make psychological observations, as Burke did in his treatise on the beautiful and the sublime, thus to assemble material for the systematic connection of empirical rules in the future without aiming to understand them, is probably the sole true duty of empirical psychology, which can hardly even aspire to rank as a philosophical science.

— Immanuel Kant, First Introduction to the Critique of Judgment , X.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] A Vindication of Natural Society Notes [ edit ] ^ Burke, Edmund.

A Philosophical Enquiry into the Sublime and Beautiful . Penguin Books. p. 129.

ISBN 9780140436259 .

^ Kant, Immanuel , First Introduction to the Critique of Judgment , Library of Liberal Arts, 146, Bobbs-Merrill Co., 1965 References [ edit ] Vermeir, Koen and Funk Deckard, Michael (eds.) The Science of Sensibility: Reading Burke's Philosophical Enquiry (International Archives of the History of Ideas, Vol. 206) (Springer, 2012) Doran, Robert.

The Theory of the Sublime from Longinus to Kant . Cambridge:Cambridge University Press, 2015.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: On the Sublime and Beautiful Complete text online v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Edmund Burke Works A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discontents (1770) " On American Taxation " (1774) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) An Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs (1791) Thoughts and Details on Scarcity (1795) Letters on a Regicide Peace (1796) Organisations Edmund Burke Foundation The Club Royal Bounty Fund Related Conservatism Edmund Burke (Thomas statue) Impeachment of Warren Hastings Religious thought of Edmund Burke Richard Burke Jr.

(son) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=A_Philosophical_Enquiry_into_the_Origin_of_Our_Ideas_of_the_Sublime_and_Beautiful&oldid=1294553025 " Categories : 1757 non-fiction books Aesthetics books Works by Edmund Burke Modern philosophical literature Treatises Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that link to Wikisource Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 11:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful 14 languages Add topic

