Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Aristotle's theory of universals Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical theory For the mathematical theory, see Aristotelian realist philosophy of mathematics .

Plato's forms exist as universals , like the ideal form of an apple . For Aristotle , both matter and form belong to the individual thing ( hylomorphism ).

Aristotle's theory of universals is Aristotle 's classical solution to the problem of universals , sometimes known as the hylomorphic theory of immanent realism .

Universals are the characteristics or qualities that ordinary objects or things have in common. They can be identified in the types , properties , or relations observed in the world. For example, imagine there is a bowl of red apples resting on a table. Each apple in that bowl will have many similar qualities, such as their red coloring or "redness". They will share some degree of the quality of "ripeness" depending on their age. They may also be at varying degrees of age, which will affect their color, but they will all share a universal "appleness". These qualities are the universals that the apples hold in common.

The problem of universals asks three questions. Do universals exist? If they exist, where do they exist? Also, if they exist, how do we obtain knowledge of them? In Aristotle 's view, universals are incorporeal and universal, but only exist only where they are instantiated ; they exist only in things.

[ 1 ] Aristotle said that a universal is identical in each of its instances . All red things are similar in that there is the same universal , redness, in each thing. There is no Platonic Form of redness, standing apart from all red things; instead, each red thing has a copy of the same property, redness. For the Aristotelian, knowledge of the universals is not obtained from a supernatural source. It is obtained from experience by means of active intellect.

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] Further information: Problem of universals In Aristotle's view, universals can be instantiated multiple times. He states that one and the same universal , such as applehood, appears in every real apple. A common sense challenge would be to inquire what remains exactly the same in all these different things, since the theory is claiming that something remains the same. Stating that different beautiful things, such as the Pacific Ocean, The Eiffel Tower, or the nighttime sky is beautiful is just to say that each thing is the same (qualitatively) in terms of beauty. Aristotle is talking about a category of being here that is not a thing but a quality. A common defense of Aristotle's realism is therefore that we should not expect universals to behave like ordinary physical objects. To say the same universal, beautiful, occurs simultaneously in all these things is no more strange than saying that each thing is beautiful.

A second issue is whether Aristotelian universals are abstract: if they are, then the theory must deal with how to abstract the concept of redness from one or more red things. Aristotle argued that people form concepts and make generalizations in the manner of a young child, who is just on the verge of grasping a generic concept such as human being .  In his view, the child is gathering his or her memories of various encounters with individual humans, searching for the essential similarity that stands out, on reflection, in every instance. Today, it might be said that one mentally extracts from each thing the quality that they all have in common.  When the child grasps the concept of a human being, he or she has learnt to ignore the accidental details of each person's past experiences and individual differences, and has paid attention to the relevant quality that they all have in common , namely, humanity. In Aristotle's view, the universal humanity is a natural kind defined by the essential properties that all humans have in common.

See also [ edit ] Hylomorphism Aristotelian realist philosophy of mathematics Metaphysics (Aristotle) References [ edit ] ^ a b Klima, Gyula (2017), "The Medieval Problem of Universals" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2017 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2020-03-14 External links [ edit ] Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Aristotle's Metaphysics. 10. Substances and Universals Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: The Medieval Problem of Universals. 4. Boethius’ Aristotelian Solution Meaning and the Problem of Universals, A Kant-Friesian Approach M. J. Cresswell: What is Aristotle's theory of universals?

(subscription required) v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐pgl4d
Cached time: 20250812024315
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.236 seconds
Real time usage: 0.294 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 529/1000000
Revision size: 5429/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 45199/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 418/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 13899/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.159/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4478273/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  246.300      1 -total
 40.42%   99.551      3 Template:Navbox
 39.24%   96.659      1 Template:Aristotelianism
 27.26%   67.133      1 Template:Reflist
 23.73%   58.439      1 Template:Citation
 22.33%   55.000      1 Template:Short_description
 10.68%   26.310      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.06%   19.851      1 Template:For
  7.79%   19.187      3 Template:Main_other
  7.14%   17.590      1 Template:SDcat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:179669:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812024315 and revision id 1302889379. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aristotle%27s_theory_of_universals&oldid=1302889379 " Categories : Epistemology Ontology Philosophy of Aristotle Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 00:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aristotle's theory of universals Add languages Add topic

