Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origins and developments (17th century–20th century) 1.2 Communist–Socialist split, the New Deal and Red Scares (1910s–1940s) 1.3 Civil rights, War on Poverty and the New Left (1950s–1960s) 1.4 SDUSA–SPUSA split, foundation of DSOC–DSA and anti-WTO protests (1970s–1990s) 1.5 Occupy, Bernie Sanders campaigns and DSA electoral victories (2000s–present) 2 Political currents Toggle Political currents subsection 2.1 Democratic socialism, social democracy, and resurgence of progressivism 2.1.1 Democratic Socialists of America 2.1.2 Social Democrats, USA 2.1.3 Socialist Party USA 2.2 Christian democracy 2.2.1 American Solidarity Party 2.3 Green politics 2.3.1 Green Party of the United States 2.4 Anarchism 2.5 De Leonism 2.5.1 Socialist Labor Party 2.6 Marxism–Leninism 2.6.1 American Party of Labor 2.6.2 Communist Party USA 2.6.3 Freedom Road Socialist Organization 2.6.4 Party for Socialism and Liberation 2.6.5 Progressive Labor Party 2.6.6 Revolutionary Communist Party, USA 2.6.7 Workers World Party 2.7 Trotskyism 2.7.1 Freedom Socialist Party 2.7.2 Revolutionary Communists of America (RCA) 2.7.3 International Socialist Organization 2.7.4 Socialist Action 2.7.5 Socialist Alternative 2.7.6 Socialist Equality Party 2.7.7 Socialist Workers Party 2.7.8 Solidarity 2.7.9 Spartacist League 3 Notable figures and current publications Toggle Notable figures and current publications subsection 3.1 People 3.2 Publications 4 Public officeholders Toggle Public officeholders subsection 4.1 Communist Party USA 4.1.1 Wisconsin 4.2 Green Party of the United States 4.2.1 Arkansas 4.2.2 California 4.3 Socialist Alternative 4.3.1 Washington 4.4 Socialist Party USA 4.4.1 New Jersey 4.5 Vermont Progressive Party 4.6 Working Families Party 4.6.1 Connecticut 4.6.2 New York 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents American Left 6 languages العربية فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Română 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Social democracy in the United States ) Left politics in the United States This article may require copy editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone, or spelling .

You can assist by editing it .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section may be too long .

Please read the length guidelines and help move details into the article's body .

( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series on the Politics of the United States Federal government Constitution of the United States Laws Treaties Legislature United States Congress House of Representatives Speaker Mike Johnson (R) Majority Leader Steve Scalise (R) Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries (D) Congressional districts ( list ) Non-voting members Senate President JD Vance (R) President Pro Tempore Chuck Grassley (R) Majority Leader John Thune (R) Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D) Executive President of the United States Donald Trump (R) Vice President of the United States JD Vance (R) Cabinet Federal agencies Executive Office Judiciary Supreme Court of the United States Chief Justice John Roberts Thomas Alito Sotomayor Kagan Gorsuch Kavanaugh Barrett Jackson Inferior Courts of the United States Courts of appeals District courts ( list ) Court of International Trade Alien Terrorist Removal Court Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review Other tribunals Elections National elections Presidential elections Midterm elections Off-year elections Primary elections Presidential primary Elections by state and territory Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands Elections in the District of Columbia ( List of elections ) Political parties Democratic Republican Third parties Constitution Green Libertarian List of political parties Political ideologies Conservatism Black Fiscal Liberal Neo- Paleo- Social Traditionalist Trumpism Liberalism Classical Conservative Modern Neo- Third Way Progressivism Abolitionism Constitutionalism Environmentalism Feminism Libertarianism Anarchism Capitalist Individualist Conservative Paleo- Minarchist Objectivism Monarchism Nationalism Nativism Populism Protectionism Republicanism Socialism Political culture Political polarization Federalism State and territorial government Governors Legislatures ( list ) Courts Local government District of Columbia government District Council Mayor Superior Court Foreign relations Department of State Secretary of State : Marco Rubio Diplomatic missions of / in the United States Nationality law Passports Visa requirements Visa policy United States and the United Nations United Nations Security Council P5 NATO G20 G7 Russia China India Japan Canada United Kingdom European Union Latin America Arab League United States portal Politics portal v t e Part of the Politics Series Party politics Political spectrum Left-wing Far-left Centre-left Centre Centre-left Radical centre Centre-right Right-wing Centre-right Far-right Syncretism Major ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Christian democracy Communism Conservatism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Green politics Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Monarchism Nationalism Populism Progressivism Classical radicalism Republicanism Social democracy Socialism Syncretism Third Way Types Bloc party Elite party Cartel party Competitive Catch-all party Entrepreneurial party Ethnic party Fraternal party Major party / Minor party Mass party Ruling party / Opposition party Rump party Parliamentary opposition Party of power Official party status Single-issue party Transnational / International Leaders and organization Backbencher Caucus Caucus chair Frontbencher Lead candidate Leader of the Opposition Majority leader Minority leader Political faction Parliamentary leader Party chair Party leader Party spokesperson Party secretary Shadow cabinet Whip Internal elections Primary election Leadership election Open list Party convention/conference Leadership convention Party discipline Conscience vote Crossing the floor Party discipline Party line Party-line vote Party switching Whip Party systems One-party Dominant-party Two-party Multi-party Non-partisan Coalitions between parties Parliamentary group Divided government Coalition government Confidence and supply Consensus government Cordon sanitaire Grand coalition Hung parliament Majority government Minority government National unity government Rotation government Tech-Trad Alliance Lists of political parties Ruling parties by country Political parties by region Banned political parties Politics portal v t e The American Left refers to the groups or ideas on the left of the political spectrum in the United States . It is occasionally used as a shorthand for groups aligned with the Democratic Party . At other times, it refers to groups that have sought egalitarian changes in the economic, political, and cultural institutions of the United States.

[ 1 ] Various subgroups with a national scope are active.

Liberals and progressives believe that equality can be accommodated into existing capitalist structures, but they differ in their criticism of capitalism and on the extent of reform and the welfare state .

Anarchists , communists , and socialists with international imperatives are also present within this macro-movement.

[ 2 ] Many communes and egalitarian communities have existed in the United States as a sub-category of the broader intentional community movement, some of which were based on utopian socialist ideals.

[ 3 ] The left has been involved in both the Democratic and Republican parties at different times, having originated in the Democratic-Republican Party as opposed to the Federalist Party .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Although left-wing politics came to the United States in the 19th century, there are currently no major left-wing political parties in the country. Despite existing left-wing factions within the Democratic Party , [ 7 ] as well as minor third parties such as the Green Party , Communist Party USA , Party for Socialism and Liberation , American Communist Party , Workers World Party , Socialist Party , and American Solidarity Party (a Christian democratic party leaning left on economics), there have been few representatives of left-leaning third parties in Congress. Academic scholars have long studied the reasons why no viable socialist parties have emerged in the United States.

[ 8 ] Some writers ascribe this to the failures of socialist organization and leadership, some to the incompatibility of socialism with American values , and others to the limitations imposed by the United States Constitution .

[ 9 ] Vladimir Lenin and Leon Trotsky were particularly concerned because it challenged orthodox Marxist beliefs that the most advanced industrial country would provide a model for the future of less developed nations. If socialism represented the future, then it should be strongest in the United States.

[ 10 ] While branches of the Working Men's Party were founded in the 1820s and 1830s in the United States, they advocated land reform , universal education and improved working conditions in the form of labor rights , not collective ownership , disappearing after their goals were taken up by Jacksonian democracy .

Samuel Gompers , the leader of the American Federation of Labor , thought that workers must rely on themselves because any rights provided by government could be revoked.

[ 11 ] Economic unrest in the 1890s was represented by populism and the People's Party . Although using anti-capitalist rhetoric, it represented the views of small farmers who wanted to protect their own private property , not a call for communism , collectivism , or socialism .

[ 12 ] Progressives in the early 20th century criticized the way capitalism had developed but were essentially middle class and reformist; however, both populism and progressivism steered some to left-wing politics; many popular writers of the progressive period were left-wing.

[ 13 ] Even the New Left relied on radical democratic traditions rather than left-wing ideology.

[ 14 ] Friedrich Engels thought that the lack of a feudal past was the reason for the American working class holding middle-class values. Writing at a time when American industry was developing quickly towards the mass-production system known as Fordism , Max Weber and Antonio Gramsci saw individualism and laissez-faire liberalism as core shared American beliefs. According to the historian David De Leon, American radicalism was rooted in libertarianism and syndicalism rather than communism, Fabianism and social democracy , being opposed to centralized power and collectivism.

[ 15 ] The character of the American political system is hostile toward third parties and has also been presented as a reason for the absence of a strong socialist party in the United States.

[ 16 ] Political repression has also contributed to the weakness of the left in the United States. Many cities had Red Squads to monitor and disrupt leftist groups in response to labor unrest such as the Haymarket Riot .

[ 17 ] During World War II, the Smith Act made membership in revolutionary groups illegal. After the war, Senator Joseph McCarthy used the Smith Act to launch a crusade ( McCarthyism ) to purge alleged communists from government and the media. In the 1960s, the FBI 's COINTELPRO program monitored, infiltrated, disrupted and discredited radical groups in the United States.

[ 18 ] In 2008, Maryland police were revealed to have added the names and personal information of anti-war protesters and death penalty opponents to a database which was intended to be used for tracking terrorists.

[ 19 ] Terry Turchie, a former deputy assistant director of the FBI Counterterrorism Division , admitted that "one of the missions of the FBI in its counterintelligence efforts was to try to keep these people (progressives and self-described socialists) out of office." [ 20 ] History [ edit ] Main articles: History of left-wing politics in the United States and History of the socialist movement in the United States Origins and developments (17th century–20th century) [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Socialism in the United States History Utopian socialism Bishop Hill Commune Brook Farm Icarians Jonestown Looking Backward New Harmony Oneida Community Progressive Era 1877 St. Louis general strike Christian socialism in Utah 1912 Lawrence textile strike Catholic Worker Movement Green Corn Rebellion Labor unionization Haymarket affair May Day Women's suffrage Red Scare American Defense Society American Protective League Communist Party USA and African Americans Communist Party USA in the labor movement 1919–1937 1937–1957 Espionage Act of 1917 First Red Scare John Birch Society McCarthyism Seattle General Strike Smith Act Smith Act trials Anti-war and civil rights movements Black power movement COINTELPRO " I Have a Dream " March on Washington New Left Poor People's Campaign Contemporary 1999 Seattle WTO protests 2008 financial crisis Occupy movement Activists Alston Balagoon Berkman Day Dixon Du Bois Ehrenreich Ervin Flynn Goldman Grace Guthrie Hampton Hay Haywood (Bill) Haywood (Harry) Hill Hoffman Jones Keller King Labadie Lovestone Marcy Mitchell Morello Newton Ochs Parsons (Albert) Parsons (Lucy) Reed (John) Robbins Rocha Rustin Sacco and Vanzetti Seale Seeger Shakur Tankian Zinn Commentators Brooks Bruenig (Elizabeth) Bruenig (Matt) Cockburn Hedges Harrington Jameson Kochinski Magdoff Moore Parenti Piker Robinson (Nathan) Roediger Sinclair Sunkara Sweezy West Intellectuals Albert Andrews Avrich Bellamy (Edward) Bellamy (Francis) Bookchin Brisbane Butler Cabet Cannon Cantor Carmichael Chomsky Clark Cleaver Davis (Angela) Davis (Mike) Dean Dennis Dreiser Einstein Fearing Feinberg Flemm Foster Gilmore Graeber Greene Hahnel Hammett Heywood (Angela) Heywood (Ezra) Hillquit Kelley London Lum Most Noyes Piven Reed (Adolph) Ripley Robinson (Cedric) Rocker Sandburg Shachtman Smith Stone Wolff Wood Wright Zerzan Politicians Abern Berger Bowman Bush Casar Debs De Leon De la Cruz Dellums Ford Foster Gitlow Hall Hawkins Hillquit Hoan La Guardia London Mamdani Marcantonio McReynolds Mitchell Ocasio-Cortez Panken Randolph Ruthenberg Sanders Sawant Seidel Thomas Tlaib Turner Zeidler Organizations Active American Communist Party Antifa Black Riders Liberation Party Black Socialists in America Communist Party USA Democratic Socialists of America Freedom Party of New York Freedom Road Socialist Organization Freedom Socialist Party Green Mountain Peace and Justice Party Green Party of the United States Industrial Workers of the World Legal Marijuana Now Party New Afrikan Black Panther Party Party for Socialism and Liberation Peace and Freedom Party Progressive Dane Progressive Labor Party Revolutionary Communist Party, USA Socialist Action Socialist Alternative South Carolina Workers Party Social Democrats, USA Socialist Equality Party Socialist Party USA Socialist Rifle Association Socialist Workers Party Solidarity Spark Spartacist League Working Families Party Workers World Party Working Class Party World Socialist Party of the United States Defunct American Indian Movement American Labor Party American Union of Associationists American Workers Party Black Panther Party Citizens Party Communist League of America Communist League of Struggle Communist Workers' Party Democratic Socialist Federation Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee Farmer–Labor Party Human Rights Party Independent Socialist League International Socialists International Socialist Organization International Workingmen's Association Justice Party Labor Party of the United States Labor Party Maoist Internationalist Movement Red Guards Red Guard Party New American Movement New Party Nonpartisan League Patriot Party People's Party Proletarian Party of America Raza Unida Party Redneck Revolt Revolutionary Socialist League Revolutionary Youth Movement Social Democracy of America Social Democratic Federation Social Democratic Party of America Socialist Labor Party of America Socialist Party of America SDS Weather Underground White Panther Party Workers Party of the United States Young Lords Young Patriots Organization Literature Appeal to Reason Current Affairs Daily Worker Dissent International Socialist Review Jacobin The Jungle Looking Backward Monopoly Capital Monthly Review The Other America A People's History of the United States Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat Voluntary Socialism Why Socialism?

ZNetwork Related topics American Left Anarchism in the United States individualist Labor history Labor laws Labor unions Minimum wage Progressivism in the United States Socialism portal United States portal v t e Many indigenous tribes in North America practiced what Marxists would later call primitive communism , meaning they practiced economic cooperation among the members of their tribes.

[ 21 ] The first European socialists to arrive in North America were a Christian sect known as Labadists , who founded the commune of Bohemia Manor in 1683, about 60 miles (97 km) west of Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . Their communal way of life was based on the communal practices of the apostles and early Christians.

[ 22 ] The first secular American socialists were German Marxist immigrants who arrived following the Revolutions of 1848 , also known as Forty-Eighters .

[ 23 ] Joseph Weydemeyer , a German colleague of Karl Marx who sought refuge in New York in 1851 following the 1848 revolutions, established the first Marxist journal in the U.S., called Die Revolution , but It folded after two issues. In 1852 he established the Proletarierbund , which would become the American Workers' League, the first Marxist organization in the U.S., but it too was short-lived, having failed to attract a native English-speaking membership.

[ 24 ] In 1866, William H. Sylvis formed the National Labor Union (NLU). Frederich Albert Sorge, a German who had found refuge in New York following the 1848 revolutions, took Local No. 5 of the NLU into the First International as Section One in the U.S. By 1872, there were 22 sections, which were able to hold a convention in New York. The General Council of the International moved to New York with Sorge as General Secretary, but following internal conflict, it dissolved in 1876.

[ 25 ] A larger wave of German immigrants followed in the 1870s and 1880s, which included social democratic followers of Ferdinand Lassalle . Lassalle believed that state aid through political action was the road to revolution and was opposed to trade unionism which he saw as futile, believing that according to the iron law of wages employers would only pay subsistence wages. The Lassalleans formed the Social Democratic Party of North America in 1874 and both Marxists and Lassalleans formed the Workingmen's Party of the United States in 1876. When the Lassalleans gained control in 1877, they changed the name to the Socialist Labor Party of North America (SLP). However, many socialists abandoned political action altogether and moved to trade unionism. Two former socialists, Adolph Strasser and Samuel Gompers , formed the American Federation of Labor (AFL) in 1886.

[ 23 ] Anarchists split from the Socialist Labor Party to form the Revolutionary Socialist Party in 1881. By 1885 they had 7,000 members, double the membership of the SLP.

[ 26 ] They were inspired by the International Anarchist Congress of 1881 in London. There were two federations in the United States that pledged adherence to the International. A convention of immigrant anarchists in Chicago formed the International Working People's Association (Black International), while a group of Native Americans in San Francisco formed the International Workingmen's Association (Red International).

[ 27 ] Following a violent demonstration at Haymarket in Chicago in 1886, public opinion turned against anarchism. While very little violence could be attributed to anarchists, the attempted murder of a financier by an anarchist in 1892 and the 1901 assassination of the American president, William McKinley , by a professed anarchist led to the ending of political asylum for anarchists in 1903.

[ 28 ] In 1919, following the Palmer Raids , anarchists were imprisoned and many, including Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman , were deported. Yet anarchism again reached great public notice with the trial of the anarchists Sacco and Vanzetti , who would be executed in 1927.

[ 29 ] Daniel De Leon , who became leader of the SLP in 1890, took it in a Marxist direction.

Eugene V. Debs , who had been an organizer for the American Railway Union formed the rival Social Democratic Party of America in 1898. Members of the SLP, led by Morris Hillquit and opposed to the De Leon's domineering personal rule and his anti-AFL trade union policy joined with the Social Democrats to form the Socialist Party of America (SPA). In 1905, a convention of socialists, anarchists and trade unionists disenchanted with the bureaucracy and craft unionism of the AFL, founded the rival Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), led by such figures as William D. "Big Bill" Haywood , Helen Keller , De Leon and Debs.

[ 30 ] The organizers of the IWW disagreed on whether electoral politics could be employed to liberate the working class. Debs left the IWW in 1906, and De Leon was expelled in 1908, forming a rival "Chicago IWW" that was closely linked to the SLP. The (Minneapolis) IWW's ideology evolved into anarcho-syndicalism , or "revolutionary industrial unionism", and avoided electoral political activity altogether.

[ 31 ] It was successful organizing unskilled migratory workers in the lumber, agriculture, and construction trades in the Western states and immigrant textile workers in the Eastern states and occasionally accepted violence as part of industrial action.

[ 32 ] The SPA was divided between reformers who believed that socialism could be achieved through gradual reform of capitalism and revolutionaries who thought that socialism could only develop after capitalism was overthrown, but the party steered a center path between the two.

[ 33 ] The SPA achieved the peak of its success by 1912 when its presidential candidate received 5.9% of the popular vote. The first Socialist congressman, Victor L. Berger , had been elected in 1910. By the beginning of 1912, there were 1,039 Socialist officeholders, including 56 mayors, 305 aldermen and councilmen, 22 police officials, and some state legislators. Milwaukee, Berkeley, Butte, Schenectady, and Flint were run by Socialists. A Socialist challenger to Gompers took one-third of the vote in a challenge for leadership of the AFL. The SPA had 5 English and 8 foreign-language daily newspapers, 262 English and 36 foreign-language weeklies, and 10 English and 2 foreign-language monthlies.

[ 34 ] American entry into the First World War in 1917 led to a patriotic hysteria aimed against Germans, immigrants, African Americans, class-conscious workers, and Socialists, and the ensuing Espionage Act and Sedition Act were used against them. The government harassed Socialist newspapers, the post office denied the SP use of the mails, and antiwar militants were arrested. Soon Debs and more than sixty IWW leaders were charged under the acts.

[ 35 ] Communist–Socialist split, the New Deal and Red Scares (1910s–1940s) [ edit ] Further information: First Red Scare , McCarthyism , and New Deal coalition This article is part of a series on Modern liberalism in the United States Schools Progressivism Social liberalism American Left Principles Egalitarianism Empiricism Equal opportunity Environmentalism Harm principle Internationalism Mixed economy Social democracy Social equality Social justice Welfare state History Progressive Era Square Deal New Deal coalition New Deal Fair Deal Civil rights movement Great Society New Democrats Third Way Intellectuals Abbott Addams Berle Carson Commager Croly Dewey Du Bois Dworkin Friedan Fukuyama Galbraith Harrington Hofstadter Hook Howe Kazin King Jr.

Krugman Lippmann Nussbaum Rawls Reich Rorty Schlesinger Skinner Sontag Trilling Vidal Politicians Abzug Aguilar Anderson Bayh Bentsen Biden Brooke Brown (Jerry) Brown (Pat) Bryan Buttigieg Case Carter Chase Smith Chisholm Church Clark Clinton (Bill) Clinton (Hillary) Clyburn Conyers Cuomo (Andrew) Cuomo (Mario) Dean Franken Goodell Gore Halpern Harris Hatfield Heinz Hill Hochul Hoyer Humphrey Jackson (Henry) Jackson (Jesse) Javits Jeffords Jeffries Johnson (Hiram) Johnson (Lyndon B.) Jordan Kefauver Kennedy (Joe) Kennedy (John) Kennedy (Robert) Kennedy (Ted) Kerry La Follette La Follette Jr.

La Guardia Lewis Lieu Long Markey Mansfield Mathias McCarthy (Eugene) Milk Mondale Murphy Murray Muskie Nelson (Bill) Nelson (Gaylord) Newsom Norris O'Malley O'Neill Obama Ocasio-Cortez Pelosi Powell Reid Rockefeller Romney (George) Roosevelt (Franklin) Roosevelt (Theodore) Sanders Schumer Shaheen Shapiro Specter Truman Wallace (Henry) Walz Warren Waters Weicker Wellstone Wilson Yarborough Jurists Blackmun Brandeis Brennan Breyer Douglas Ginsburg (Ruth Bader) Hughes Jackson (Ketanji Brown) Kagan Marshall (Thurgood) Sotomayor Souter Stevens Warren (Earl) Williams Activists Armstrong Biden (Jill) Chavez Du Bois Emhoff Ford Friedan Gompers Hamer Ireland Jackson (Jesse) King King Jr.

Lerner MacFarlane McIlrath Miranda Murray Obama (Michelle) Randolph Reuther Roosevelt (Eleanor) Sharpton Steinem Stewart Trotter Parties Active Democratic Party (1930s–present) Defunct Progressive Party 1912–1920 1924–1934 1948–1955 ) Rockefeller Republicans (1930s–1970s) Think tanks Center for American Progress Center for Budget and Policy Priorities Demos Economic Policy Institute Roosevelt Institute Urban Institute Other organizations AFL-CIO ACLU American Constitution Society American Humanist Association Americans United for Separation of Church and State Brennan Center for Justice Congress of Racial Equality Congressional Progressive Caucus Equal Justice Works Fair Fight Action Human Rights Campaign NAACP NARAL NOW Our Revolution People for the American Way Southern Christian Leadership Conference Southern Center for Human Rights SNCC National Urban League Media Journals The American Prospect The Atlantic Mother Jones The Nation The New Republic Rolling Stone Sojourners TV channels MSNBC Websites AlterNet Daily Kos Firedoglake HuffPost Salon Talking Points Memo ThinkProgress The Young Turks Other The Problem with Jon Stewart See also 4B movement Liberal bias in academia Liberal bias in the media Liberal theorists Liberalism in the United States Liberalism portal United States portal v t e In 1919, John Reed , Benjamin Gitlow and other Socialists formed the Communist Labor Party of America , while Socialist foreign sections led by C. E. Ruthenberg formed the Communist Party. These two groups would be combined as the Communist Party USA (CPUSA).

[ 36 ] The Communists organized the Trade Union Unity League to compete with the AFL and claimed to represent 50,000 workers.

[ 37 ] In 1928, following divisions inside the Soviet Union, Jay Lovestone , who had replaced Ruthenberg as general secretary of the CPUSA following his death, joined with William Z. Foster to expel Foster's former allies, James P. Cannon and Max Shachtman , who were followers of Leon Trotsky . Following another Soviet factional dispute, Lovestone and Gitlow were expelled, and Earl Browder became party leader.

[ 38 ] Cannon, Shachtman, and Martin Abern then set up the Trotskyist Communist League of America , and recruited members from the CPUSA.

[ 39 ] The League then merged with A. J. Muste 's American Workers Party in 1934, forming the Workers Party . New members included James Burnham and Sidney Hook .

[ 40 ] By the 1930s the Socialist Party was deeply divided between an Old Guard, led by Hillquit, and younger Militants, who were more sympathetic to the Soviet Union, led by Norman Thomas . The Old Guard left the party to form the Social Democratic Federation .

[ 41 ] Following talks between the Workers Party and the Socialists, members of the Workers Party joined the Socialists in 1936.

[ 42 ] Once inside they operated as a separate faction.

[ 43 ] The Trotskyists were expelled from the Socialist Party the following year and set up the Socialist Workers Party (SWP) and the youth wing of the Socialists, the Young People's Socialist League (YPSL) joined them.

[ 44 ] Shachtman and others were expelled from the SWP in 1940 over their position on the Soviet Union and set up the Workers Party . Within months many members of the new party, including Burnham, had left.

[ 45 ] The Workers Party was renamed the Independent Socialist League (ISL) in 1949 and ceased being a political party.

[ 46 ] Some members of the Socialist Party's Old Guard formed the American Labor Party (ALP) in New York State, with support from the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO). The right-wing of this party broke away in 1944 to form the Liberal Party of New York .

[ 47 ] In the 1936, 1940 and 1944 elections the ALP received 274,000, 417,000, and 496,000 votes in New York State, while the Liberals received 329,000 votes in 1944.

[ 48 ] Civil rights, War on Poverty and the New Left (1950s–1960s) [ edit ] Further information: Civil rights movement , New Left , and War on poverty In 1958, the Socialist Party welcomed former members of the Independent Socialist League , which before its 1956 dissolution had been led by Max Shachtman . Shachtman had developed a neo-Marxist critique of Soviet communism as " bureaucratic collectivism ", a new form of class society that was more oppressive than any form of capitalism. Shachtman's theory was similar to that of many dissidents and refugees from Communism, such as the theory of the " new class " proposed by Yugoslavian dissident Milovan Djilas .

[ 49 ] Shachtman's ISL had attracted youth like Irving Howe , Michael Harrington , [ 50 ] Tom Kahn , and Rachelle Horowitz.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] The YPSL was dissolved, but the party formed a new youth group under the same name.

[ 54 ] Socialist A. Philip Randolph , who led the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom at which Martin Luther King Jr.

delivered his speech " I Have a Dream " Kahn and Horowitz, along with Norman Hill , helped Bayard Rustin with the civil rights movement . Rustin had helped to spread pacificism and nonviolence to leaders of the civil rights movement, like Martin Luther King Jr.

Rustin's circle and A. Philip Randolph organized the 1963 March on Washington , where Martin Luther King delivered his I Have a Dream speech.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] Michael Harrington soon became the most visible socialist in the United States when his The Other America became a best seller, following a long and laudatory New Yorker review by Dwight Macdonald .

[ 59 ] Harrington and other socialists were called to Washington, D.C., to assist the Kennedy Administration and then the Johnson Administration 's war on poverty and Great Society .

[ 60 ] Shachtman, Harrington, Kahn, and Rustin argued advocated a political strategy called "realignment" that prioritized strengthening labor unions and other progressive organizations that were already active in the Democratic Party. Contributing to the day-to-day struggles of the civil rights movement and labor unions had gained socialists credibility and influence, and had helped to push politicians in the Democratic Party towards " social-liberal " or social-democratic positions, at least on civil rights and the war on poverty.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Harrington, Kahn, and Horowitz were officers and staff-persons of the League for Industrial Democracy (LID), which helped to start the New Left Students for a Democratic Society (SDS).

[ 63 ] The three LID officers clashed with the less experienced activists of SDS, like Tom Hayden , when the latter's Port Huron Statement criticized socialist and liberal opposition to communism and criticized the labor movement while promoting students as agents of social change.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] LID and SDS split in 1965, when SDS voted to remove from its constitution the " exclusion clause " that prohibited membership by communists: [ 66 ] The SDS exclusion clause had barred "advocates of or apologists for" "totalitarianism".

[ 67 ] The clause's removal effectively invited "disciplined cadre" to attempt to "take over or paralyze" SDS, as had occurred to mass organizations in the thirties.

[ 68 ] Afterwards, Marxism–Leninism , particularly the Progressive Labor Party , helped to write "the death sentence" for SDS, [ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] which nonetheless had over 100 thousand members at its peak.

SDUSA–SPUSA split, foundation of DSOC–DSA and anti-WTO protests (1970s–1990s) [ edit ] Further information: Black power movement , History of the hippie movement , and New Communist movement In 1972, the Socialist Party voted to rename itself as Social Democrats, USA (SDUSA) by a vote of 73 to 34 at its December Convention; its National Chairmen were Bayard Rustin , a peace and civil-rights leader, and Charles S. Zimmerman , an officer of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union (ILGWU).

[ 73 ] In 1973, Michael Harrington resigned from SDUSA and founded the Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee (DSOC), which attracted many of his followers from the former Socialist Party.

[ 74 ] The same year, David McReynolds and others from the pacifist and immediate-withdrawal wing of the former Socialist Party formed the Socialist Party USA .

[ 75 ] When the SPA became SDUSA, [ 73 ] the majority had 22 of 33 votes on the (January 1973) national committee of SDUSA. Two minority caucuses of SDUSA became associated with two other socialist organizations, each of which was founded later in 1973. Many members of Michael Harrington's ("Coalition") caucus, with 8 of 33 seats on the 1973 SDUSA national committee, [ 76 ] joined Harrington's DSOC. Many members of the Debs caucus, with 2 of 33 seats on SDUSA's 1973 national committee, [ 76 ] joined the Socialist Party of the United States (SPUSA).

From 1979 to 1989, SDUSA members like Tom Kahn organized the AFL-CIO 's fundraising of $300,000, which bought printing presses and other supplies requested by Solidarnosc (Solidarity), the independent labor-union of Poland .

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] SDUSA members helped form a bipartisan coalition (of the Democratic and Republican parties) to support the founding of the National Endowment for Democracy (NED), whose first President was Carl Gershman . The NED publicly allocated $4 million of public aid to Solidarity  through 1989.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] The Democratic Socialists of America was founded in 1982 with the goal of running candidates in Democratic primaries and winning.

[ 82 ] In the 1990s, anarchists attempted to organize across North America around Love and Rage , which drew several hundred activists. By 1997 anarchist organizations began to proliferate.

[ 83 ] One successful anarchist movement was Food Not Bombs , that distributed free vegetarian meals. Anarchists received significant media coverage for their disruption of the 1999 World Trade Organization conference, called the Battle in Seattle , where the Direct Action Network was organized. Most organizations were short-lived and anarchism went into decline following a reaction by the authorities that was increased after the September 11 attacks in 2001.

Occupy, Bernie Sanders campaigns and DSA electoral victories (2000s–present) [ edit ] Further information: Bernie Sanders 2016 presidential campaign and Bernie Sanders 2020 presidential campaign Bernie Sanders is considered one of the most influential political figures of the contemporary American left.

In the 2000 presidential election , Ralph Nader and Winona LaDuke received 2,882,000 votes or 2.74% of the popular vote on the Green Party ticket.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Filmmaker Michael Moore directed a series of popular movies examining the United States and its government policy from a left-wing perspective, including Bowling for Columbine , Sicko , Capitalism: A Love Story and Fahrenheit 9/11 , which was the top grossing documentary film of all time.

[ 86 ] According to The New Republic , Barack Obama's victory in the 2008 United States presidential election "would thrill and then embitter a generation of leftists." with "Millennials curious about socialism [being] drawn to" Obama, "especially as he successfully repelled the avatar of the Democratic establishment, Hillary Clinton. In office, however, Obama veered to the economic center, tapping Rahm Emanuel as his chief of staff and allowing fiscal moderates like Timothy Geithner and Larry Summers to steer the recovery from the economic crash." [ 82 ] In 2011, Occupy Wall Street protests demanding accountability for the 2008 financial crisis and against inequality started in Manhattan , New York City, and soon spread to other cities around the country, becoming known more broadly as the Occupy movement .

[ 87 ] Kshama Sawant was elected to the Seattle City Council as an openly socialist candidate in 2013. She was re-elected in 2015.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] Bernie Sanders , a self-described democratic socialist who runs as an independent , [ 91 ] won his first election as mayor of Burlington, Vermont , in 1981 and was re-elected for three additional terms. He then represented Vermont in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1991 until 2007, and was subsequently elected U.S. Senator for Vermont in 2007, a position which he still holds.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] Although he did not win the 2016 Democratic Party presidential nomination , Sanders won the fifth highest number of primary votes of any candidate in a nomination race, Democratic or Republican, and had caused an upset in Michigan and many other states.

[ 95 ] Democratic Socialists of America member Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez defeated ten-term incumbent Joe Crowley in the NY-14 U.S. House primary and went on to win her general election. She is the youngest woman ever elected to Congress and ran on a progressive platform. The DSA has seen a huge resurgence in growth with Bernie Sanders' 2016 presidential campaign and continues to grow despite having had a membership of around 5,000 members only a decade ago. Unlike other parts of the modern left like the Socialist Equality Party , the DSA is not a political party and its affiliated candidates usually run on a Democratic or independent ticket.

Political currents [ edit ] Democratic socialism, social democracy, and resurgence of progressivism [ edit ] Part of a series on Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Critical theory Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Institutional abuse Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Structural abuse Structural violence Trade union Tripartism Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman İnönü Jaurès Jenkins Jumblatt Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Liebknecht (Karl) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Myrdal (Alva) Myrdal (Gunnar) Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Radbruch Reich Rustin Sánchez Sanders Savage Scholz Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists Network of Social Democracy in Asia Parties CPDS ESDP MLSTP–PSD MSZDP MSZP PES PS Andorra France PSD PSDE PSDSH PSSh S Denmark Latvia SAP SD SDE SDF SDK SDLP SDP Croatia Finland Japan Montenegro SDPI SDSM Smer SOCDEM SocDems SPD SDP BiH SPDS SP SPÖ Related Bevanism Figuerism Kirchnerism Lulism " The Internationale " Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Progressivism Movements 50501 movement BLM Conservation movement ECG Ethical movement Environmental movement Indivisible movement Labour LGBTQ movements #MeToo Occupy Wall Street Reform Social hygiene " The Resistance " Taiwan independence YIMBY Ideas Direct democracy Economic development Environmentalism Broad measures of economic progress Gender equality Green politics Human enhancement Indigenous rights Intersectionality Liberation theology Metaphysics Minority rights LGBTQ rights Multiculturalism Modernism Post Moral universalism Progress Philosophy of progress Progressive education In Latin America Progressive stack Progressive nationalism Progressive taxation Religious liberalism Reparations for slavery In the US Scientific management Scientific progress Social change Social constructivism Social justice Social justice warrior Social organization Social progress List of countries Solidarity unionism Strategic essentialism Sustainable design Ecological engineering Sustainable development Techno-progressivism Welfare state Women's suffrage Workplace democracy Youth rights Variants Christian Confucian Conservative Economic Islamic Neoliberal Techno Ideologies Ecevitism Kirchnerism Lulism Roosevelt Republican Activists Abbott (Edith) Abbott (Grace) Addams Armstrong Ahmed Ajamu X Alexander Alinsky Archer Belmont Bond Brandeis Breckinridge Cambell Cloward Dees Gilman Hammer Hanna Hassan Heumann Huang Jackson (Esther) Jackson (George) Jackson (Jesse) Kahane King (Shaun) King (Jr.) Lennon Ludmer Markey McIlrath Mckesson Page Pearson Roosevelt (Eleanor) Rothblatt Seligmann Smeeth Soros (Alexander) Soros (George) Su Walia Windsor Wong (Alice) Wong (Joshua) Woodhull Commentators Bedborough Brewis Cohen Conover Criado Perez Danskin Duberman Ellis Faust Favreau Fiorentini Glaude Goldberg Hartmann Hasan Jennings Klippenstein Kochinski Krugman Kulinski Levy Lovett Marshall McKay Miller (Stephanie) Moore Morgan Nagle Oliver Pakman Pfeiffer Piker Rather Reich (Robert) Reid Seder Sharpton Smith Stewart Thorn Vietor Withers Wise Wynn Welles Zuckerberg Intellectuals Addams Allen Anderson Benedict Benjamin Ben-Moshe Beveridge Black Blackwell Bornstein Brand Brandeis Butler Carpenter de Condorcet Cornell Davis (Mike) Dewey DiAngelo Douglas (Kelly) Douglas (William) Du Bois Dyson Ellis Fredrickson Friedan Gilmore Hammonds Helms Hirschfeld hooks Jeffries Karenga Keller Kendi McIntosh Merriam Meyers Mills Money Moore Oastler Ostrowski Painter Patterson Peled-Elhanan Rawls Reich (Wilhelm) Roberts Rothstein Saini Sanger Seuss Shaw Stanley Stein TallBear Wachowskis (Lana/Lilly) Wells Welsing West Whedon Wilderson III Zuboff Politicians Albanese Ardern Attlee Boric Brandt Bryan Casar Crockett da Silva Debs Drees Frost Gorbachev Harris Hawkins Hessel Hunter Jackson Jayapal Johnson Kennedy (John F.) Kennedy (Ted) Khanna La Follette La Guardia Lai Layton Lee (Barbara) Lee (Summer) Lewis Lyuh Mamdani Manley Markey McGovern Merkley Mottley Murayama Murphy (Emily) Murphy (Chris) Nader Nehru Norris Norton Obrador Ocasio-Cortez Omar Petro Pocan Pressley Raskin Roosevelt (Franklin) Roosevelt (Theodore) Sánchez Sanders Tlaib Trudeau Tsai Turner Wallace Walz Warren Weaver Wilson (Harold) Yamamoto Yavlinsky Zapatero Literature Looking Backward (1888) Equality (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) Man and Superman (1903) The Universal Kinship (1906) The Open Conspiracy (1928) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) Sexuality in the Cultural Struggle (1936) Beveridge Report (1942) Rules for Radicals (1971) Humanist Manifesto II (1973) Woman Hating (1974) The Handmaid's Tale (1985) Black Athena (1987–2006) The Racial Contract (1997) War Against the Weak (2003) The Audacity of Hope (2006) The Invention of the Jewish People (2008) The New Jim Crow (2010) The Speech (2011) Our Revolution (2016) White Rage (2016) The Color of Law (2017) Inferior (2017) Not All Dead White Men (2018) White Fragility (2018) Invisible Women (2019) How to Be an Antiracist (2019) Race After Technology (2019) Superior (2019) Nice Racism (2021) Organizations Amadeu Antonio Foundation ACLU ASHA BLMGNF CGS Brennan Center for Justice Color of Change Democracy Alliance Ella Baker Center for Human Rights Equality and Human Rights Commission ENAR Fabian Society " Coefficients " FIRM Ford Foundation ILGA InCAR IPPA MacArthur Foundation Movement for Black Lives No one is illegal NWRO New SDS OSF Our Revolution PFAW Progressive Alliance Progressive International Progressive League Progressive Majority ProgressNow Red Flare RWJF SftP Tides Foundation Media CTXT HuffPost Jacobin Jezebel Lucifer Mother Jones MSNBC The Nation New Statesman The Progressive Salon Searchlight The Young Turks Rational Wiki By region Japan South Korea Taiwan United States Related Accelerationism Communitarianism Counterculture of the 1960s Critical theory Democratic capitalism Democratic socialism Red–green alliance Social democracy Left-libertarianism Libertarian socialism Left-wing populism Liberalism Classical radicalism Social liberalism In United States New Left Pink tide Progress Studies Progressive Era Technocracy Unitarian Universalism Woke Politics portal v t e Use of the socialist label became more prominent after Socialist Party of America was founded in 1901.

Eugene Debs ran as the party's presidential candidate five times and received 6% of the popular vote in 1912. The party suffered political repression during World War I due to its pacifist stance and broke into factions over whether or not to support the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia and whether or not to join the Comintern . The Socialist Party was re-formed in the mid-1920s but stopped running candidates after 1956, having been undercut by Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal and the resulting leftward movement of the Democratic Party to its right, and by the Communist Party on its left. In the early 1970s, the party split into tiny factions.

After 1960 the Socialist Party also functioned "as an educational organization".

[ 96 ] Members of the Debs–Thomas Socialist Party helped to develop leaders of social-movement organizations, including the civil-rights movement and the New Left.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] Similarly, contemporary social-democratic and democratic-socialist organizations are known because of their members' activities in other organizations.

When used in a broader sense, the American left can also refer to progressivism as the movement is largely sympathetic to social democratic principles, despite there existing differences in approach between progressive factions such as more capitalist-leaning American social liberals and social democrats versus some anti-capitalist democratic socialists . Following a slow in usage after the Progressive Era and post- F.D.R.

, progressivism had a rebirth in the 21st century with the two-term elections of Barack Obama , [ 99 ] followed by the election of politicians to Obama's left including Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez , Bernie Sanders , and Elizabeth Warren .

[ 100 ] The label has been more broadly embraced by Democratic Party elected officials since the 2016 United States presidential election , since Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton referred to herself as a "progressive who likes to get things done" during a CNN primary debate with Sanders, who also brandished the progressive label and indicated some degree of value consensus despite differing policies.

[ 101 ] The Democratic Party has adopted an increasingly progressive stance with the presidency Joe Biden and his progressive economic agenda .

[ 102 ] Biden's presidency has been considered to be ushering-in more principles of social democracy into American government.

[ 103 ] Democratic Socialists of America [ edit ] Main article: Democratic Socialists of America See also: List of Democratic Socialists of America members who have held office in the United States Michael Harrington resigned from Social Democrats, USA early in 1973. He rejected the SDUSA (majority Socialist Party) position on the Vietnam War, which demanded an end to bombings and a negotiated peace settlement. Harrington called rather for an immediate cease fire and immediate withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam.

[ 104 ] Even before the December 1972 convention, Michael Harrington had resigned as an Honorary Chairperson of the Socialist Party.

[ 73 ] In the early spring of 1973, he resigned his membership in SDUSA. That same year, Harrington and his supporters formed the Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee (DSOC). At its start, DSOC had 840 members, of which 2 percent served on its national board; approximately 200 had been members of Social Democrats, USA or its predecessors whose membership was then 1,800, according to a 1973 profile of Harrington.

[ 105 ] The DSOC became a member of the Socialist International . It supported progressive Democrats including DSOC member Congressman Ron Dellums and worked to help network activists in the Democratic Party and in labor unions.

[ 106 ] In 1982, the DSOC established the Democratic Socialists of America (DSA) upon merging with the New American Movement , an organization of democratic socialists mostly from the New Left.

[ 107 ] Its high-profile members included Congressman Major Owens , Congresswoman Rashida Tlaib , Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez , Congressman Ron Dellums, multiple state legislators ( Sara Innamorato , Lee J. Carter , Summer Lee , Julia Salazar ), and William Winpisinger ,  President of the International Association of Machinists .

[ 108 ] [ circular reference ] In 2019 at the Democratic Socialists of America convention in Atlanta, Georgia, DSA confirmed its support for Senator Bernie Sanders in the 2020 United States presidential election .

[ 109 ] Since the 2016 United States presidential election , the DSA has grown to more than 50,000 members, making it the largest socialist organization in the United States.

[ 110 ] In 2017, DSA left the Socialist International, citing its support of neoliberal economic policies.

[ 111 ] Social Democrats, USA [ edit ] Main article: Social Democrats, USA The Socialist Party of America changed its name to Social Democrats, USA (SDUSA) in 1972.

[ 73 ] In electoral politics, SDUSA's National Co-chairman Bayard Rustin stated that its goal was to transform the Democratic Party into a social-democratic party.

[ 112 ] SDUSA sponsored a conferences that featured discussions and debates over proposed resolutions, some of which were adopted as organizational statements. For these conferences, SDUSA invited a range of academic, political, and labor-union leaders. These meetings also functioned as reunions for political activists and intellectuals, some of whom worked together for decades.

[ 113 ] Many SDUSA members served as organizational leaders, especially in labor unions. Rustin served as President of the A. Philip Randolph Institute , [ 114 ] and was succeeded by Norman Hill .

Tom Kahn served as Director of International Affairs for the AFL–CIO.

[ 58 ] Sandra Feldman served as President of the American Federation of Teachers (AFT).

[ 115 ] Rachelle Horowitz served as Political Director for the AFT and serves on the board for the National Democratic Institute . Other members of SDUSA specialized in international politics.

Penn Kemble served as the acting director of the U.S. Information Agency in the Presidency of Bill Clinton .

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] After having served as the U.S. Representative to the U.N.'s Committee on human rights during the first Reagan Administration , [ 118 ] Carl Gershman has served as the President of the National Endowment for Democracy .

[ 119 ] Socialist Party USA [ edit ] Main article: Socialist Party USA In the Socialist Party before 1973, members of the Debs Caucus opposed endorsing or otherwise supporting Democratic Party candidates. They began working outside the Socialist Party with antiwar groups such as the Students for a Democratic Society . Some locals voted to disaffiliate with SDUSA and more members resigned; they re-organized as the Socialist Party USA (SPUSA) while continuing to operate the old Debs Caucus paper, the Socialist Tribune , later renamed The Socialist . The SPUSA continues to run local and national candidates, including Dan La Botz ' 2010 campaign for US Senate in Ohio that won over 25,000 votes and Pat Noble's successful election onto the Red Bank Regional High School Board of Education in 2012 and subsequent re-election in 2015. The SPUSA has run or endorsed a presidential ticket in every election since its founding, most recently nominating Greens party co-founder and activist Howie Hawkins in the 2020 presidential election.

Part of a series on Christian democracy Principles Catholic social teaching Christian corporatism Christian ethics Christian humanism Common good Communitarianism Conservatism Christian Compassionate Liberal Progressive Social Consistent life ethic Cultural mandate Culture of life Dignity of labor Distributism Economic progressivism Familialism Human dignity Just war theory Liberalism Christian Catholicism Conservative Ordo Social Mixed economy Multiculturalism Neo-Calvinism Neo-Thomism Option for the poor Pan-European identity Person Dignity Theory Popularism Public morality Religious liberty Friendly separation of church and state Religious pluralism Social Gospel Social justice Social market economy Solidarity Sphere sovereignty Stewardship Environmentalism Environmental protection Subsidiarity in Catholicism Welfare State Philosophers Arizmendiarrieta Baader Barth Belloc Benedict XV Berggrav Blond Bonhoeffer Brague Cardijn Chesterton Day Dooyeweerd Escrivá Gebhardt Gilson Görres Groen Guardini Habsburg John XXIII John Paul II Ketteler De Koninck Korfanty Lamennais Leo XIII Leo XIV Lewis Manning Maritain Merton Milani Mounier Müller-Armack Murray Nell-Breuning Newman Ozanam Paul VI Pesch Pieper Pius XI Pottier Röpke Sheen Spaemann Stein Stomma Sturzo Tawney Tischner Toniolo Vogelsang Weigel Williams Politicians Adenauer Andreotti Antall Aznar Bayrou Beel Bidault Biden Bondevik Busch Buzek Caldera Clerides Cosgrave Daul De Gasperi Dehaene Donnelly Dzurinda Erhard Erzberger Fenech Adami Field Frei Gemayel Groen Haller Joseph Juncker Kaas Ketteler Klausener Kohl Komorowski Korfanty Kramp-Karrenbauer Kurz Kuyper Lacalle Pou Laschet Letta Leuger Lipinski Lubbers Martens Mattarella Mazowiecki Merkel Merz Metsola Mikołajczyk Moro Nile Quadros Pastrana Peterle Pethrus Popiel Portas Pöttering Prodi Raab Schäffer Schuman Schüssel Seipel Söder Stegerwald Stomma Strauss Sturzo Tajani Tindemans Vogelsang von der Leyen Wałęsa Weber Werner Windthorst Parties American Solidarity Party Austrian People's Party Christian Democracy Christian Democratic Appeal Christian Democratic and Flemish Christian Democratic Party Christian Democratic Party of Uruguay Christian Democratic People's Party Christian-Democratic Rebirth Party Christian Democratic Union of Germany Christian Social People's Party Christian Social Union in Bavaria Christian Union Centre Party Centrists for Europe Civic Platform Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Rally Democrats Fianna Fáil Fine Gael Kataeb Party National Action Party National Party Nationalist Party New Democracy Patriotic Union People's Party Polish People's Party Popular Republican Movement Prohibition Party VMRO-DPMNE Organizations Catholic Action Centrist Democrat International Christian Democrat Organization of America European People's Party European Christian Political Party Konrad Adenauer Foundation Conservative Christian Fellowship Centre for European Studies European Ideas Network Schuman Foundation Center for Public Justice Paneuropean Union World Movement of Christian Workers SIPDIC Documents Rerum novarum Populorum progressio Graves de communi re Quadragesimo anno Laborem exercens Sollicitudo rei socialis Centesimus annus Laudato si' Related topics Catholic Church and politics Christian left Christian anarchism Christian communism Christian socialism Christian right Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Theoconservatism Clerical philosophers Ethical socialism Integralism Illiberal democracy Progressive Christianity Religious democracy Buddhist Islamic Jewish Mormon Social democracy Traditionalist Catholicism Christianity portal Politics portal v t e Christian democracy [ edit ] American Solidarity Party [ edit ] Main article: American Solidarity Party The American Solidarity Party (ASP) is a fiscally progressive and socially conservative Christian-democratic political party with a social-democratic faction in the United States.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] It favors a social market economy with a distributist flavor, [ 121 ] [ 122 ] and seeks "widespread economic participation and ownership" through supporting small business, [ 122 ] as well as providing a social safety net programs. It also has a minor anti-capitalism faction.

[ 123 ] The party's name was inspired by Solidarity ( Solidarnosc ), the independent labor union of Poland.

[ 124 ] Green politics [ edit ] Green Party of the United States [ edit ] Main article: Green Party of the United States Part of a series on Green politics Core topics Climate change litigation Fossil fuels lobby Green party List of topics Politics of climate change Four pillars Ecological wisdom Social justice Grassroots democracy Nonviolence Perspectives Alter-globalization Bright green environmentalism Criticisms of globalization Deep ecology Degrowth Dirty hands Disinvestment Ecoauthoritarianism Eco-capitalism Ecocentrism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green Zionism Social ecology Queer ecology Intellectuals Abbey Albert Anderson Bari Best Beuys Berry Bookchin Brown (Lester) Brower Carson Dodds d'Eaubonne Gandhi George Hawken Jackson Khosla Klein Kovel LaDuke Latouche Linkola Löwy Maathai Mason Næss Negri Nussbaum Porritt Raworth Rendueles Salleh Sassen Schumacher Scruton Shiva Singer Snyder Sukhdev Thoreau Zerzan Politicians Bandt Bausch Benčić Bennett Betancourt Brélaz Brown (Bob) Camejo Cohn-Bendit Cuffe Emsis Fajardo Feinstein Fischer Frassoni Grodzka Habeck Halsema Harris Hourigan Joly Kelly Kogler Kretschmann Kuhn Lalonde Lipietz López Lucas Lunacek Martin Manning May Nader O'Gorman Roth Schmidt-Nielsen Silva Sirkis Stein Trittin Van der Bellen Vējonis Wall Organizations Asia Pacific Greens Federation European Green Party Federation of Green Parties of Africa Federation of the Green Parties of the Americas Federation of Young European Greens Global Greens Global Young Greens World Ecological Parties Related topics Carbon fee and dividend Carbon tax Circular economy Climate change mitigation Climate finance Climate justice Climate target Conservation movement Corporate political activism Eco-investing Ecological economics Ecological modernization Ecomodernism Eco-tariff Ecotax Eco-terrorism Environmental conflict effects of agriculture effects of aviation finance issues justice movement planning pricing reform racism technology Environmentalism opposition Environmental skepticism Stewardship in music Fossil fuel phase-out Green development economy growth grabbing greening imperialism industrial policy infrastructure job New Deal recovery retrofit state theory transport hierarchy vehicle washing Localism Low-carbon economy List of environmental incidents conflicts killings Political ecology Progressivism Renewable energy Sustainable design development energy engineering refurbishment transport War on coal Water conflict Environment portal Politics portal v t e The Green Party of the United States is an eco-socialist party whose platform emphasizes environmentalism, non-hierarchical participatory democracy, social justice, respect for diversity, peace, and nonviolence.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 128 ] [ 129 ] At their 2016 party convention in Houston, the party changed its platform to support a decentralized form of eco-socialism based on workplace democracy .

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] In the 2000 presidential election , Ralph Nader and Winona LaDuke received 2,882,955 votes or 2.74% of the popular vote.

[ 132 ] In the 2016 election , Green Party presidential candidate Jill Stein and running mate Ajamu Baraka qualified to be on the ballot in 44 states and the District of Columbia, with 3 additional states allowing write-in votes.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] The Greens/Green Party USA is a much smaller group focusing on education and local, grassroots organizing.

Anarchism [ edit ] Main article: Anarchism in the United States Anarchism in the United States first emerged from individualistic , free-thinking , and utopian socialism as typified by the work of thinkers such as Josiah Warren and Henry David Thoreau . This was overshadowed by a mass, cosmopolitan, and working-class movement between the 1880s and 1940s, whose members were mostly recent immigrants, including those of German, Italian, Jewish, Mexican, and Russian descent.

[ 135 ] Prominent figures of this period include Albert Parsons and Lucy Parsons , Emma Goldman , Carlo Tresca , and Ricardo Flores Magón . The anarchist movement achieved notoriety due to violent clashes with police , assassinations , and sensational Red Scare propaganda, but most anarchist activity took place in the realm of agitation and labor organizing among largely immigrant workers. Anarchist organizations include: Anarchist Black Cross [ 136 ] Anarchist People of Color Black Rose Anarchist Federation/Federación Anarquista Rosa Negra First of May Anarchist Alliance Food Not Bombs [ 136 ] Green Mountain Anarchist Collective Industrial Workers of the World [ 137 ] International Working People's Association Local to Global Justice [ 136 ] Revolutionary Socialist League Union of Russian Workers Workers Solidarity Alliance [ 136 ] Youth International Party De Leonism [ edit ] De Leonism , occasionally known as Marxism–De Leonism, is a libertarian Marxist ideological variant developed by the American activist Daniel De Leon .

Socialist Labor Party [ edit ] Main article: Socialist Labor Party of America Founded in 1876, the Socialist Labor Party (SLP) was a reformist party but adopted the theories of Karl Marx and Daniel De Leon in 1900, leading to the defection of reformers to the new Socialist Party of America (SPA). It contested elections, including every election for President of the United States from 1892 to 1976. Some of its prominent members included Jack London and James Connolly . By 2009 it had lost its premises and ceased publishing its newspaper, The People .

[ 138 ] In 1970, a group of dissidents left the SLP to form Socialist Reconstruction. Socialist Reconstruction then expelled some of its dissidents, who formed the Socialist Forum Group.

[ 139 ] Marxism–Leninism [ edit ] Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Marxism–Leninism has been advocated and practiced by American communists of many kinds, including pro-Soviet , Trotskyist , Maoist , or independent .

[ 140 ] American Party of Labor [ edit ] The American Party of Labor was founded in 2008 and adheres to Hoxhaism .

[ 141 ] It has its origins in the activities of the American communist Jack Shulman , former secretary of Communist Party USA leader William Z. Foster ; and the British Marxist-Leninist Bill Bland . Members of the American Party of Labor had previously been active in Alliance Marxist-Leninist and International Struggle Marxist-Leninist, two organizations founded by Shulman and Bland. The present-day APL sees itself as upholding and continuing the work of Shulman and Bland. Although not a formal member of the International Conference of Marxist–Leninist Parties and Organizations (Unity & Struggle), the APL is generally supportive of its line and maintains friendly relations with a number of foreign communist parties including the Chilean Communist Party (Proletarian Action) , the Turkish Labour Party (EMEP), the Labour Party of Iran , and the Communist Party of Great Britain (Marxist–Leninist) .

It has been involved in a number of events, such as a 2013 protest against the Golden Dawn in Chicago , [ 142 ] a 2014 meeting on Ukraine [ 143 ] and a protest against Donald Trump at the 2016 Republican National Convention .

[ 144 ] A significant program of the American Party of Labor is "Red Aid: Service to the People", which involves providing food, clothing and other assistance to the poor and homeless in impoverished communities, and has been established in multiple US cities.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] [ 147 ] Its current organ, The Red Phoenix , carries articles concerning contemporary political issues and theoretical and historical questions.

Communist Party USA [ edit ] Main article: Communist Party USA Established in 1919, the Communist Party USA (CPUSA) claimed a membership of 100,000 in 1939 and maintained a membership over 50,000 until the 1950s. However, the 1956 invasion of Hungary, McCarthyism and investigations by the House Unamerican Activities Committee (HUAC) contributed to its steady decline despite a brief increase in membership from the mid-1960s. Its estimated membership in 1996 was between 4,000 and 5,000.

[ 148 ] From the 1940s, the FBI attempted to disrupt the CPUSA, including through its Counter-Intelligence Program ( COINTELPRO ).

[ 149 ] Several Communist front organizations founded in the 1950s continued to operate at least into the 1990s, notably the Veterans of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade , the American Committee for the Protection of Foreign Born , the Labor Research Association , the National Council of American-Soviet Friendship , and the U.S. Peace Council. Other groups with less direct links to the CPUSA include the National Lawyers Guild , the National Emergency Civil Liberties Committee , and the Center for Constitutional Rights .

[ 150 ] Many leading members of the New Left , including some members of the Weather Underground and the May 19th Communist Organization were members of the National Lawyers Guild.

[ 151 ] However, CPUSA attempts to influence the New Left were mostly unsuccessful.

[ 152 ] The CPUSA attracted media attention in the 1970s with the membership of the high-profile activist, Angela Davis .

[ 153 ] The CPUSA publishes the People's World and Political Affairs . Beginning in 1988, the CPUSA stopped running candidates for President of the United States.

[ 154 ] After the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, it was found that the Soviet Union had provided funding to the CPUSA throughout its history. The CPUSA had always supported the positions of the Soviet Union.

[ 155 ] Freedom Road Socialist Organization [ edit ] Main article: Freedom Road Socialist Organization The Freedom Road Socialist Organization (FRSO) was founded in 1985 through the mergers of Maoist and Marxist–Leninist organizations active near the end of the New Communist Movement . The FRSO grew out of an initial merger of the Proletarian Unity League and the Revolutionary Workers Headquarters. Some years later, the Organization for Revolutionary Unity and the Amilcar Cabral/Paul Robeson Collective merged into the FRSO.

In 1999, the FRSO split into two organizations, both of which retain the FRSO name to this day. The split primarily concerned the organization's continued adherence to Marxism–Leninism, with one side of the FRSO upholding Marxism–Leninism and the other side preferring to pursue a strategy of regrouping and rebuilding the left in the United States. These organizations are commonly identified through their publications, which are Fight Back! News and Freedom Road , and their websites, (frso.org) and (freedomroad.org), respectively.

In 2010, members of the FRSO (frso.org) and other anti-war and international solidarity activists were raided by the FBI. Secret documents left by the FBI revealed that agents planned to question activists about their involvement in the FRSO (frso.org) and their international solidarity work related to Colombia and Palestine .

[ 156 ] The FRSO (frso.org) works in the committee to Stop FBI Repression.

Both FRSO groups continue to uphold the right of national self-determination for African-Americans and Chicanos . The FRSO (frso.org) works in the labor movement, the student movement, and the oppressed nationalities movement.

Party for Socialism and Liberation [ edit ] Main article: Party for Socialism and Liberation The Party for Socialism and Liberation was formed in 2004 as a result of a split in the Workers World Party. The San Francisco, Los Angeles and Washington, D.C. branches left almost in their entirety and the party has grown significantly since then.

[ citation needed ] The new party took control of the Worker's World Party front organization Act Now to Stop War and End Racism (A.N.S.W.E.R.) at the time of the split.

[ 157 ] Following the 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, A.N.S.W.E.R. organized the "Seize BP" campaign, which organized demonstrations calling for the U.S. federal government to seize BP's assets and place them in trust to pay for damages.

[ 158 ] The PSL has also been active in the antiracist movement, participating in protests across the country throughout 2020.

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] Several organizers in their Denver branch were arrested for their involvement in protests against the death of Elijah McClain .

[ 161 ] Progressive Labor Party [ edit ] Main article: Progressive Labor Party (United States) The Progressive Labor Party (PL) was formed as the Progressive Labor Movement in 1962 by a group of former members of the Communist Party USA, most of whom had quit or been expelled for supporting China in the Sino-Soviet split. To them, the Soviet Union was imperialist. They competed with the CP and SWP for influence in the anti-war movement and the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), forming the May 2 Movement as its anti-war front organization.

[ 162 ] Its major publications are Progressive Labor and the Marxist–Leninist Quarterly .

[ 163 ] They later abandoned Maoism, refusing to follow the line of any foreign country and formed the front group, the International Committee Against Racism (InCAR), in 1973. Much of their activity included violent confrontations against far-right groups, such as Nazis and Klansmen.

[ 164 ] While membership in 1978 was about 1,500, by 1996 it had fallen below 500.

[ 165 ] Revolutionary Communist Party, USA [ edit ] Main article: Revolutionary Communist Party, USA Formed in 1969 as the Bay Area Revolutionary Union (BARU), the Revolutionary Communist Party (RCP) had almost one thousand members in twenty-five states by 1975. Its main founder and long-time leader, Bob Avakian , a Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) organizer had fought off attempts for control of the SDS by the Progressive Labor Party. The party has been unwaveringly Maoist .

[ 166 ] Working through the U.S.-China Peoples Friendship Association , the party arranged for visits by Americans to China.

[ 167 ] Their newspaper, Revolutionary Worker has featured articles supportive of Albania and North Korea, while the party, unusually for the left, has been hostile to school busing , the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), and gay rights. The party fell out of favour with the Chinese government after the death of Mao Zedong , partly because of the personality cult of the RCP leader. By the mid-1990s the party numbered fewer than 500 members.

[ 168 ] Workers World Party [ edit ] Main article: Workers World Party The Workers World Party (WWP) was formed in 1958 by fewer than one hundred people who left the Socialist Workers Party after the SWP supported socialists in New York State elections. Their publication is Workers World . The party's position has developed from Trotskyism to independent Marxism–Leninism, supporting all Marxist states. They have been active in organizing protests against far-right groups. They were also notable for being the main US supporter of the former Ethiopian communist government . In the 1990s their membership was estimated at 200.

[ 169 ] Their front group, Act Now to Stop War and End Racism (A.N.S.W.E.R.) organized the early protests against the war in Iraq, which brought hundreds of thousands of protesters to Washington, D.C. before the war had even begun.

[ 170 ] However, following a split in the party in 2004, some members left to form the Party for Socialism and Liberation , taking leadership of A.N.S.W.E.R. with them. The Workers World Party then formed the Troops Out Now Coalition .

[ 157 ] Trotskyism [ edit ] Many Trotskyist parties and organizations exist that advocate communism. These groups are distinct from Marxist–Leninist groups in that they generally adhere to the theory and writings of Leon Trotsky . Many owe their organizational heritage to the Socialist Workers Party, which emerged as a split-off from the CP.

Freedom Socialist Party [ edit ] Main article: Freedom Socialist Party The Freedom Socialist Party began in 1966 as the Seattle branch of the Socialist Workers Party that had split from the party and joined with others who had not belonged to the SWP. They differed with the SWP on the role of African Americans, whom they saw as being the future vanguard of the revolution, and of women, emphasizing their rights, which they called " socialist feminism ".

Clara Fraser came to lead the party and was to form the group Radical Women .

[ 171 ] Revolutionary Communists of America (RCA) [ edit ] The Revolutionary Communists of America are the US Section of the Revolutionary Communist International (RCI) (formerly International Marxist Tendency or IMT). They are a Trotskyist party founded in 2024, [ 172 ] with their preceding organization having existed in the US since 2002. The RCA are inspired by the theories of Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels , Vladimir Lenin , and Leon Trotsky , as well as British Trotskyist Ted Grant , and publish a regular newspaper called The Communist (formerly Socialist Appeal and Socialist Revolution ). The party-affiliated publishing house is called Marxist Books . The party argues for a break with the Democrats and Republicans, advocates for political class-independence of the working class based on a socialist program and aims to build a capable revolutionary leadership.

[ 173 ] International Socialist Organization [ edit ] Main article: International Socialist Organization The International Socialist Organization (ISO) was a group founded in 1977 as a section of the International Socialist Tendency (IST). The organization held Leninist positions on imperialism and considered itself a vanguard party , preparing the ground for a revolutionary party to hypothetically succeed it. The organization held a Trotskyist critique of nominally socialist states, which it considered class societies. In contrast to this, the ISO advocated the tradition of "socialism from below". It was strongly influenced by the perspectives of Hal Draper and Tony Cliff . It broke from the IST in 2001 but continued to exist as an independent organization for the next eighteen years.

The ISO emphasized educational work on the socialist tradition. Branches also took part in activism against the Iraq War , against police brutality, against the death penalty, and in labor strikes, among other social movements. At its peak in 2013, the group had as many as 1500 members. The organization argued that it was the largest revolutionary socialist group in the United States at that time. The ISO found itself in crisis early 2019, largely stemming from a scandal over the leadership's response to a 2013 sexual misconduct case. The ISO voted to dissolve itself in March 2019.

Socialist Action [ edit ] Main article: Socialist Action (United States) Socialist Action was formed in 1983 by members, almost all of whom had been expelled from the Socialist Workers Party. Its members remained loyal to Trotskyist principles, including " permanent revolution ", that they claimed the SWP had abandoned. Strongly critical of authoritarian regimes, including the Soviet Union and Iran, it championed socialist revolution in third world countries. It was an active participant in the Cleveland Emergency National Conference in September 1984, set up to challenge American policy in Central America, and played a major role in organizing demonstrations against American action against the Sandanista rebels in Nicaragua.

[ 174 ] Socialist Alternative [ edit ] Main article: Socialist Alternative (United States) Although Socialist Alternative has sometimes pursued a democratic socialist strategy, most notably in Seattle where Kshama Sawant was elected to the Seattle City Council as an openly socialist candidate in 2013., [ 88 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] it identifies as a Trotskyist political organization. Socialist Alternative is the U.S. affiliate of the International Socialist Alternative , which is a Brussels-based international of Trotskyist political parties.

Socialist Equality Party [ edit ] Main article: Socialist Equality Party (United States) The Socialist Equality Party (SEP) is a political party that formed after a 1964 ideological rupture with Socialist Workers Party over the issue of their support of the Fidel Castro government in Cuba, The SEP are composed of Trotskyists and are affiliated with the World Socialist Web Site .

Socialist Workers Party [ edit ] Main article: Socialist Workers Party (United States) With fewer than one thousand members in 1996, the Socialist Worker's Party (SWP) was the second-largest Marxist–Leninist party in the United States.

[ 175 ] Formed by supporters of Leon Trotsky , they believed that the Soviet Union and other Communist states remained "worker's states" and should be defended against reactionary forces, although their leadership had sold out the workers. They became members of the Trotskyist Fourth International .

[ 176 ] Their publications include The Militant and a theoretical journal, the International Socialist Review .

[ 177 ] Two groups that broke with the SWP in the 1960s were the Spartacist League and the Workers League (which would later evolve into the Socialist Equality Party ).

[ 178 ] The SWP has been involved in numerous violent scuffles.

[ 179 ] In 1970 the party successfully sued the FBI for COINTELPRO, where the FBI opened and copied mail, planted informants, wiretapped members' homes, bugged conventions, and broke into party offices.

[ 180 ] The party fields candidates for President of the United States.

[ 179 ] Solidarity [ edit ] Main article: Solidarity (United States) Solidarity is a socialist organization associated with the journal Against the Current . Solidarity is an organizational descendant of International Socialists , a Trotskyist organization based on the proposition that the Soviet Union was not a "degenerated workers' state" (as in orthodox Trotskyism ) but rather " bureaucratic collectivism ", a new and especially repressive class society.

[ 181 ] Spartacist League [ edit ] Main articles: International Communist League (Fourth Internationalist) and Spartacist League (US) The Spartacist League was formed in 1966 by members of the Socialist Workers Party who had been expelled two years earlier after accusing the SWP of adopting "petty bourgeois ideology". Beginning with a membership of around 75, their numbers dropped to 40 by 1969 although they grew to several hundred in the early 1970s, with Maoists disillusioned with China's new foreign policy joining the group.

[ 182 ] The League saw the Soviet Union as a " deformed workers' state ", and supported it over some policies. It is committed to Trotskyist " permanent revolution ", rejecting Mao's peasant guerilla warfare model. The group's publication is Workers Vanguard . Much of the group's activity has involved stopping Ku Klux Klan and Nazi rallies.

[ 182 ] Notable figures and current publications [ edit ] People [ edit ] Ed Asner – actor Paul Auster – writer Bob Avakian – chairman of the Revolutionary Communist Party, USA Bill Ayers – co-founder and co-leader of the Weather Underground John Bachtell – chairman of the Communist Party USA General Baker – leader of the League of Revolutionary Black Workers Roger Nash Baldwin – founding member of the ACLU Jack Barnes – Socialist Workers Party leader Harry Belafonte – singer, civil rights and social activist Edward Bellamy – utopian socialist author Victor L. Berger – Socialist Party of America congressman Grace Lee Boggs – Chinese-American Marxist James Boggs – African-American Marxist Murray Bookchin – anarchist and libertarian socialist theorist Earl Browder – Communist Party leader James P. Cannon – leader of the Socialist Workers Party Chevy Chase – comedian Cesar Chavez – United Farm Workers leader Noam Chomsky – linguistics academic and anarchist activist John Cusack – actor Angela Davis – Communist Party leader Dorothy Day – founding member of the Catholic Worker Movement Claudia De la Cruz – Activist, Educator, Party for Socialism and Liberation candidate in 2024 Daniel De Leon – Marxist theoretician and newspaper editor Eugene V. Debs – Socialist Party of America leader and presidential candidate David Dellinger – Socialist Party of America leader and pacifist Ron Dellums – Socialist congressman from California Farrell Dobbs – leader of the Socialist Workers Party Hal Draper – Young Peoples Socialist League leader and socialist intellectual W. E. B. Du Bois – Sociologist, historian, and civil rights activist Barbara Ehrenreich – co-chair of Democratic Socialists of America Albert Einstein – physicist Jane Fonda – New Left antiwar activist, actor, CED founder, climate activist William Z. Foster – Communist Party leader Al Franken – comedian and former Senator Gil Green – Young Communist and Communist Party USA leader Danny Glover – American actor Emma Goldman – anarchist activist Laurence Gronlund – utopian socialist author Horace Greeley – Utopian socialist newspaper editor, representative and Presidential candidate Gus Hall – Communist Party leader and presidential candidate Dashiell Hammett – author Fred Hampton – Black Panther Michael Harrington – democratic socialist activist Howie Hawkins – cofounder of Green Party US and 2020 presidential candidate of both it and SPUSA Tom Hayden – New Left activist and California assemblyman Bill Haywood – IWW labor activist Chris Hedges – dissident academic and Presbyterian Minister Alger Hiss – State Department official, accused Soviet spy Abbie Hoffman – Yippie activist Irving Howe – democratic socialist activist Mary Harris "Mother" Jones – IWW labor activist Tom Kahn – social democratic, civil rights and labor activist Helen Keller – author and activist Martin Luther King Jr.

– civil rights activist Gloria La Riva – ten-time perennial presidential candidate for the Workers World Party and the Party for Socialism and Liberation Jack London – author Meyer London – Socialist Party of America congressman Vito Marcantonio – Socialist congressman from New York Sam Marcy – chairman of the Workers World Party Michael Moore – award-winning documentary filmmaker, author, podcaster A. J. Muste – pacifist, labor and civil rights activist Immanuel Ness – labor activist Huey P. Newton – leader of the Black Panther Party David North – World Socialist Web Site Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez – Representative for New York's 14th congressional district and democratic socialist Robert Dale Owen – Utopian socialist, Indiana politician Michael Parenti – academic Sean Penn – actor A. Philip Randolph – civil rights and labor leader Adolph L. Reed Jr.

– political scientist, academic, and Marxist John Reed – journalist Paul Robeson – actor, civil rights and labor activist Tim Robbins – actor Jerry Rubin – Yippie activist Mark Ruffalo – actor Bayard Rustin – pacifist and civil rights activist C. E. Ruthenberg – Communist Party leader Bernie Sanders – Independent democratic socialist Senator and Democratic presidential candidate in the 2016 and 2020 presidential elections Margaret Sanger – reproductive rights and labor activist Susan Sarandon – actor Kshama Sawant – Trotskyist activist and member of the Seattle City Council Max Shachtman – Marxist theorist and activist Irwin Silber – Marxist journalist Upton Sinclair – author and socialist politician Jill Stein – Green Party presidential candidate I. F. Stone – journalist Oliver Stone – director Paul Sweezy – Marxist economist and journalist Norman Thomas – Socialist Party of America leader and presidential candidate Benjamin Tucker – anarchist and libertarian socialist thinker Mark Twain – author Henry A. Wallace – Former Vice President and presidential candidate of the Progressive Party in 1948.

Cornel West – dissident academic Tim Wohlforth – Trotskyist leader Richard D. Wolff – academic Malcolm X – civil rights activist Howard Zinn – academic Publications [ edit ] Main article: List of alternative media (U.S. political left) The New Hampshire Gazette , fortnightly, press run 5,500, founded 1756.

[ 183 ] The Nation , weekly, established 1865. Circulation 190,000.

[ 183 ] The Progressive , monthly, established 1909.

[ 183 ] Monthly Review , monthly, established 1949. Circulation 7,000.

[ 183 ] Dissent , quarterly, established 1954.

[ 183 ] Texas Observer , established 1954.

[ 183 ] Fifth Estate , quarterly, established 1965.

[ 183 ] Review of Radical Political Economics , quarterly, established 1968.

Dollars & Sense , bimonthly, established 1974.

[ 183 ] Mother Jones , bimonthly, established 1974.

[ 183 ] In These Times , monthly, established 1976. Circulation 17,000.

[ 183 ] Z Magazine , monthly established 1977. Circulation 10,000 print and 6,000 online subscribers.

[ 183 ] Labor Notes , monthly, established 1979.

Utne Reader , bimonthly, established 1984. Circulation 150,000.

[ 183 ] Left Business Observer , established 1986.

The American Prospect , monthly, established 1990. Circulation 55,000.

[ 183 ] * The Baffler , established 1988.

[ 183 ] CounterPunch , semi-monthly, established 1994.

CrimethInc.

, anarchist publishing collective established 1996.

Working USA , quarterly, established 1997.

[ 184 ] The Indypendent , published 17 times per year, established 2000.

[ 183 ] Truthout , website, established 2001.

Left Turn , website, established 2001.

[ 183 ] Socialist Revolution [ 185 ] (formerly Socialist Appeal ), established 2001.

Black Commentator , web-only weekly, established 2002.

[ 183 ] Jacobin , established 2010.

It's Going Down , established 2016.

Public officeholders [ edit ] Communist Party USA [ edit ] Wisconsin [ edit ] Wahsayah Whitebird – Member of the Ashland, Wisconsin city-council.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] Green Party of the United States [ edit ] There have been at least 65 officeholders for the Green Party of the United States.

[ 188 ] Arkansas [ edit ] Alvin Clay – Justice of the Peace Mississippi County, District 6 Elected: 2012 Kade Holliday – County Clerk Craighead County, Arkansas Elected: 2012 Roger Watkins – Constable Craighead County, District 5 Elected: 2012 California [ edit ] Dan Hamburg – Board of Supervisors, District 5, Mendocino County Bruce Delgado – Mayor, Marina (Monterey County) Larry Bragman – Town Council, Fairfax (Marin County) Renée Goddard – Town Council, Fairfax (Marin County) John Reed – Town Council, Fairfax (Marin County) Gayle Mclaughlin – City Council, Richmond (Contra Costa) Deborah Heathersone – Town Council, Point Arena (Mendocino County) Paul Pitino – Town Council, Arcata (Humboldt County) John Keener (politician)|John Keener – City Council, Pacifica (San Mateo County) Vahe Peroomian – Board of Trustees, Glendale Community College District, Glendale (Los Angeles County) Amy Martenson – Board of Trustees, District 2, Napa Valley College, Napa (Napa County) April Clary – Board of Trustees, Student Representative, Napa Valley College, Napa (Napa County) Heather Bass – Board of Directors, Gilroy Unified School District, Gilroy, Santa Clara County Dave Clark – Board of Directors, Cardiff School District (San Diego County) Phyllis Greenleaf – Board of Trustees, Live Oak Elementary School District (Santa Cruz County) Adriana Griffin – Red Bluff Union School District, Red Bluff (Tehama County) Jim C. Keller – Board of Trustees, Bonny Doon Union Elementary School District, Santa Cruz County Brigitte Kubacki – Governing Boardmember, Green Point School, Blue Lake (Humboldt County) Jose Lara – Vice President and Governing Board Member, El Rancho Unified School District, Pico Rivera (Los Angeles) Kimberly Ann Peterson – Board of Trustees, Geyserville Unified School District (Sonoma County) Karen Pickett (politician)|Karen Pickett – Board Member, Canyon Canyon Elementary School District (Contra Costa County) Kathy Rallings – Board of Trustees, Carlsbad Unified School District, Carlsbad, San Diego County Sean Reagan – Governing Boardmember, Norwalk-La Mirada Unified School District, Norwalk (Los Angeles County) Curtis Robinson – Board of Trustees, Area 6, Marin County Board of Education (Marin County) Christopher Sabec (politician)|Christopher Sabec – Governing Boardmember, Lagunitas School District (Marin County) Katherine Salinas – Governing Boardmember, Arcata School District, Arcata (Humboldt County) Jeffrey Dean Schwartz – Governing Boardmember, Arcata School District, Arcata (Humboldt County) Alex Shantz – Board of Trustees, St. Helena Unified School District, Napa County Dana Silvernale – Governing Boardmember, North Humboldt Union High School (Humboldt County) Jim Smith (politician)|Jim Smith – President, Canyon School Board, Canyon Township (Contra Costa County) Logan Blair Smith – Little Shasta Elementary School District, Montague (Shasta County) Rama Zarcufsky – Governing Boardmember, Maple Creek School District (Humboldt County) John Selawsky – Rent Stabilization Board, Berkeley (Alameda County) Jesse Townley – Rent Stabilization Board, Berkeley (Alameda County) Jeff Davis (politician)|Jeff Davis – Board of Directors, Alameda-Contra Costa Transit District (Alameda and Contra Costa Counties) Karen Anderson (politician)|Karen Anderson – Board of Directors, Coastside Fire Protection District (San Mateo County) Robert L. Campbell – Scotts Valley Fire District (Santa Cruz County) William Lemos – Fire Protection District, Mendocino (Mendocino County) Russell Pace – Board of Directors, Willow Creek Fire District (Humboldt County) John Abraham Powell – Board of Directors, Montecito Fire District, Montecito (Santa Barbara County) Larry Bragman – Board of Directors, Division 3, Marin Municipal Water District Board (Marin County) James Harvey (politician)|James Harvey – Board of Directors, Montara Water and Sanitary District (San Mateo County) Randy Marx – Board of Directors, Fair Oaks Water District, Division 4 (Sacramento County) Jan Shriner – Board of Directors, Marina Coast Water District (Monterey County) Kaitlin Sopoci-Belknap – Board of Directors, Humboldt Bay Municipal Water District, Division 1 (Humboldt County) James Barone – Boardmember, Rollingwood-Wilart Recreation and Parks District (Contra Costa County) William Hayes (California politician)|William Hayes – Board of Directors, Mendocino Coast Park and Recreation District (Mendocino County) Illijana Asara – Board of Directors, Community Service District, Big Lagoon (Humboldt County) Gerald Epperson – Board of Directors, Crocket Community Services District, Contra Costa County Joseph Gauder – Boardmember, Covelo Community Services District, Covelo (Mendocino County) Crispin Littlehales – Boardmember, Covelo Community Services District, Covelo (Mendocino County) George A. Wheeler – Board of Directors, Community Service District, McKinleyville (Humboldt County) Mathew Clark – Board of Directors, Granada Sanitary District (San Mateo County) Nanette Corley – Director, Resort Improvement District, Whitehorn (Humboldt County) Sylvia Aroth – Outreach Officer, Venice Neighborhood Council, Los Angeles (Los Angeles County) Robin Doyno – At-Large Community Officer, Mar Vista Neighborhood Council, Los Angeles (Los Angeles County) Janine Jordan – District 4 Business Representative, Mid-Town North Hollywood Neighborhood Council, Los Angeles (Los Angeles County) Jack Lindblad – At Large Community Stakeholder, North Hollywood Northeast Neighborhood Council, Los Angeles (Los Angeles County) Johanna A. Sanchez – Secretary, Historic Highland Park Neighborhood Council, Los Angeles (Los Angeles County) Johanna A. Sanchez – At-Large Director, Historic Highland Park Neighborhood Council, Los Angeles (Los Angeles County) Marisol Sanchez (politician)|Marisol Sanchez – Area 1 Seat, Boyle Heights Neighborhood Council, Los Angeles (Los Angeles County) William Bretz – Crest/Dehesa/Harrison Canyon/Granite Hill Planning Group (San Diego County) Claudia White – Member, Descanso Community Planning Group (San Diego County) Annette Keenberg – Town Council, Lake Los Angeles (Los Angeles County) Rama Zarcufsky – Governing Boardmember, Maple Creek School District (Humboldt County) Socialist Alternative [ edit ] Washington [ edit ] Election year No. of Seattle City Council members % of Seattle City Council members +/- 2013 0 / 9 0 1 2015 1 / 9 11.11 2019 1 / 9 11.11 Kshama Sawant – Seattle City Council , Position 2 Socialist Party USA [ edit ] New Jersey [ edit ] Election year No. of Red Bank Regional High School Board of Education members % of Red Bank Regional High School Board of Education members +/- 2012 0 / 9 0 1 2015 1 / 9 11.11 Pat Noble – Member of the Red Bank Regional High School Board of Education for Red Bank Vermont Progressive Party [ edit ] David Zuckerman – Lieutenant Governor Doug Hoffer – State Auditor Tim Ashe – Pro Tem of the Vermont Senate Chris Pearson – Member of the Vermont Senate Anthony Pollina – Member of the Vermont Senate Mollie S. Burke – Member of the Vermont House of Representatives Robin Chesnut-Tangerman – Member of the Vermont House of Representatives Diana Gonzalez – Member of the Vermont House of Representatives Sandy Haas – Member of the Vermont House of Representatives Selene Colburn – Member of the Vermont House of Representatives Brian Cina – Member of the Vermont House of Representatives Jane Knodell – Burlington City Council President (Central District) Max Tracy – Burlington City Council (Ward 2) Sara Giannoni – Burlington City Council (Ward 3) Wendy Coe – Ward Clerk (Ward 2) Carmen Solari – Inspector of Elections (Ward 2) Kit Andrews – Inspector of Elections (Ward 3) Jeremy Hansen – Berlin Select Board Steve May  Richmond Select Board Susan Hatch Davis – Former Member of the Vermont House of Representatives Dexter Randel  Former Member of the Vermont House of Representatives & Former Troy Select Board Bob Kiss – Former Mayor of Burlington Peter Clevelle – Former Mayor of Burlington David Van Deusen – Former Moretown Select Board & Former First Constable Working Families Party [ edit ] Connecticut [ edit ] Ed Gomes – Member of the Connecticut Senate from the 23rd district New York [ edit ] Diana Richardson – Member of the New York State Assembly from the 43rd district See also [ edit ] African-American leftism Anti-war movement British left Espionage Act of 1917 Fourth-wave feminism Handschu agreement History of the socialist movement in the United States House Un-American Activities Committee Jewish left Liberalism in the United States Millennial socialism Modern liberalism in the United States New Left Pink tide Progressivism in the United States Red Scare Regressive left Tankie References [ edit ] ^ Buhle, Buhle and Georgakas, p. ix.

^ Buhle, Buhle and Georgakas, p. vii ^ Iaácov Oved (1987).

Two Hundred Years of American Communes . Transaction Publishers. pp.

9– 15.

ISBN 9781412840552 .

^ Hushaw, C. William (1964).

Liberalism Vs. Conservatism; Liberty Vs. Authority . Dubuque, IA: W. C. Brown Book Company. p. 32.

^ Ornstein, Allan (March 9, 2007).

Class Counts: Education, Inequality, and the Shrinking Middle Class . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. pp.

56– 58.

ISBN 9780742573727 .

^ Larson, Edward J.

(2007).

A Magnificent Catastrophe: The Tumultuous Election of 1800, America's First Presidential Campaign . Simon and Schuster. p. 21.

ISBN 9780743293174 .

The divisions between Adams and Jefferson were exasperated by the more extreme views expressed by some of their partisans, particularly the High Federalists led by Hamilton on what was becoming known as the political right, and the democratic wing of the Republican Party on the left, associated with New York Governor George Clinton and Pennsylvania legislator Albert Gallatin, among others.

^ Archer 2007.

^ Lipset & Marks, p. 9 ^ Lipset & Marks, p. 11 ^ Lipset & Marks, p. 16 ^ Lipset & Marks, pp. 19–23 ^ Draper, pp. 36–37 ^ Draper, p. 41 ^ Lipset & Marks, p. 23 ^ Lipset & Marks, pp. 21–22 ^ Lipset & Marks, p. 83 ^ Arthur N. Eisenberg.

"Testimony: Police Surveillance of Political Activity – The History and Current State of the Handschu Decree" . New York Civil Liberties Union . Retrieved January 14, 2015 .

^ Ed Gordon (January 19, 2006).

"COINTELPRO and the History of Domestic Spying" . NPR.

^ Lisa Rein (October 8, 2008).

"Md. Police Put Activists' Names On Terror Lists" .

The Washington Post .

^ Colin Kalmbacher (January 19, 2019).

"Former FBI Official: the FBI Tried to Keep 'Progressives and Socialists Out of Office' Long After Claiming Otherwise" . Law & Crime.

^ Carl Ratner (2012).

Cooperation, Community, and Co-Ops in a Global Era . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 40.

ISBN 9781461458258 .

^ Iaácov Oved (1987).

Two Hundred Years of American Communes . Transaction Publishers. p. 20.

ISBN 9781412840552 .

^ a b Draper, pp. 11–12.

^ Coleman, pp. 15–16 ^ Coleman, pp. 15–17 ^ Draper, p. 13.

^ Woodcock, p. 395 ^ Woodcock, p. 397-398 ^ Woodcock, p. 399-400 ^ Draper, pp. 14–16.

^ Draper, pp. 16–17.

^ Draper, pp. 21–22.

^ Draper, pp. 22–24.

^ Draper, pp. 41–42.

^ Ryan, p. 13.

^ Ryan, p. 16.

^ Ryan, p. 35.

^ Ryan, p. 36.

^ Alexander, pp. 765–767.

^ Alexander, p. 777.

^ Alexander, p. 784.

^ Alexander, p. 786.

^ Alexander, p. 787.

^ Alexander, p. 792-793.

^ Alexander, pp. 803–805.

^ Alexander, p. 810.

^ Stedman and Stedman, p. 9 ^ Stedman and Stedman, p. 33 ^ Page 6: Chenoweth, Eric (Summer 1992).

"The gallant warrior: In memoriam Tom Kahn" (PDF) .

Uncaptive Minds: A Journal of Information and Opinion on Eastern Europe .

5 (20). Washington DC: Institute for Democracy in Eastern Europe (IDEE): 5– 16.

ISSN 0897-9669 . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 19, 2015.

^ Isserman, The other American , p. 116.

^ Drucker (1994 , p. 269) ^ Horowitz (2007 , p. 210) ^ Kahn (2007 , pp. 254–255): Kahn, Tom (Winter 2007) [1973], "Max Shachtman: His ideas and his movement" (PDF) , Democratiya , 11 : 252– 259, archived from the original (PDF) on May 13, 2021 ^ Alexander, p. 812-813.

^ Jervis Anderson, A. Philip Randolph: A Biographical Portrait (1973; University of California Press, 1986).

ISBN 978-0-520-05505-6 ^ Anderson, Jervis.

Bayard Rustin: Troubles I've Seen (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1997).

Branch, Taylor.

Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1954–63 (New York: Touchstone, 1989).

D'Emilio, John.

Lost Prophet: The Life and Times of Bayard Rustin (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2004).

ISBN 0-226-14269-8 ^ Horowitz (2007 , pp. 220–222) ^ a b Saxon, Wolfgang (April 1, 1992).

"Tom Kahn, leader in labor and rights movements, was 53" .

The New York Times .

^ MacDonald, Dwight (January 19, 1963).

"Our invisible poor" .

The New Yorker .

Reprinted in collection: Macdonald, Dwight (1985) [1974]. "Our invisible poor".

Discriminations: Essays and afterthoughts 1938–1974 (reprint ed.). Da Capo Press.

ISBN 978-0-306-80252-2 .

Whitfield, Stephen J. (1984) A critical American: The politics of Dwight Macdonald Wreszin, Michael (1994) A rebel in defense of tradition: The life and politics of Dwight MacDonald ^ Isserman, Maurice (June 19, 2009).

"Michael Harrington: Warrior on poverty" .

The New York Times .

^ Isserman, The other American , pp. 169–336.

^ Drucker (1994 , pp. 187–308) ^ Miller, pp. 24–25, 37, 74–75: cf., pp. 55, 66–70 : Miller, James.

Democracy is in the Streets: From Port Huron to the Siege of Chicago . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1994 ISBN 978-0-674-19725-1 .

^ Kirkpatrick Sale, SDS , pp. 22–25.

^ Miller, pp. 75–76, 112–116, 127–132; cf. p. 107.

^ Kirkpatrick Sale, SDS , p. 105.

^ Kirkpatrick Sale, SDS , pp. 25–26 ^ Gitlin, p. 191.

Todd Gitlin .

The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of Rage (1987) ISBN 0-553-37212-2 .

^ Sale, p. 287.

Sale described an "all‑out invasion of SDS by the Progressive Labor Party. PLers—concentrated chiefly in Boston, New York, and California, with some strength in Chicago and Michigan—were positively cyclotronic in their ability to split and splinter chapter organizations: if it wasn't their self‑righteous positiveness it was their caucus‑controlled rigidity, if not their deliberate disruptiveness it was their overt bids for control, if not their repetitious appeals for base‑building it was their unrelenting Marxism". Kirkpatrick Sale, SDS , pp. 253.

^ "The student radicals had gamely resisted the resurrected Marxist–Leninist sects ..."  (p. 258); "for more than a year, SDS had been the target of a takeover attempt by the Progressive Labor Party, a Marxist–Leninist cadre of Maoists", Miller, p. 284. Miller describes Marxist Leninists also on pages 228, 231, 240, and 254: cf., p. 268.

^ Gitlin, p. 191.

Todd Gitlin .

The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of Rage (1987) p. 387 ISBN 0-553-37212-2 .

^ Sale wrote, "SDS papers and pamphlets talked of 'armed struggle,' 'disciplined cadre,' 'white fighting force,' and the need for "a communist party that can guide this movement to victory"; SDS leaders and publications quoted Mao and Lenin and Ho Chi Minh more regularly than Jenminh Jih Pao. and a few of them even sought to say a few good words for Stalin". p. 269.

^ a b c d Anonymous (December 31, 1972).

"Socialist Party now the Social Democrats, U.S.A." New York Times . p. 36 . Retrieved February 8, 2010 .

^ Isserman, p. 311.

^ Isserman, p. 422.

^ a b Anonymous (January 1, 1973).

" 'Firmness' urged on Communists: Social Democrats reach end of U.S. Convention here" .

New York Times . p. 11.

^ Horowitz (2007 , pp. 204–251) ^ Shevis (1981 , p. 31): Shevis, James M. (1981). "The AFL-CIO and Poland's Solidarity".

World Affairs .

144 (Summer). World Affairs Institute: 31– 35.

JSTOR 20671880 .

^ Opening statement by Tom Kahn in Kahn & Podhoretz (2008 , p. 235): Kahn, Tom ; Podhoretz, Norman (2008).

"How to support Solidarnosc : A debate" (PDF) .

Democratiya (Merged with Dissent in 2009) .

13 (Summer). Sponsored by the Committee for the Free World and the League for Industrial Democracy , with introduction by Midge Decter and moderation by Carl Gershman , and held at the Polish Institute for Arts and Sciences, New York City in March 1981: 230– 261. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 17, 2011.

^ "The AFL–CIO had channeled more than $4 million to it, including computers, printing presses, and supplies" according to Horowitz (2007 , p. 237).

^ Puddington (2005) : Puddington, Arch (2005).

"Surviving the underground: How American unions helped solidarity win" .

American Educator (Summer). American Federation of Teachers . Retrieved June 4, 2011 .

^ a b "Has the Socialist Moment Already Come and Gone?" .

The New Republic . August 3, 2023.

ISSN 0028-6583 . Retrieved August 9, 2023 .

^ Graeber ^ "2000 Presidential Popular Vote Summary for all Candidates Listed on at Least One State Ballot" . Federal Elections Commission. December 2001.

^ "The Nader Campaign and the Future of U.S. Left Electoral Politics" .

Monthly Review . February 2001.

^ "Documentary" .

Box Office Mojo . Retrieved February 25, 2015 .

^ Joanna Walters (October 8, 2011).

"Occupy America: protests against Wall Street and inequality hit 70 cities" .

The Guardian .

^ a b Kevin Roose (May 26, 2014).

"Meet the Seattle Socialist Leading the Fight for a $15 Minimum Wage" . nymag.com.

^ a b Joseph Kishore (November 20, 2013).

"Socialist Alternative candidate wins in Seattle City Council election" . World Socialist Web Site.

^ a b Kirk Johnson (December 28, 2013).

"A Rare Elected Voice for Socialism Pledges to Be Heard in Seattle" .

The New York Times .

^ "Bernie Sanders" .

The Des Moines Register . January 16, 2015.

^ Steve Inskeep (November 19, 2014).

"Sen. Bernie Sanders On How Democrats Lost White Voters" . NPR.

^ Grace Wyler (October 6, 2014).

"Bernie Sanders Is Building a 'Revolution' to Challenge Hillary Clinton in 2016" .

Vice .

^ Paul Harris (October 21, 2011).

"Bernie Sanders: America's No. 1 socialist makes his move into the mainstream" .

The Guardian .

^ Nate Silver (July 27, 2016).

"Was The Democratic Primary A Close Call Or A Landslide?" .

FiveThirtyEight .

^ Hamby (2003 , p. 25, footnote 5): Hamby, Alonzo L.

(2003). "Is there no democratic left in America? Reflections on the transformation of an ideology".

Journal of Policy History .

15 (The future of the democratic left in industrial democracies): 3– 25.

doi : 10.1353/jph.2003.0003 .

S2CID 144126978 .

^ Aldon Morris , The Origins of the Civil Rights Movement: Black Communities Organizing for Change (New York: The Free Press, 1994) ^ Maurice Isserman .

If I Had a Hammer...The Death of the Old Left and the Birth of the New Left (Basic Books, 1987).

ISBN 0-465-03197-8 .

^ "Obama Invigorates Progressives as 2nd Term Begins" .

ABC News . January 22, 2013 . Retrieved October 24, 2024 .

^ "After a Decade of Left-Populism, What Have We Learned About Political Change?" .

Washington Monthly . January 16, 2024 . Retrieved October 24, 2024 .

^ "Hillary Clinton on flip-flop charge: 'I'm a progressive, but I'm a progressive who likes to get things done' " .

The Week . October 13, 2015 . Retrieved October 24, 2024 .

^ Gerstle, Gary (2022).

The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the Free Market Era .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0197519646 .

Archived from the original on June 26, 2022 . Retrieved August 1, 2024 .

The most sweeping account of how neoliberalism came to dominate American politics for nearly a half century before crashing against the forces of Trumpism on the right and a new progressivism on the left.

^ "America Is Becoming a Social Democracy" .

Foreign Policy . May 7, 2021 . Retrieved October 24, 2024 .

^ Drucker (1994 , pp. 303–307) ^ O'Rourke (1993 , pp. 195–196): O'Rourke, William (1993).

"L: Michael Harrington" .

Signs of the literary times: Essays, reviews, profiles, 1970–1992' . The Margins of Literature (SUNY Series). SUNY Press. pp.

192– 196.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1681-5 .

Originally: O'Rourke, William (November 13, 1973).

"Michael Harrington: Beyond Watergate, Sixties, and reform" .

SoHo Weekly News .

3 (2): 6– 7.

ISBN 9780791416815 .

^ Isserman, pp. 312–331: Isserman, Maurice (2001) The Other American: The Life of Michael Harrington.

New York: Perseus Books.

^ Isserman, p. 349 : Isserman, Maurice (2001) The Other American: The Life of Michael Harrington.

New York: Perseus Books.

^ List of Democratic Socialists of America members who have held office in the United States ^ Gabbatt, Adam (March 22, 2019).

"Democratic Socialists of America back Bernie: 'The best chance to beat Trump' " .

The Guardian – via www.theguardian.com.

^ DSA 🌹 [@DemSocialists] (September 2, 2018). "It's official -- we now have 50,000 members!" (Tweet). Retrieved September 2, 2018 – via Twitter.

^ "DSA Votes for BDS, Reparations, and Out of the Socialist International" . August 5, 2017.

^ Fraser, C. Gerald (September 7, 1974).

"Socialists seek to transform the Democratic Party" (PDF) .

The New York Times . p. 11.

^ Meyerson, Harold (Fall 2002).

"Solidarity, Whatever" .

Dissent .

49 (4): 16. Archived from the original on June 20, 2010.

[ clarification needed ] ^ See Anderson, Jervis (1997).

Bayard Rustin: Troubles I've seen . New York: HarperCollins Publishers.

ISBN 9780060167028 .

* D'Emilio, John (2003).

Lost prophet: Bayard Rustin and the quest for peace and justice in America . New York: The Free Press.

ISBN 978-0-684-82780-3 .

Republished as Lost prophet: The life and times of Bayard Rustin . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 2004.

ISBN 0-226-14269-8 .

^ Berger, Joseph (September 20, 2005).

"Sandra Feldman, scrappy and outspoken labor leader for teachers, dies at 65" .

The New York Times .

^ Holley, Joe (October 19, 2005).

"Political activist Penn Kemble dies at 64" .

The Washington Post .

^ "Penn Kemble: Dapper Democratic Party activist whose influence extended across the spectrum of US politics (21 January 1941 –15 October 2005)" .

The Times . London. October 31, 2005.

[ dead link ] ^ Nossiter, Bernard D. (March 3, 1981). "New team at U.N.: Common roots and philosophies".

The New York Times (Late City final ed.). section A, p. 2, col. 3.

^ "Meet Our President" .

National Endowment for Democracy . Archived from the original on April 26, 2008 . Retrieved August 5, 2008 .

^ Black, Susannah (August 15, 2016).

"Mr. Maturen Goes to Washington" .

Front Porch Republic . Retrieved August 16, 2016 .

What's next may be hinted at by a 51 year old devout Catholic, businessman, and semi-professional magician named Mike Maturen, who recently accepted the presidential nomination of the American Solidarity Party, the only active Christian Democratic party in the nation.

^ a b "Christian Democracy" .

American Solidarity Party . Archived from the original on November 16, 2018 . Retrieved July 18, 2018 .

^ a b "Did you know there's a third party based on Catholic teaching?" .

Catholic News Agency . October 12, 2016 . Retrieved January 1, 2020 .

We believe in the economic concept of distributism as taught by GK Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc.

^ Liberation Caucus of ASP 🧡, & (Liberation Caucus of the American Solidarity Party). (2021, October 28). Thread: What is the Liberation Caucus? We are a voting bloc caucus of @AmSolidarity, with members of varying backgrounds, unified by common principles. We seek to dismantle capitalism, racism and misogyny, and promote an ownership society through deliberative democracy. [Tweet]. @LiberationASP.

https://twitter.com/LiberationASP/status/1453750965803393026 ^ "Platform |" . Archived from the original on June 10, 2021 . Retrieved September 30, 2021 .

^ Larry J. Sabato and Howard R. Ernst (2009).

Encyclopedia of American Political Parties and Elections . Infobase Publishing. p. 167.

^ John Tarleton (October 28, 2014).

"Meet Howie Hawkins, the Anti-Cuomo" . The Indypendent.

^ Howie Hawkins (November 2001).

"The Green Party and the Future of the US Left" . Greens.org.

^ "United States: Greens become NY's third party after strong left campaign" .

Green Left Weekly . November 6, 2014.

^ Ken Rudin (July 9, 2012).

"The Green Party Makes Its Case As A Left-Leaning Alternative To Obama" . NPR.

^ "US Green Party Convention Adopts an Ecosocialist Position" . London Green Left Blog. August 8, 2016.

^ "2016 Platform Amendment Proposal Ecological Economics" . Green Party of the United States. Archived from the original on February 12, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2016 .

^ "2000 OFFICIAL PRESIDENTIAL GENERAL ELECTION RESULTS" . Federal Election Commission. December 2001.

^ "Americans in 48 States Can Cast a Vote for Stein/Baraka" . Jill2016. Archived from the original on May 21, 2016 . Retrieved October 1, 2016 .

^ Kathryn Bullington (September 2, 2016).

"Green Party Ballot Access at Highest Levels in 2016" . Independent Voter Project.

^ Kenyon Zimmer (2010).

" "The Whole World is Our Country": Immigration and Anarchism in the United States, 1885–1940" . University of Pittsburgh.

^ a b c d Amster, p. xii ^ Amster, p. 3 ^ ALB ^ Alexander, p. 932 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 95 ^ "Historical Flags of Our Ancestors - Flags of Extremism - Part 1 (a-m)" .

www.loeser.us . Retrieved May 11, 2019 .

^ Struch, Eric (January 24, 2013).

"Chicago protesters say 'No' to Greek fascists" . Retrieved May 11, 2019 .

^ "Chicago forum on U.S. role in Ukraine: fascists attempt disruption" .

Fight Back! News . April 16, 2014 . Retrieved May 11, 2019 .

^ "Support grows for "Dump Trump" protest planned for day one of Republican National Convention" .

Fight Back! News . June 20, 2016 . Retrieved May 11, 2019 .

^ "Here in the very belly of imperialism, you have comrades" .

Evrensel . July 24, 2017 . Retrieved July 28, 2019 .

^ "Who We Are" .

americanpartyoflabor.org . Retrieved July 28, 2019 .

^ "Red Aid: Service to the People" .

The Red Phoenix . June 28, 2018 . Retrieved July 28, 2019 .

^ George & Wilcox, pp. 97–98 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 103 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 98 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 99 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 101 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 103-104 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 102 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 105 ^ "FBI Interview Questions for FRSO" (PDF) . Committee to Stop FBI Repression. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 17, 2013 . Retrieved April 25, 2013 .

^ a b Reuters ^ Sherman ^ Fenwick, Tyler (December 10, 2020).

"What the Party for Socialism and Liberation Wants You to Understand" .

indianapolisrecorder.com . Indianapolis Recorder . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ CLark, Taylor (June 25, 2020).

"At Most Black Lives Matter Protests: Who Is PSL?" .

alaskasnewssource.com . Gray Television, Inc . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ "Protesters, demonstration leaders arrested in connection to rallies in Aurora" .

denverpost.com . MediaNews Group, Inc. September 17, 2020 . Retrieved January 29, 2021 .

^ George & Wilcox, p. 147 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 148 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 150 ^ George &
Wilcox, p. 151 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 159 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 160 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 161 ^ George & Wilcox, pp. 153–154 ^ Bérubé, pp. 130–131 ^ Alexander, p. 936 ^ Lange, Jon (August 1, 2024).

"Founding Congress of the RCA: The Future of American Communism is Bright" .

Revolutionary Communists of America . Retrieved April 14, 2025 .

^ "A Fighting Program for the Revolutionary Communists of America" .

Revolutionary Communists of America . Retrieved April 14, 2025 .

^ Kleher, pp. 68–69 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 113 ^ George & Wilciox, p. 108-109 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 108 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 109 ^ a b George & Wilcox, p. 110 ^ George & Wilcox, p. 112 ^ Lichtenstein, Nelson (2003). "Introduction to the new edition".

Labor's war at home: The CIO in World War II (PDF) (second ed.). Philadelphia PA: Temple University Press. p. xxiii (footnote 2).

ISBN 1-59213-197-2 . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 5, 2010 . Retrieved July 12, 2011 .

^ a b Klehr, pp. 70–73 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Richard Lingeman (2009).

The Nation Guide to the Nation . Vintage.

^ "Post-Capitalist Project" . Consortia Website . Retrieved November 19, 2012 .

^ "Socialist Revolution | IMT" .

Socialist Revolution . Retrieved January 10, 2019 .

^ OLIVO, RICK (April 2, 2019).

"Whitebird defeats Mettille in Ashland District 6" .

APG of Wisconsin . Retrieved August 9, 2019 .

^ Johnson, Earchiel (May 7, 2019).

"Native American communist topples incumbent council president in Wisconsin town" .

People's World . Retrieved August 9, 2019 .

^ "Officeholders" . Green Party of the United States . Retrieved May 15, 2016 .

Bibliography [ edit ] ALB (2009–10) "The SLP of America: a premature obituary?" Socialist Standard . Retrieved 2010-05-11.

[1] [ permanent dead link ] Alexander, Robert J.

International Trotskyism, 1929–1985: a documented analysis of the movement . United States of America: Duke University Press, 1991.

ISBN 0-8223-0975-0 Amster, Randall.

Contemporary anarchist studies: an introductory anthology of anarchy in the academy . Oxford, UK: Taylor & Francis, 2009 ISBN 0-415-47402-7 Archer, Robin.

Why Is There No Labor Party in the United States?

. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007.

ISBN 978-0-691-12701-9 Bérubé, Michael.

The Left at war . New York: New York University Press, 2009 ISBN 0-8147-9984-1 Buhle, Mari Jo ; Buhle, Paul and Georgakas, Dan .

Encyclopedia of the American left (Second edition). Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.

ISBN 0-19-512088-4 Busky, Donald F.

Democratic Socialism: A Global Survey . Westport: Praeger Publishers, 2000.

ISBN 0-275-96886-3 Coleman, Stephen.

Daniel De Leon . Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press, 1990 ISBN 0-7190-2190-1 Draper, Theodore.

The roots of American Communism . New York: Viking Press, 1957.

ISBN 0-7658-0513-8 Drucker, Peter (1994).

Max Shachtman and his left: A socialist's odyssey through the "American Century" . Humanities Press.

ISBN 0-391-03816-8 .

George, John and Wilcox, Laird.

American Extremists: Militias, Supremacists, Klansmen, Communists & Others . Amherst: Prometheus Books, 1996.

ISBN 1-57392-058-4 Graeber, David. "The rebirth of anarchism in North America, 1957–2007" in Contemporary history online , No. 21, (Winter, 2010) Horowitz, Rachelle (2007).

"Tom Kahn and the fight for democracy: A political portrait and personal recollection" (PDF) .

Democratiya (Merged with Dissent in 2009) .

11 . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 12, 2009.

Isserman, Maurice.

The other American: the life of Michael Harrington . New York: Public Affairs, 2000.

ISBN 1-58648-036-7 Klehr, Harvey.

Far Left of Center: The American Radical Left Today . New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1988.

ISBN 0-88738-875-2 Liebman, Arthur.

Jews and the Left . New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1979.

ISBN 978-0-471-53433-4 Lingeman, Richard.

The Nation Guide to the Nation . New York: Vintage Books, 2009.

ISBN 0-307-38728-3 Lipset, Seymour Martin and Marks, Gary.

It didn't happen here: why socialism failed in the United States . New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. 2001.

ISBN 0-393-04098-4 Reuters. "U.S. protests shrink while antiwar sentiment grows". Oct 3, 2007 12:30:17 GMT Retrieved September 20, 2010.

Humanitarian | Thomson Reuters Foundation News Ryan, James G.

Earl Browder: the failure of American Communism . Tuscaloosa and London: The University of Alabama Press, 1997.

ISBN 0-8173-0843-1 Sherman, Amy. "Demonstrators to gather in Fort Lauderdale to rail against oil giant BP", the Miami Herald . May 12, 2010 Retrieved from SunSentinel.com September 22, 2010.

Demonstrators to gather in Fort Lauderdale to rail against oil giant BP Stedman, Susan W. and Stedman Jr. Murray Salisbury.

Discontent at the polls: a study of farmer and labor parties, 1827–1948 . New York: Columbia University Press. 1950.

Woodcock, George, Anarchism: a history of libertarian ideas and movements . Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2004.

ISBN 1-55111-629-4 External links [ edit ] "The Socialist Trade and Labor Alliance versus the 'pure and simple trade union'" ,  1900 debate, Daniel De Leon and Job Harriman "Is Russia a socialist Community?" , 1950 debate, Earl Browder , C. Wright Mills and Max Shachtman "Why No Revolution? A Short History of American Left Movements", Part 1: early 1800s to 1945 , Part 2: 1945–2012 , 2012, featuring Joe Uris "Second Thought" https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCJm2TgUqtK1_NLBrjNQ1P-w v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category v t e Modern liberalism in the United States Variants Progressivism Social liberalism Social democracy Christian democracy Distributism Social market economy American Left Core principles Egalitarianism Equal opportunity Economic progressivism Environmentalism Internationalism Mixed economy Social equality Social justice Welfare state History 1950s 1960s and 1970s Civil rights movement Classical liberalism Cold War Fair Deal Great Society Liberal coalition Liberal Republicans Neoconservatism New Deal New Democrats Third Way New Left Progressive Era Vietnam War Significant figures Edith Abbott Jane Addams Louis Brandeis Cesar Chavez Henry Steele Commager William O. Douglas W. E. B. Du Bois Betty Ford Betty Friedan John Kenneth Galbraith Ruth Bader Ginsburg Samuel Gompers Fannie Lou Hamer Richard Hofstadter Patricia Ireland Jesse Jackson Alfred Kazin Coretta Scott King Martin Luther King Jr.

Paul Krugman Michael Lerner Rachel Maddow Thurgood Marshall Pauli Murray John Rawls Walter Reuther Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Al Sharpton Susan Sontag Sonia Sotomayor Gloria Steinem Lionel Trilling William Monroe Trotter Gore Vidal Earl Warren Significant politicians Bella Abzug Joe Biden William Jennings Bryan Pete Buttigieg Jimmy Carter Bill Clinton Hillary Clinton John Conyers Mario Cuomo Howard Dean Michael Dukakis Barney Frank Al Gore Kamala Harris Hubert Humphrey Jacob Javits Lyndon B. Johnson Barbara Jordan Estes Kefauver John F. Kennedy Robert F. Kennedy Ted Kennedy John Kerry Robert M. La Follette Fiorello H. La Guardia John Lewis John Lindsay Eugene McCarthy George McGovern Harvey Milk Walter Mondale Tip O'Neill Barack Obama Nancy Pelosi Adam Clayton Powell Jr.

Nelson Rockefeller Eleanor Roosevelt Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Harry S. Truman Henry A. Wallace Tim Walz Elizabeth Warren Paul Wellstone Woodrow Wilson Ralph Yarborough Major political parties and political organizations Democratic Party (since the 1930s) Progressive Party ( 1912 , 1924 , 1948 ) Rockefeller Republicans (1930s–1970s) American Solidarity Party ( economic progressivism ) Liberalism portal Portals : Socialism Liberalism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_Left&oldid=1305309880#Democratic_socialism,_social_democracy,_and_resurgence_of_progressivism " Categories : Left-wing politics in the United States Political movements in the United States Progressivism in the United States Reform movements Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2011 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2024 CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing copy edit Wikipedia introduction cleanup from August 2023 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from August 2023 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Use mdy dates from April 2012 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from February 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2010 Articles with dead external links from October 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 08:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents American Left 6 languages Add topic

