Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Copyright 3 Publishing 4 Performance licensing 5 Business 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Music law 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legal aspects of the music industry This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Music law" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Music law refers to legal aspects of the music industry, and certain legal aspects in other sectors of the entertainment industry. The music industry includes record labels , music publishers, merchandisers, the live events sector and of course performers and artists.

The terms "music law" and "entertainment law", along with "business affairs", are used by the music and entertainment industry and should not be thought of as academic definitions. Indeed, music law covers a range of traditional legal subjects including intellectual property law ( copyright law, trademarks , image publicity rights, design rights), competition law , bankruptcy law , contract law , defamation and, for the live events industry, immigration law , health and safety law , and licensing. 
While foundational norms have gradually been established for music law in western nations, other parts of the world maintain unique traditions that impact music's legal status in the context of both heritage preservation and enormous national arts entertainment industries, including China [ 1 ] and India.

[ 2 ] Definitions [ edit ] A "compilation" refers to work formed from already existing materials in a way that forms its own original work, including collective works.

"Copies" are physical objects that hold, fix, or embody a work such as a music tape, film, CD, statue, play, or printed sheet music.

"Sound recordings" can refer to any audio recording including the sound accompanying motion pictures.

"Copyright owner" is the entity that legally owns rights to a work.

[ 3 ] "Performance" The copyright holder has the exclusive right to perform the work in public, or to license others to perform it. The right applies to "literary, musical, dramatic, and choreographic works, pantomimes, and motion pictures and other audiovisual works.".

[ 4 ] Playing a CD in public, or showing a film in public is "performing" the work.

Copyright [ edit ] Main article: Copyright This section is empty.

You can help by adding to it .

( January 2025 ) Publishing [ edit ] Publishing is the primary source of income for musicians writing their own music.

[ citation needed ] Money collected from the 'publishing' rights is ultimately destined for songwriters - the composers of works, whether or not they are the recording artist or performer. Often, songwriters will work for a musical ensemble to help them with musical aspects of the composition, but here again, the writer of the song is the owner of it and will own the copyrights in the song and thus will be entitled to the publishing revenues. Copyrights in compositions are not the same as sound recordings . A recording artist can record a song and sell it to another band or company. As a result, that particular company will own the recording, but not the song. The original writer will always maintain the copyright for that particular song. The publishing money is connected to the copyright, so the owner will be the only one making money off of the song itself. All successful songwriters will join a collection society (such as ASCAP and BMI in the USA, SOCAN in Canada, JASRAC in Japan, GEMA in Germany and PRS for Music in the UK, etc.) and many will enter into agreements with music publishing companies who will exploit their works on the songwriters behalf for a share of ownership, although many of these deals involve the transfer (assignment) of copyright from the songwriter to the music publisher, Both the recorded music sector and music publishing sector have their foundations in intellectual property law and all of the major recording labels and major music publishers and many independent record labels and publishers have dedicated "business and legal affairs" departments with in-house lawyers whose role is not only to secure intellectual property rights from recording artists, performers and songwriters but also to exploit those rights and protect those rights on a global basis. There are a number of specialist independent law firms around the world who advise on music and entertainment law whose clients include recording artists, performers, producers, songwriters, labels, music publishers, stage and set designers, choreographers, graphic artists, games designers, merchandisers, broadcasters, artist managers, distributors, collection societies and the live events sector (which further includes festivals, venues, promoters, booking agents and production service providers such as lighting and staging companies).

Performance licensing [ edit ] Main article: Music licensing This section is empty.

You can help by adding to it .

( January 2025 ) Business [ edit ] The US government views artists that give concerts and sell merchandise as a business. Bands that tour internationally will also face a plethora of legislation around the world including health and safety laws, immigration laws and tax legislation. Also, many relationships are governed by often complex contractual agreements.

In the US, it is important for musicians to get legal business licenses. These can be obtained at a city hall or local government center. The business license will require the tracking of sales, wages, and gigs. A tax ID is also necessary for all businesses. Musicians that fail to comply with the tax ID process and do not report their profits and losses to the government can face serious consequences with the IRS.

References [ edit ] ^ Li, Juqian (2022).

China's Legal Framework for Supporting Protection and Sustainability of Artistic Heritage . In David G. Hebert and Jonathan McCollum, (Eds.), "Ethnomusicology and Cultural Diplomacy" . Lexington Books (Rowman & Littlefield), pp.297-311.

ISBN 9781793642912 ^ Choudhary, Karan (2022).

Cultural Heritage and Music Diplomacy: The Legal Framework in India . In David G. Hebert and Jonathan McCollum, (Eds.), "Ethnomusicology and Cultural Diplomacy" . Lexington Books (Rowman & Littlefield), pp.277-295.

ISBN 9781793642912 ^ "Copyright Law of the United States - U.S. Copyright Office" .

^ 17 U.S.C. § 106(4) Further reading [ edit ] Hill, Iain; Kemp, Chris (Eds).

Health & Safety Aspects in the Live Music Industry , Cambridge: Entertainment Technology Press.

ISBN 1-904031-22-6 Schulenberg, Richard.

Legal Aspects of the Music Industry , New York: Billboard Books (Watson-Guptill publications).

ISBN 0-8230-8364-0 Kanaar, Nicholas; Phillips, Chris.

Music Business Agreements London: Sweet & Maxwell, 3rd Edition.

ISBN 978-1-84703-905-7 Rosen, Ronald S.

Music and Copyright , Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-533836-7 Harrison, Ann.

Music The Business London: Virgin Books, 3rd Edition.

ISBN 1-85227-013-6 Lindenbaum, John. "Music Sampling and Copyright Law." Princeton University Center for the Arts and Cultural Studies, April 1999 ( online ) Standler, Ronald B. "Music Copyright Law in the USA." 2008-2009 ( online ) Richard, Phillip, "Lawyers in the Music Industry", No Bullshit Management, Nov. 2012 ( online ) Music: Copyright Law. Educational CyberPlayGround, Inc. 1997 ( online ) Frith, Simon; Lee Marshall (Eds).

Music and Copyright , Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2nd Edition.

ISBN 978-0-7486-1813-2 External links [ edit ] Music Law Updates International Association of Entertainment Lawyers Independent Federation of Phonographic Industries v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐int.eqiad.main‐5976599f4d‐tmkmd
Cached time: 20250815145223
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.373 seconds
Real time usage: 0.512 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 947/1000000
Revision size: 8011/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 49265/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1156/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 37604/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.236/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5845430/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  436.008      1 -total
 26.63%  116.100      1 Template:Law
 25.77%  112.362      1 Template:Navbox
 23.21%  101.183      1 Template:Reflist
 18.87%   82.254      3 Template:Ambox
 18.86%   82.251      1 Template:Refimprove
 16.20%   70.633      1 Template:Short_description
 15.48%   67.498      8 Template:ISBN
  9.92%   43.269      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.13%   26.709      1 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19026308:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815145223 and revision id 1306035445. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Music_law&oldid=1306035445 " Categories : Intellectual property law Music industry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from January 2025 All articles to be expanded Articles with empty sections from January 2025 All articles with empty sections All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2013 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 14:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Music law 1 language Add topic

