Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origins of the Institution 1.2 Architecture and Ange-Jacques Gabriel 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents École Militaire 28 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 48°51′09″N 2°18′13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.85250°N 2.30361°E ﻿ / 48.85250; 2.30361 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Military facility southeast of the Champ de Mars, Paris For the Belgian institution known as the École royale militaire, see Royal Military Academy (Belgium) .

École Militaire Central École militaire building General information Type Educational building complex, military academy Address 1 Place de Joffre, 75007 Town or city Paris , Île-de-France Country France Coordinates 48°51′09″N 2°18′13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.85250°N 2.30361°E ﻿ / 48.85250; 2.30361 Current tenants Military academy Completed 1751 ; 274 years ago ( 1751 ) Design and construction Architect(s) Ange-Jacques Gabriel Website geostrategia .fr The École Militaire ( French: [ekɔl militɛːʁ] ; "military school") is a complex of buildings in Paris, France, which house various military training facilities. It was founded in 1751 by King Louis XV and is located in the 7th arrondissement of Paris , southeast of the Champ de Mars .

The building, constructed by Ange-Jacques Gabriel , is an active military academy and was classified as a national monument since 1990.

[ 1 ] This site can be visited during the European Heritage Days .

History [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Origins of the Institution [ edit ] L'École Militaire was founded in 1750, after the War of the Austrian Succession , by Louis XV on the basis of a proposal of Marshal Maurice de Saxe and with the support of Madame de Pompadour and financier Joseph Paris Duverney .

[ 2 ] Previously, military academies were exclusive to children of a noble background and offered apprenticeships in the King's Stables or the stables of other royal members. With the aim of creating an academic college for cadet officers from poor noble families, the exclusivity that royal military academies held vanished.

By the edict of January 1751, King Louis XV established the institution to provide education to five hundred young noblemen born without fortune.

[ 3 ] Article XI of the edict provides for "by way of first perpetual endowment" the tax on playing cards. The administration is entrusted to the Secretary of State for War. The Royal Military Academy included a number of military colleges in the province such as the School of Brienne where students were admitted on evidence of nobility. At the end of their schooling, admission to the Royal Military School in Paris was done through a national competition.

Architecture and Ange-Jacques Gabriel [ edit ] Charged by King Louis XV to design a grander building than the Hôtel des Invalides (constructed by Louis XIV ), Ange-Jacques Gabriel broke ground in 1752 on the farm of Grenelle . After years of construction, the school was opened in 1760. Gabriel presented an immense area with beautiful façades and water running through a network of wells and pipes. The entirety was indeed much larger and more striking than the Invalides.

[ 4 ] The Comte de Saint-Germain reorganised the establishment in 1777 under the name of the École des Cadets-gentilshommes ("School of Young Gentlemen"), which accepted the young Napoleon Bonaparte in 1784. Bonaparte went on to graduate after only one year instead of the usual two.

The École now incorporates: the Saint-Louis Chapel, Paris The École de guerre (EdG) (School of Warfare) The Ecole de Guerre-Terre (EdG-T) (School of Land Warfare) The Institut des hautes études de défense nationale (Institute of Advanced Studies in National Defense) The vast complex formed by the École Militaire.

École Militaire from the Place de Fontenoy Saint-Louis Chapel See also [ edit ] France portal Education portal Ecole de Guerre-Terre (EDG-T), Paris École spéciale militaire de Saint-Cyr (ESM), Coëtquidan , Brittany École de guerre [ fr ] (EdG) (School of Warfare) École militaire interarmes (EMIA), Coëtquidan , Brittany École supérieure de guerre (1876 - 1993) References [ edit ] ^ Base Mérimée : École Militaire , Ministère français de la Culture.

(in French) ^ "🔎 École militaire (France) - Définition et Explications" .

Techno-Science.net (in French) . Retrieved 2021-04-05 .

^ Henri, Volpert.

"Édit portant création de l'École militaire" .

FranceArchives (in French) . Retrieved 2021-04-05 .

^ Christ, Yvan (1977).

Paris des Utopies . Paris: Balland. pp. 92 and 93.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to École militaire .

Official website of CID (in French) Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Geographic Mérimée Structurae Other Kulturenvanteri monument Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=École_Militaire&oldid=1289464212 " Categories : Education in Paris 1750 establishments in France Office buildings in Paris Military academies of France Buildings and structures in the 7th arrondissement of Paris Palaces and residences of Napoleon Educational institutions established in 1750 Terminating vistas in Paris Universities and colleges established in the 18th century Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with French-language sources (fr) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with French IPA Articles needing additional references from June 2018 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 8 May 2025, at 20:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents École Militaire 28 languages Add topic

