Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Early work 3 Later work 4 Member of the French Academy 5 Legacy 6 Bibliography 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle 39 languages العربية Aragonés تۆرکجه Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Македонски مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Bernard de Fontenelle ) French writer and philosopher of the enlightenment (1657–1757) Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle A 1723 portrait of Fontenelle by Louis Galloche Born ( 1657-02-11 ) 11 February 1657 Rouen , France Died 9 January 1757 (1757-01-09) (aged 99) Paris, France Occupation Essayist Relatives Thomas Corneille and Pierre Corneille Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle ( / f ɒ n t ə ˈ n ɛ l / ; [ 1 ] French: [fɔ̃tənɛl] ; 11 February 1657 
– 9 January 1757), [ 2 ] also called Bernard Le Bouyer de Fontenelle , was a French author and an influential member of three of the academies of the Institut de France , noted especially for his accessible treatment of scientific topics during the unfolding of the Age of Enlightenment .

Biography [ edit ] Fontenelle was born in Rouen , France (then the capital of Normandy ) and died in Paris at age 99.  His mother was the sister of great French dramatists Pierre and Thomas Corneille . His father, François le Bovier de Fontenelle, was a lawyer who worked in the provincial court of Rouen and came from a family of lawyers from Alençon.

[ 3 ] He trained in the law but gave up after one case, devoting his life to writing about philosophers and scientists, especially defending the Cartesian tradition.

[ 4 ] In spite of the undoubted merit and value of his writings, both to the laity and the scientific community, there is no question of his being a primary contributor to the field. He was a commentator and explicator and occasionally a passionate, though generally good-humoured, controversialist.

[ 5 ] He was educated at the college of the Jesuits , the Lycée Pierre Corneille (although it did not adopt the name of his uncle (Pierre Corneille) until 1873, about 200 years later).

[ 6 ] At the Lycée he showed a preference for literature and distinguished himself.

According to Bernard de Fontenelle, François Blondel was a disciple of Father Marin Mersenne at the Academia Parisiensis in the French capital, until 1649. There he met "Messieurs Gassendi , Descartes , Hobbes , Roberval , and the two Pascals, father and son ".

[ 7 ] Early work [ edit ] He began as a poet, writing a poem in Latin at the age of 13 and more than once competed for prizes of the Académie française , but he never won anything. He visited Paris from time to time and became friendly with the abbé de Saint-Pierre , the abbé Vertot and the mathematician Pierre Varignon . He witnessed, in 1680, the total failure of his tragedy Aspar .  Fontenelle afterwards acknowledged the public verdict by burning his drama. His libretto for Pascal Collasse's Thétis et Pélée (" Thetis and Peleus "), which premiered at the Opéra de Paris in January, 1689, was received with great acclaim.

French and Francophone literature by category History Medieval Renaissance 17th 18th 19th 20th century Contemporary Movements Précieuses Classicism Rococo Decadent Parnassianism Symbolism Nouveau roman Writers Chronological list Writers by category Essayists Novelists Playwrights Poets Short story writers Children's writers Countries and regions France Quebec Franco-American Haiti Postcolonial Portals France Literature v t e His Lettres galantes du chevalier d'Her ...

, published anonymously in 1685, was a collection of letters portraying worldly society of the time.  It immediately made its mark. In 1686 his famous allegory of Rome and Geneva , slightly disguised as the rival princesses Mreo and Eenegu, in the Relation de l'île de Bornéo , gave proof of his daring in religious matters. Fontenelle's Nouveaux Dialogues des morts (1683) established a genuine claim to high literary rank.

Three years later, he wrote the most influential work to date on the plurality of worlds , Entretiens sur la pluralité des mondes (1686).

[ 8 ] He wrote extensively on the nature of the universe : "Behold a universe so immense that I am lost in it. I no longer know where I am. I am just nothing at all. Our world is terrifying in its insignificance." Later work [ edit ] Éléments de la géométrie de l'infini , 1727 Fontenelle had made his home in Rouen . In 1687 he moved to Paris. In 1687 he published his Histoire des oracles , a book which made a considerable stir in theological and philosophical circles. It consisted of two essays, the first of which was designed to prove that oracles were not given by the supernatural agency of demons, and the second that they did not cease with the birth of Jesus.

It excited the suspicion of the Church, and a Jesuit , by name Jean-François Baltus , published a ponderous refutation of it; but the peace-loving disposition of its author impelled him to leave his opponent unanswered. To the following year (1688) belongs his Digression sur les anciens et les modernes , in which he took the modern side in the controversy then raging; his Doutes sur le système physique des causes occasionnelles (against Nicolas Malebranche ) appeared shortly afterwards.

He remained influential in his older years and when a then unknown Jean-Jacques Rousseau met him in 1742, when Fontenelle was 85, he passed on the advice he gave all young writers that came to him: "You must courageously offer your brow to laurel wreaths and your nose to blows." [ 9 ] A noted gourmand , he attributed his longevity to eating strawberries [ citation needed ] . At ninety-two, one observer wrote that he was as lively as a man of twenty-two.

[ 4 ] When, in his late nineties, he met the then-beautiful Madame Helvétius , he reportedly told her, "Ah Madame, if only I were eighty again!" [ 10 ] Member of the French Academy [ edit ] In 1691 he was received into the French Academy in spite of the determined efforts of the partisans of the "ancients", especially Racine and Boileau , who on four previous occasions had ensured his rejection. He was thus a member both of the Academy of Inscriptions and of the Academy of Sciences .

[ 5 ] In 1697 he became perpetual secretary to the Academy of Sciences, an office he held for forty-two years. It was in this official capacity that he wrote the Histoire du renouvellement de l'Académie des Sciences (Paris, 3 vols., 1708, 1717, 1722) containing extracts and analyses of the proceedings, and also the éloges of the members, written with great simplicity and delicacy.

[ 5 ] Perhaps the best known of his éloges , of which there are sixty-nine in all, is that of his uncle Pierre Corneille . This was first printed in the Nouvelles de la republique des lettres (January 1685) and, as Vie de Corneille , was included in all the editions of Fontenelle's Œuvres.

The other important works of Fontenelle are his Éléments de la géometrie de l'infini (1727) and his Théorie des tourbillons (1752). In the latter he supported the views of René Descartes concerning gravitation, material that by that time had effectively been superseded by the work of Isaac Newton .

[ 5 ] He is noted for the accessibility of his work – particularly its novelistic style. This allowed non-scientists to appreciate scientific development in a time where this was unusual, and scientists to benefit from the thoughts of the greater society. If his writing is often seen as trying to popularize the astronomical theories of Descartes, whose greatest exponent he is sometimes considered, it also appealed to the literate society of the day to become more involved in "natural philosophy," thus enriching the work of early-Enlightenment scientists. In spite of the inarguable value and quality of his writings, he had no serious pretensions to original scientific or mathematical work, but did not let that stop him from outspoken support for Descartes' proposed conceptions of the roles of vortices in physics.

[ 5 ] Legacy [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A portrait of Fontenelle by Nicolas de Largillière Fontenelle was a popular figure in the educated French society of his period, byholding a position of esteem comparable only to that of Voltaire . Unlike Voltaire, however, Fontenelle avoided making important enemies.  He balanced his penchant for universal critical thought with liberal doses of flattery and praise to the appropriate individuals in aristocratic society.

Fontenelle forms a link between two very widely different periods of French literature, that of Corneille , Racine and Boileau on the one hand, and that of Voltaire, D'Alembert and Diderot on the other. It is not in virtue of his great age alone that this can be said of him; he actually had much in common with the beaux esprits of the 17th century, as well as with the philosophes of the 18th. But it is to the latter rather than to the former period that he properly belongs.

According to Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve , he deserves a place dans la classe des esprits infiniment distingués but is distinguished by being ought to be added by intelligence rather than by intellect and less by the power of saying much than by the power of saying a little well.
There have been several collected editions of Fontenelle's works, the first being printed in 3 vols. at the Hague in 1728–1729. The best is that of Paris, in 8 vols., 1790. Some of his separate works have been frequently reprinted and also translated.

The Pluralité des mondes was translated into modern Greek in 1794.

Sainte-Beuve has an interesting essay on Fontenelle, with several useful references, in the Causeries du lundi , vol. iii. See also Villemain , Tableau de la littérature française au XVIIIe siècle ; the abbé Trublet, Mémoires pour servir à l'histoire de la vie et des ouvrages de M. de Fontenelle (1759); A Laborde-Milaà, Fontenelle (1905), in the " Grands écrivains français " series; and L. Maigron, Fontenelle, l'homme, l'œuvre, l'influence (Paris, 1906).

His Dialogues of the dead show both his erudition and wit by presenting invented but plausible dialogues between dead ancients, dead moderns and a whole book devoted to dialogues between an ancient and a modern. To Montaigne asking him if some centuries had more wise men than other, Socrates answers sadly, "The general order of natures seems very constant". In one of the books Roxelane and Anne Boleyn discuss about politics and the way for a woman to decide a man to marry her. The dialogue between Montezuma and Cortez allows the former to dismiss some myths about the wisdom in ancient Greece by quoting some counter-examples.

In 1935, the lunar crater Fontenelle was named after him.

[ 11 ] Bibliography [ edit ] La Comète (1681) Nouveaux dialogues des morts (1683) De l'origine des fables (1684) Lettres galantes du chevalier d’Her*** (1685) Relation de l’île de Bornéo (1686) Entretiens sur la pluralité des mondes (1686; revised 1724) Histoire des oracles (1687) Digression sur les anciens et les modernes (1688) Le Comte de Gabalis, comédie en un acte (1689) Énée et Lavinie (1690) Idalie (circa 1710) References [ edit ] ^ "Fontenelle" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins .

^ Delorme, Suzanne (1970–1980). "Fontenelle, Bernard Le Bouyer (or Bovier) De".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 5. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp.

57– 63.

ISBN 978-0-684-10114-9 .

^ "Fontenelle biography" .

www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk . Retrieved 8 February 2016 .

^ a b Madame Geoffrin by Janet Aldis . G. P. Putnam's sons. 1905. p.

26 . Retrieved 16 August 2012 – via Internet Archive .

Fontenelle Madame Helvetius.

^ a b c d e Grégoire François. Le dernier défenseur des tourbillons : Fontenelle.. In: Revue d'histoire des sciences et de leurs applications,
tome 7, n°3, 1954. pp. 220-246. doi : 10.3406/rhs.1954.3438 http://www.persee.fr/doc/rhs_0048-7996_1954_num_7_3_343 Archived 5 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Lycée Pierre Corneille de Rouen – History" . Lgcorneille-lyc.spip.ac-rouen.fr. 19 April 1944 . Retrieved 16 August 2012 .

^ "Resolution des quatre principaux problemes d'architecture" .

University of Tours (in English and French).

Archived from the original on 22 April 2016 . Retrieved 2 May 2021 .

^ Almond, Philip C. " Adam, Pre-Adamites, and Extra-Terrestrial Beings in Early Modern Europe ".

Journal of Religious History , vol. 30, no. 2. July 2006. 163–174.

^ Leo Damrosch (2007).

Jean-Jacques Roussea: Restless Genius . Mariner Books.

^ Wright, Esmond (1988).

Franklin of Philadelphia . Harvard University Press. p. 327.

ISBN 9780674318106 .

^ " MOON - Fontenelle ", Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature . International Astronomical Union, Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Fontenelle, Bernard le Bovier de ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 10 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

608– 609.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle ( category ) at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle at Wikiquote Works by or about Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle at Wikisource Works at Internet Archive Works by Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews v t e Académie française seat 27 Abel Servien (1634) Jean-Jacques Renouard de Villayer (1659) Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle (1691) Antoine-Louis Séguier (1757) Jacques-Henri Bernardin de Saint-Pierre (1803) Étienne Aignan (1814) Alexandre Soumet (1824) Ludovic Vitet (1845) Elme Marie Caro (1874) Gabriel Paul Othenin de Cléron, comte d'Haussonville (1888) Auguste Nompar de Caumont (1925) Joseph Kessel (1962) Michel Droit (1980) Pierre Nora (2001) v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet Artists ULAN MusicBrainz FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bernard_Le_Bovier_de_Fontenelle&oldid=1304296877 " Categories : 1657 births 1757 deaths Writers from Rouen Lycée Pierre-Corneille alumni 17th-century French poets 18th-century French poets 17th-century French dramatists and playwrights 18th-century French dramatists and playwrights 17th-century French male writers 18th-century French male writers Fellows of the Royal Society Members of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres Members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences Members of the Académie Française Officers of the French Academy of Sciences Age of Enlightenment Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2014 Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Articles needing additional references from August 2025 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 05:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle 39 languages Add topic

