Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Europe 1.2 The Americas 1.3 Muslim world 1.4 Indian subcontinent 2 Laws and social norms Toggle Laws and social norms subsection 2.1 Indigenous costumes 3 Private dress codes Toggle Private dress codes subsection 3.1 Workplace 3.1.1 New Jersey BorgataBabes case 3.1.2 Doe v. Boeing Corporation (1993) 3.1.3 Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v. R.G. &. G.R Harris Funeral Homes, Inc.

3.1.4 The CROWN Act 3.2 Formal wear 3.3 Weddings 3.4 Business casual 3.5 Casual 3.6 Vestments 3.7 Unwritten rules 4 Education system Toggle Education system subsection 4.1 United States education 4.1.1 Dress code violations 4.1.2 Dress code backlash 4.2 Canadian education 4.2.1 Dress code backlash 4.3 Academic dress 5 Expense and access 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Dress code 38 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Lietuvių Magyar मराठी Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Clothing code based on event or occasion "Dresscode" redirects here. For other uses, see Dresscode (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Dress code" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Western dress codes and corresponding attires Formal ( full dress ) White tie Morning dress Full dress uniform Frock coat Evening gown Ball gown Semi-formal ( half dress ) Black tie Black lounge suit Mess dress uniform Evening gown Cocktail dress Informal ( undress , "dress clothes") Suit Service dress uniform Cocktail dress Pantsuit Casual (anything not above) Business casual Casual Friday Combat uniform Smart casual Workwear Streetwear Sportswear known as Sportswear (fashion) and Athleisure Undress Supplementary alternatives Ceremonial dress law courts royal courts diplomatic academic , etc.

Religious clothing cassock , habit , etc.

Folk costume Distinctions Orders medals , etc.

Legend: = Day (before 6 p.m.) = Evening (after 6 p.m.) = Bow tie colour = Ladies = Gentlemen Fashion portal v t e Cannes Film Festival has a dress code that requires men to wear tuxedos and women to wear gowns and high-heeled shoes .

[ 1 ] A dress code is a set of rules, often written, with regard to what clothing groups of people must wear. Dress codes are created out of social perceptions and norms, and vary based on purpose, circumstances, and occasions. Different societies and cultures are likely to have different dress codes, Western dress codes being a prominent example.

Dress codes are symbolic indications of different social ideas, including social class , cultural identity , attitude towards comfort, tradition, and political or religious affiliations. Dress code also allows individuals to read others' behavior as good, or bad by the way they express themselves with their choice of apparel.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Europe [ edit ] See also: Western dress codes , Sumptuary laws , and English medieval clothing From the seventh through the ninth centuries, the European royalty and nobility used a dress code to differentiate themselves from other people. All classes generally wore the same clothing, although distinctions among the social hierarchy began to become more noticeable through ornamented garments. Common pieces of clothing worn by peasants and the working class included plain tunics , cloaks, jackets, pants, and shoes. According to rank, embellishments adorned the collar of the tunic, waist or border. Examples of these decorations included, as James Planché states, "gold and silver chains and crosses, bracelets of gold, silver or ivory, golden and jeweled belts, strings of amber and other beads, rings, brooches, [and] buckles".

[ 3 ] The nobility tended to wear longer tunics than the lower social classes.

[ 3 ] While dress codes of modern-day Europeans are less strict, there are some exceptions. It is possible to ban certain types of clothing in the workplace, as exemplified by the European Court of Justice ’s verdict that "a ban on Islamic headscarves at work can be lawful." [ 4 ] The Americas [ edit ] The indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast had a complex social hierarchy that consisted of slaves, commoners, and nobles, with dress codes indicating these social distinctions.

John R. Jewitt , an Englishman who wrote a memoir about his years as a captive of the Nuu-chah-nulth people in 1802-1805, describes how, after some time living there, Maquinna and the chiefs decided that he must now be "considered one of them, and conform to their customs". Jewitt resented the imposition of this dress code, finding the loose untailored garments very cold, and attributed to them a subsequent illness of which he almost died. He was not allowed to cut his hair and had to paint his face and body as a Nootka would.

[ 5 ] In the early 20th century, informal wear was the norm across many social settings, including workplaces, restaurants, travel, and movie theaters. In the 1950s, casual wear became prominent in many of these settings, but informal wear remained dominant in workplaces and churches. Beginning in the 1980s, technology companies in Silicon Valley developed the business casual dress code, which was part of a broader organizational culture of emphasizing efficiency over propriety. Today, casual wear is the norm in the tech industry, exemplified by tech executives such as Steve Jobs and Mark Zuckerberg .

[ 6 ] In North American high schools, fashion for girls began to be more revealing in the late twentieth century, including clothing such as low-rise jeans, revealing tops, miniskirts, and spaghetti straps.

[ 2 ] With these new styles appearing in schools, dress codes have in some cases become more rigorous as a result.

[ 2 ] The dress codes in North American high schools typically resulted in tests that would determine if skirts or shorts were long enough. A common test would be used to measure the appropriate length of students' shorts/skirts. If a student's fingers extended past their clothing, then the clothing was considered a violation of the school dress code.

[ 7 ] Muslim world [ edit ] Main article: Haram § Clothing and adornment Islam , founded in the seventh century CE, laid out rules regarding the attire of both men and women in public.  Gold adornments and silk clothes are prohibited for men to wear, as they are luxurious, but they are permissible for women.  Men are also required to wear the ihram clothing while on Hajj , or annual pilgrimage to Mecca .

Hijab generally refers to various head coverings conventionally worn by some Muslim women, [ 8 ] most often a headscarf wrapped around the head, covering the hair, neck and ears, but leaving the face visible.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The use of the hijab has been on the rise worldwide since the 1970s and is viewed by many Muslims as expressing modesty and faith.

[ 9 ] There is a consensus among Islamic religious scholars that covering the head is either required or preferred, though some Muslim scholars and activists argue that it is not mandated.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Indian subcontinent [ edit ] Sikhism , which was founded in the Indian subcontinent around the end of the fifteenth century, also requires a dress code.

Gurbir Grewal, member of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission Male Sikhs, who are members of the Khalsa are required to wear a turban at all times. Some, but not all, male Sikhs in North America wear a turban; they will instead tie their hair in a knot or ponytail.

Laws and social norms [ edit ] Main article: Clothing laws by country See also: Islamic clothing , Islamic veiling practices by country , and Sumptuary laws Cultural values, norms, and laws regarding clothing can vary by location.

For example, the degree of nudity that is acceptable changes depending on location. In New Guinea and Vanuatu , there are areas where it is customary for men to wear nothing but penis sheaths in public, while women wear string skirts. In remote areas of Bali , women may go topless , which is less common in more Western countries.

Most Western countries have generally no rules regarding specific clothing in most public scenarios, but only have private rules.

Islamic clothing codes vary by country, especially Islamic veiling practices by country . In Dubai , it is less strict outside of mosques , but for both men and women, shoulders and knees must be covered in public.

[ 15 ] Nudity is illegal in Dubai for both sexes, cross-dressing is prohibited, and toplessness or cleavage is essentially illegal for women.

[ 15 ] In Afghanistan , the hijab is compulsory for all women and everywhere, including in schools, while the burqa is not mandatory but is customary.

[ 16 ] On the other hand, in the People's Republic of China , the burqa is banned in the Islamic area of Xinjiang .

[ 17 ] Indigenous costumes [ edit ] Indigenous national costumes are often preferred for certain occasions, even among communities that also incorporate more widespread dress customs from the West . The barong tagalog for men and baro't saya for women are formal wear in the Philippines .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Other examples include chut thai in Thailand , [ 20 ] kilts in Scotland , [ 21 ] and kente in Ghana .

[ 22 ] Bhutan's code of etiquette, driglam namzha , specifies indigenous clothing that should be worn in public, both formally and informally; adherence to this code in certain settings has been legally mandated since 1989.

[ 23 ] Private dress codes [ edit ] Black tie standard Many places have their own private dress code; these organizations may insist on particular dress codes or standards in particular situations, such as for weddings, funerals, religious gatherings, etc.

Workplace [ edit ] Canadian Deputy PM Chrystia Freeland with U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson in Western dress code at a meeting Employees are sometimes required to wear a uniform or certain standards of dress, such as a business suit and tie. This may depend on particular situations, for example if they are expected to interact with customers. (See also International standard business attire ) In Western countries, these policies vary depending on the industry.

Lawyers , bankers , and executives often wearing a suit and tie, with black shoes and belt, while casual wear is more common in the technology industry .

[ 6 ] Some businesses observe that anti-discrimination laws restricts their determining what is appropriate and inappropriate workplace clothing. Requiring men and women to dress differently at the workplace can be challenged because the gender-specific dress codes would be based on one sex and could be considered stereotypical.

[ 24 ] Most businesses have authority in determining and establishing what workplace clothes they can require of their workers. Generally, a carefully drafted dress code applied consistently does not violate anti-discrimination laws.

[ 25 ] So long as the dress code does not favor one gender over the other it is usually acceptable by law for employers to have a private dress code.

[ 26 ] In the United States, it is legal for employers to require women to wear makeup and ban men from wearing it. It has been argued that such a distinction in a dress code is not discriminatory because both sexes have rules about their appearance. An important court case that occurred in the U.S was the Jespersen v. Harrah's Operating Co.

, which allowed for a workplace to require that female employees wear makeup while their male counterparts were banned from doing so. Darlene Jespersen worked at Harrah's Casino for more than 20 years and found that the makeup and dress code was not only unattainable but degrading.

[ 27 ] Jespersen found that the 'Personal Best' policy was not true to her natural appearance as it required a full face of makeup including foundation, powder, blush, mascara, and lipstick.

[ 27 ] Jespersen stated that this policy "forced her to be ... 'dolled up' like a sexual object, and ... took away her credibility as an individual and as a person." [ 27 ] In opposition men who worked at Harrah's Casino were banned from wearing makeup, nail polish, and other traditionally female attires.

[ 27 ] Judge Kozinski argued that hyperfemininity was a burden that only women employees suffered. Kozinski stated that the time, effort and expense was more of a hindrance than just being banned from wearing makeup.

[ 27 ] However despite these efforts, in the ruling, it was decided that women did not have a larger burden in the requirements of the dress code but two judges disagreed and argued that makeup takes more time and money and that sex stereotyping occurred because women's bare faces were seen as less desirable.

[ 27 ] New Jersey BorgataBabes case [ edit ] In New Jersey , twenty-one women sued the Borgata Casino Hotel & Spa for requiring them to lose weight and stay under a certain size to maintain their jobs. The women argued that the management would ridicule them over weight gain even if they were pregnant. The case was dismissed in New Jersey because the BorgataBabes program required that both men and women maintain certain body shapes and sizes. The "BorgataBabes contractually agreed to adhere to these strict personal appearance and conduct standards".

[ 28 ] In 2016, Superior Court Judge Nelson Johnson dismissed the claims because the appearance standards were lawful. He also determined that the women could return to court for their claims of a hostile environment created by the management.

[ 29 ] Doe v. Boeing Corporation (1993) [ edit ] Doe, a transgender person beginning gender transition , found that her supervisors at the engineering company, Boeing Corporation , were uncooperative with her desire to wear feminine presenting clothing to work. She was warned against wearing, "obviously feminine clothing such as dresses, skirts, or frilly blouses" and from using the women's bathroom. This was even after her counselor recommended that wearing female presenting clothing would help with her transition. After a few warnings from her supervisors, Doe showed up to work wearing a pink pantsuit and was subsequently fired for violating the dress code. This prompted Doe to legal action. The Washington State Supreme Court ultimately upheld the decision made by Boeing and stated that the company had the right to determine what female identity looked like while at work.

[ 27 ] [ 30 ] Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v. R.G. &. G.R Harris Funeral Homes, Inc.

[ edit ] Aimee Stephens , a transgender woman, worked at the R.G. &. G.R Harris Funeral Homes and originally was dressing as a stereotypical male following the funeral home's male attire, but Stephens had intended to transition to female attire to better suit her gender identity . Thomas Rost, the owner of the funeral home, fired Stephens for not presenting herself as a man and for dressing like a woman.

[ 31 ] Stephens opened a case at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission , stating discrimination based on sex and gender but the district court sided with the funeral home stating, "that transgender status is not a protected trait under Title VII ".

[ 31 ] In the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals , it was ruled that Stephens was unlawfully fired based on sex discrimination , which does protect transgender people.

[ 32 ] The United States Supreme Court ruled in 2020 against firing someone for being homosexual or transgender, as being discrimination based on sex.

[ 33 ] The CROWN Act [ edit ] The CROWN act, standing for "create a respectful and open world for natural hair" is a California law that prohibits discrimination in the school and workplace based on the style or texture of one's hair. The act was created in 2019 by Dove and the CROWN Coalition in partnership with California's State Senator Holly J. Mitchel.

[ 34 ] After a study conducted by Dove to reveal the degree of workplace discrimination towards black women, the data was used to spread awareness and elicit change for the act to be passed. CROWN continues to fight for this cause, with a recent work-study conducted in 2023 revealing that discrimination regarding hair texture still prevails. As of June 2023, 23 US states have enacted the CROWN act into law.

[ 35 ] Formal wear [ edit ] Main article: Formal wear In Western countries, a "formal" dress code typically means coats for men and evening dresses for women. The most-formal dress code is a full-length ball or evening gowns with evening gloves for women and for men white tie , which also includes a tailcoat .

"Semi-formal" has a much less precise definition but typically means an evening jacket and tie for men (known as black tie ) and a dress for women. A frilled or patterned white shirt is considered more formal than a plain white or black shirt, and a black bow tie is considered more formal than a plain black cravat , but all could be considered appropriate, depending upon the gala or wedding, when white, black, and blue were the only acceptable colors for weddings and gala events in the 20th century.

Many classical music venues, such as La Scala , in Milan , Italy , enforce a formal dress code: "no flip flops or tank tops allowed." [ 36 ] Weddings [ edit ] Weddings across the world tend to be formal affairs. In Asian culture, women tend to wear red or similar dresses. In Europe and the Americas, the bride wears white silk, taffeta, lace, or other fancy-cloth dresses, while the bridesmaids and mothers of the bride and groom often wear pastel colors of the bride's choice. The groom , best man , and other groomsmen in many different countries usually wear the most formal morning coat , tuxedo, or dinner jacket, depending upon the time of day. Even the flower girl or boy gets dressed up.

"Wedding Casual" defines yet another mode of dress, where guests dress respectfully, but not necessarily fancily. Weddings in the 21st century tend to attract more colorful clothing than traditionally in the past. Ethnically appropriate costumes, such as a kilt , turban , Barong tagalog , sari , or kinte cloth are also worn frequently.

Business casual [ edit ] Main article: Business casual "Business casual" typically means not wearing neckties or suits , but wearing instead collared shirts, and trousers (not black, but more relaxed , including things such as corduroy ).

Business casual dress is a popular workplace dress code that emerged in white-collar workplaces in Western countries in the 1990s, especially in the United States and Canada. Many information technology businesses in Silicon Valley were early adopters of this dress code. In contrast to formal business wear such as suits and neckties (the international standard business attire ), the business casual dress code has no generally accepted definition; its interpretation differs widely among organizations and is often a cause of sartorial confusion among workers.

The job search engine Monster.com offers this definition, "In general, business casual means dressing professionally, looking relaxed, yet neat and pulled together." A more pragmatic definition is that business casual dress is the mid ground between formal business clothes and street clothes. Generally, neckties are excluded from business casual dress, unless worn in nontraditional ways. The acceptability of blue jeans and denim cloth clothing varies — some businesses consider them to be sloppy and informal.

Casual [ edit ] "Casual" typically just means clothing for the torso, legs and shoes.

Vestments [ edit ] Main article: Vestment In certain Christian and other religions, Vestments are worn by clergy, cantors , and acolytes . In denominations that follow a set liturgical cycle, that dress might vary by season or occasion; for example, for a funeral, the bishop may dictate that clergy to wear black garb with white stoles.

Unwritten rules [ edit ] Because dress codes are frequently unwritten and unspoken, some neurodivergent people have difficulty understanding, finding, shopping for, and dressing appropriately to the codes of special events.

[ citation needed ] Education system [ edit ] This section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a particular audience .

Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy .

( September 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Many schools around the world implement dress codes in the school system to prevent students from wearing inappropriate clothing items to school and was thought to help influence a safer and more professional environment.

United States education [ edit ] In 1996, former U.S. President Bill Clinton announced his support for the idea of school uniforms by stating, "School uniforms are one step that may help break the cycle of violence, truancy and disorder by helping young students understand what really counts is what kind of people they are." Many school districts in the United States took up the idea.

[ 37 ] In all, 70 schools--comprising around 60,000 students--switched to school uniforms.

[ 38 ] School uniforms have been used with several schools to teach students how to dress appropriately, and in cases it has worked, and has decreased distractions in the educational systems.

[ 38 ] School uniforms also have several other purposes: they are used to create conformity to social norms , increase school spirit , reduce peer bullying , and prevent discrimination based upon socioeconomic class .

One common criticism of school dress codes in the U.S. is that they infringe on students' right to self-expression. There have been many court cases regarding school dress code, the first being Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District , which involved students wearing black armbands to protest the Vietnam war.

[ 39 ] Within the educational system, the Federation supports professional dress code standards for all teachers.

[ 40 ] Dress code violations [ edit ] "Communicative" dress code violations are violations where the clothing has implications of hate, violence, gang-affiliation, etc.

[ 41 ] In cases where dress code rules in public school systems have been violated by non-communicative clothing, courts repeatedly legitimise dress code discrimination based on gender .

[ 42 ] Amongst the transgender populations, gender based dress codes are primarily enforced against individuals who do not yet pass .

[ 42 ] Violation of dress codes have become a subject of school protests, such as at a high school in Toronto, which had a protest after a student was disciplined for wearing a crop top.

[ 43 ] Students at multiple schools have protested gender discrimination in the application of dress codes.

[ 44 ] Dress code backlash [ edit ] Certain dress code restrictions in schools across North America have been accused of perpetuating sexist standards. In March 2014, a group of middle-school girls from Evanston, Illinois, protested their school's dress code, which prohibited them from wearing leggings to school under the pretense that it was "too distracting for boys." Thirteen-year-old student Sophie Hasty was quoted in the Evanston Review saying that "not being able to wear leggings because it's 'too distracting for boys' is giving us the impression we should be guilty for what guys do." In a Time magazine article covering the incident, Eliana Dockterman argued that teachers and administration in these schools are "walking the fine line between enforcing a dress code and slut shaming." [ 45 ] School dress codes seem to also be gender-biased towards young girls. The research article, "Objectification Study on High School Girls" conducted interviews with middle school girls, one of them describing, "If they're [boys] wearing a sleeveless basketball jersey, it doesn't fully cover their shoulders. They don't usually get called out for that. Guys are not the ones that they're looking out for. So they dress code girls, so guys don't get distracted. But they don't think that girls are going to get distracted by guys' shoulders.

[ 46 ] " On Monday, September 22, 2014, "about 100 pupils walked out of Bingham high school in South Jordan, Utah" [ 47 ] after more than a dozen girls were turned away from a homecoming dance for wearing dresses which violated the dress code.

[ 47 ] "School staff allegedly lined up girls against a wall as they arrived and banished about two dozen for having dresses which purportedly showed too much skin and violated the rules." It is believed that this act was awkward and humiliating towards the female students, which spawned the walkouts.

[ 47 ] In August 2021, one student's mother criticized her daughter's school for continuing to enforce clothing restrictions on girls while allowing students to opt out of mask-wearing during the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] There have been several issues with dress code backlash happening to several students, such as a 15-year-old girl who attended Edmonton High school, she was banned from attending her school due to dying her hair blue, this resulted in the girl suing her principal for discrimination.

[ 2 ] In another case, a 16-year-old girl was sent home because she refused to take her eyebrow ring out.

[ 2 ] Canadian education [ edit ] Dress code backlash [ edit ] A Canadian teenager, Lauren Wiggins, was given detention in May 2015 for wearing a floor-length dress with a halter neckline. The punishment prompted Wiggins to write an open letter to the school's assistant vice principal at Harrison Trimble High School in Moncton, New Brunswick. In the letter, Wiggins concentrated specifically on the fact that females are often blamed for the behaviour of males, saying that if a boy "will get distracted by my upper back and shoulders then he needs to be sent home and practice self-control." She was then given a one-day suspension after writing and submitting the letter.

[ 2 ] In Ontario, Canada, there were a few backlash incidents that occurred which consisted of girls being sent home due to wearing shorts that were too short.

[ 2 ] The other case happened in British Columbia where students were directed to wear clothes that were in good taste, and clothing that displayed a business look.

[ 2 ] Another case that took place in British Columbia was a young women got sent home from her high school, because her principal stated that her shirt was inappropriate due to the show of too much cleavage.

[ 2 ] These are a few of the many cases that have resulted in a backlash against dress codes.

Academic dress [ edit ] Main article: Academic dress See also: Burgon Society and Groves classification system Academic dress of King's College London in different colours, designed and presented by fashion designer Vivienne Westwood Academic dress is a traditional form of clothing for academic settings, mainly tertiary (and sometimes secondary ) education, worn mainly by those who have obtained a university degree , or hold a status that entitles them to assume them (e.g., undergraduate students at certain old universities).

[ 50 ] It is also known as academical dress, [ 51 ] or academic regalia.

Expense and access [ edit ] One of the most significant criticisms about dress codes is the expense to purchase particular items. The criticism can be pushed back by some ways that the expense is alleviated. First, the cost of buying and maintaining school uniforms is often much lower than buying multiple, fashionable brand-name outfits. Secondly, thrift stores often sell lightly used clothes such as suits, dresses, and ties, for a fraction of the cost and with the knowledge that the customer is both helping the charity (such as a church, Goodwill Industries , or Housing Works ) that sells the items, and the environment, by not buying fast fashion . Thirdly, a few items can be mixed and matched with khakis and a Navy blazer : I find that if I wear a chino with one of three shirts – a white oxford , a blue chambray , or a dark rinse denim – that carries me through so many looks.

— James E. Mulholland, designer [ 52 ] See also [ edit ] Clothing laws by country Clothing sizes Cosmetics policy Costume Double empathy problem Full dress Dress clothes Haute couture Hemline High heel policy History of fashion design Income segregation Nonverbal communication School uniform Semiotics Smart casual Social norm Social role of hair Subculture Sumptuary law Uniform Uniform fetishism Unwritten rules Vanity sizing Western dress code Workwear References [ edit ] ^ "Is the Cannes Film Festival's dress code sexist?" .

thetylt.com . Retrieved 2019-04-08 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Pomertanz, Shauna (2007). "Cleavage in a Tank Top: Bodily Prohibition and the Discourses of School Dress Codes".

Alberta Journal of Educational Research .

53 (4): 373– 386.

ProQuest 228639180 .

^ a b Planché, J. R. (1847).

History of British Medieval Costume: From the Earliest Period to the Close of the Eighteenth Century. C. Cox . pp. 28, 32– 35.

^ Langdon, Vedder Price PC-Esther; Maude, Jonathan (June 2017).

"Dress Codes and Religious Symbols at Work in the EU | Lexology" .

www.lexology.com . Retrieved 2019-03-17 .

^ A Narrative of the Adventures and Sufferings of John R. Jewitt, Only Survivor of the Crew of the Ship Boston, During a Captivity of Nearly Three Years Among the Savages of Nootka Sound: With an Account of the Manners, Mode of Living, and Religious Opinions of the Natives .

digital full text here p161 onwards ^ a b Clemente, Deirdre (2017-05-22).

"Why American Workers Now Dress So Casually" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 2024-03-19 .

^ Frazier, Karen.

"Typical School Dress Codes" .

lovetoknow . Retrieved 16 September 2022 .

^ Mitchell, Travis (29 June 2021).

"9. Religious clothing and personal appearance" . Retrieved 4 April 2023 .

^ a b Mark Juergensmeyer, Wade Clark Roof, ed. (2012). "Hijab".

Encyclopedia of Global Religion . Vol. 1. SAGE Publications. p. 516.

doi : 10.4135/9781412997898 .

ISBN 9780761927297 .

^ “Hijab.” Cambridge Dictionary , dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/hijab. Accessed 6 Sept. 2023.

^ Syed, Ibrahim.

"The Quran Does Not Mandate Hijab" .

Islamic Research Foundation International, Inc .

Archived from the original on 21 December 2015 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 .

^ "Hijab is Not an Islamic Duty: Muslim Scholar" .

Morocco World News .

Archived from the original on 27 December 2015 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 .

^ Nomani, Asra Q.; Arafa, Hala (21 December 2015).

"Opinion: As Muslim women, we actually ask you not to wear the hijab in the name of interfaith solidarity" .

Washington Post . Retrieved 22 December 2022 .

^ "Behind the Veil: Oppression or Assertion" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 May 2023.

^ a b "What to Wear in Dubai? Do's & Don'ts" .

Dubai Tickets . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

^ "Taliban says burqa not mandatory for women, hijab is" .

The Jakarta Post . Retrieved 2021-12-18 .

^ "China bans burqas and 'abnormal' beards in Muslim province" .

Independent.co.uk . 30 March 2017.

^ "THE EVOLUTION OF MODERN FILIPINIANA: A BRIEF HISTORY OF PHILIPPINE FASHION" .

Narra Studio . 2025 . Retrieved January 20, 2025 .

^ "Piña Exhibit (drop-down box): Evolution of Philippine Costume" .

Philippine Folk Museum Foundation (United States) . 2025 . Retrieved January 20, 2025 .

^ "ชุดไทยพระราชนิยม (Chut Thai Phra ratcha niyom)" .

Ministry of Culture website (in Thai). Ministry of Culture. 3 February 2010. Archived from the original on 27 January 2010 . Retrieved 10 June 2010 .

^ "Kilts Dance to New Tune" .

BBC News . 25 July 2000 . Retrieved 10 June 2009 .

^ "Asante Kente Cloth" .

artsmia.org . Minneapolis Institute of Art . Retrieved August 13, 2025 .

^ Whitecross, Richard W. (March 23, 2017). "Law, "Tradition" and Legitimacy: Contesting Driglam Namzha". In Schmidt, Johannes Dragsbæk (ed.).

Development Challenges in Bhutan: Perspectives on Inequality and Gross National Happiness . Contemporary South Asian Studies. Springer. pp.

115– 134.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-47925-5_7 .

ISBN 978-3-319-47924-8 .

^ "Employee Dress and Appearance" .

Society for Human Resource Management . Retrieved 27 September 2017 .

(subscription required) ^ Thomas, Robin.

"Dress Code Legal Issues" .

Personnel Policy Services Inc . Archived from the original on 14 March 2016.

^ "Illegal Workplace Policies: Appearance, Dress Codes, and Grooming Policies" .

www.employmentlawfirms.com . Retrieved 2019-03-17 .

^ a b c d e f g Ainsworth, Janet (January 2014). "What's Wrong with Pink Pearls and Cornrow Braids? Employee Dress Codes and the Semiotic Performance of Race and Gender in the Workplace".

Law, Culture and Visual Studies . Dordrecht Springer. pp.

241– 260.

ISBN 978-90-481-9322-6 .

^ "Schiavo v. Marina District Development Company, LLC, NJ: Appellate Div. 2015 - Google Scholar" .

scholar.google.com . Retrieved 2021-02-26 .

^ NJ.com, Paige Gross | For (2019-05-20).

"The 'Borgata Babes' who sued the casino a decade ago will get their day in court. Rules about their weight were discriminatory, they say" .

nj . Retrieved 2021-02-26 .

^ Jane Doe v. Boeing Company , 121 Wn.2d 8 (Supreme Court of Washington, en banc 1993).

^ a b Eeoc v. Rg &. Gr Harris Funeral Homes, Inc.

, vol. 884, October 4, 2017, p. 560 , retrieved February 25, 2021 , Argued: October 4, 2017 ^ "R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral Homes v EEOC & Aimee Stephens" .

American Civil Liberties Union . Retrieved 2021-02-26 .

^ Higgins, Tucker (2020-06-15).

"Supreme Court rules workers can't be fired for being gay or transgender" .

CNBC . Retrieved 2021-02-26 .

^ "The Official CROWN Act" .

The Official CROWN Act .

^ "CROWN Act: Does Your State Prohibit Hair Discrimination?" .

^ "La Scala Warns Opera Lovers: No Flip Flops or Tank Tops Allowed" .

New York Times . 10 July 2025 . Retrieved 11 July 2025 .

^ Bowen, Sherry.

"Should Kids Wear School Uniforms?" . EduGuide . Retrieved September 22, 2013 .

^ a b Firmin, Michael; Smith, Suzanne; Perry, Lynsey (2006). "School Uniforms: A Qualitative Analysis of Aims and Accomplishments at Two Christian Schools".

Journal of Research on Christian Education .

15 (2): 143– 168.

doi : 10.1080/10656210609485000 .

S2CID 144932641 .

ProQuest 594820094 .

^ "School Dress Codes - FindLaw" .

Findlaw . Retrieved 2017-12-08 .

^ Hills, Surry (April 7, 2014). "Response to dress code".

Education .

95 (3): 8.

ProQuest 1519605424 .

^ Herbon, Beth, and Jane E. Workman. "Dress and Appearance Codes in Public Secondary School Handbooks." Journal of Family & Consumer Sciences 92.5 (2000): 68-76.

^ a b Smith, Natalie. "Eliminating Gender Stereotypes in Public School Dress Codes: The Necessity of Respecting Personal Preference." Journal of Law & Education ; 41.1 (2012): 251-60.

^ Casey, Liam (May 26, 2015).

"Toronto students sport crop tops in protest of dress code" .

CTVNews . Retrieved November 23, 2021 .

^ McGowan, Emma (September 1, 2015).

"Meet the Teenage Girls Who Are Taking a Stand Against Slut-Shaming Dress Codes" .

Mic . Retrieved November 23, 2021 .

^ Dockterman, Eliana.

"When Enforcing School Dress Codes Turns Into Slut Shaming" .

Time . Retrieved 2015-11-16 .

^ Lim, Heejin; Lennon, Sharron; Jones, Domenique (2021-11-17).

"Objectification Found in High School Girls' Experience With Dress Code Enforcement" .

Clothing and Textiles Research Journal .

42 (2): 103– 120.

doi : 10.1177/0887302X211058434 .

ISSN 0887-302X .

S2CID 244394673 .

^ a b c Carroll, Rory (24 September 2014).

"Students protest 'slut shaming' high school dress codes with mass walkouts" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 8 December 2014 .

^ Hall, Louise (13 August 2021).

"Mom praised for calling out double standard of schools not enforcing masks but 'misogynistic' dress code" .

The Independent .

^ West, Phil (13 August 2021).

"Mom calls out school's double standard in letting masks be optional but making girls adhere to 'misogynistic' dress code" .

The Daily Dot .

^ Shaw, George W.

(1995), Academical Dress of British and Irish Universities . Chichlester: Philmore & Co. Ltd.

ISBN 0-85033-974-X p. 3.

^ "Cox, N. (2000). Academical dress in New Zealand" . Archived from the original on 14 November 2015 . Retrieved 12 March 2016 .

^ A Life in Style: The Wardrobe of James E. Mulholland , p. 5, Kent State University.

Pratt, Michael G., and Anat Rafaeli. "Organizational Dress as a Symbol of Multilayered Social Identities." Academy of Management Journal, vol. 40, no. 4, 1997, pp. 862-898.

ProQuest 199840879 .

External links [ edit ] Look up dress code in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dress code .

Majority of Americans Would Rather Die Than Take Their Clothes Off at the Wayback Machine (archived May 23, 2006) (Beach Buzz) v t e Fashion articles Index of fashion articles General Environmental impact of fashion Fashion accessory Fashion design Fashion design copyright Fashion matrix Fashion museum Fashion plate Fashion tourism Semiotics of fashion History History of clothing and textiles History of Western fashion History of fashion design Timeline of clothing and textiles technology 19th century 21st century Events Fashion show Fashion week Industry Awards Clothing industry Designer clothing Digital fashion Fashion blog Fashion capital Fashion entrepreneur Fashion editor Fashion forecasting Fashion illustration Fashion influencer Fashion journalism Fashion law Fashion photography Fashion merchandising Fast fashion in China Red carpet fashion Social media in the fashion industry Sweatshop Trickle-up fashion Trickle-down fashion Traditional clothing Ceremonial Court Diplomatic Academic Military Full Mess Service Sailor Combat Folk Western dress codes Formal Morning dress White tie Ball gown Semi-formal Black lounge suit Black tie Evening gown Informal Suit Cocktail dress Pantsuit Religious Christian Jewish Islamic Modest fashion Casual Smart casual British country clothing Business casual Nautical style Chic Cruise collection Preppy Ivy League Mod Sloane Ranger Teddy Boys Young fogey Street fashion Streetwear Hip hop Hippie Hipster Sportswear Athleisure Gorpcore Sportswear fashion Surfwear Ghetto fabulous Bling-bling Vintage fashion Alternative Androgyny Bohemian Emo Fetish Gothic Lolita Queer Skinhead Steampunk Thrift store chic Rocker Greaser Glam Grunge Heavy metal Punk Skate Rockabilly By country American fashion British fashion Canadian fashion Chinese fashion Filipino fashion French fashion German fashion Indian fashion Iranian fashion Israeli fashion Italian fashion History Japanese fashion Nigerian fashion Russian fashion South Korean fashion Swedish fashion Taiwanese fashion Thai fashion Vietnamese clothing Fashion activism Anti-fashion Anti-sweatshop movement Circular fashion Environmental sustainability of vintage fashion Ethical consumerism Fair trade certification Sustainable fashion Slow fashion Textile recycling Trashion Zero-waste fashion Related Androgyny Dandy Effeminacy Fop Macaroni Metrosexual Ballet and fashion Capsule wardrobe Chinoiserie in fashion Dress code Undress Fashion victim Genderless fashion in Japan List of boots List of bra designs List of hat styles List of headgear List of fur headgear List of individual dresses List of shoe styles Music and fashion Tattoo Fashion portal v t e Historical clothing Clothing generally not worn today, except in historical settings Body-length Abolla Banyan Brunswick Court dress (Empire of Japan) Chiton Frock Frock coat Hanfu Justacorps Paenula Peplos Stola Toga Tunic Xout lao Tops Basque Bedgown Bodice Doublet Peascod belly Poet shirt Sbai Suea pat Trousers Braccae Breeches Sompot Chong Kben Culottes Harem Knickerbockers Pedal pushers Zaragüelles [ es ] Skirts Hobble Poodle Safeguard Sompot Sinh Train Dresses Bliaut Close-bodied gown Debutante Gown Kirtle Mantua Polonaise Robe de cour Sack-back gown Sailor Tea gown Zaju chuishao fu Outerwear Capote Car coat Caraco Cardinal cloak Chamail Chlamys Cloak Kinsale cloak Dolman Doublet Duster Exomis Greatcoat Himation Houppelande Inverness cape Jerkin Kandys Mackinaw jacket Nadiri Norfolk jacket Overfrock Pañuelo Palla Pallium Pelisse Poncho Shadbelly Shawl Galway shawl Kullu Smock-frock Spencer Surcoat Surtout Ulster coat Visite Witzchoura Underwear Basque Bustle Chausses Chemise Codpiece Corselet Corset Waist cincher Dickey Garter Hoop skirt Crinoline Farthingale Pannier Hose Liberty bodice Loincloth Open drawers Pantalettes Petticoat Peignoir Pettipants Union suit Yếm Headwear Anthony Eden Apex Arakhchin Attifet Aviator Ba tầm Bergère Blessed hat Bonnet Calath crown (headdress) Capotain Caubeen Cavalier Coif Coonskin Cornette Dunce Fillet French hood Fontange Futou Gable hood Hennin Jeongjagwan Jewish Kausia Khat (apparel) Kokoshnik Llawt'u Malahai Matron's badge Miner's Mob Modius Monmouth Mooskappe Motoring hood Mounteere Nemes Nightcap Ochipok Pahlavi Petasos Phrygian Pileus Printer's Pudding Qeleshe Qing Salakot Snood Smoking Stephane (headdress) Tainia Taranga Welsh Wig Wimple Footwear Buskins Calcei Caligae Carbatina Chinese styles Chopines Duckbills Episcopal sandals Hessian Lotus shoes Manchu platform shoes Pampooties Pattens Pigaches Poulaines Socci Tiger-head shoes Turnshoes Accessories Ascot tie Belt hook Cointoise Cravat (early) Hairpin Hatpin Jabot Lavallière Muff Oes Partlet Perfumed gloves Ruff Shoe buckle Visard Clothing portal v t e Clothing History Industry Technology Terminology Timeline Headwear List of hat styles List of headgear List of fur headgear Beret Cap baseball flat knit Crown Hat boater bowler fedora homburg top Helmet Hood Kerchief Mask Turban Veil Neckwear Bands Choker Collar Clerical Lavallière Neckerchief Neck gaiter Necktie ascot bolo bow kipper school stock Scarf Tippet Underwear and lingerie Top Bra List of bra designs Camisole Undershirt Bottom Diaper Training pants Leggings Panties Plastic pants Slip Thong Underpants boxer briefs boxer shorts briefs Full Bodysuit, adult Bodysuit, infant Long underwear See-through Teddy Tops Blouse cache-cœur crop top halterneck tube top Cycling Kurta Mantle Shirt dress Henley polo sleeveless T crew neck Sweater cardigan guernsey hoodie jersey polo neck shrug sweater vest twinset Waistcoat Bottoms Trousers Bell-bottoms Bondage Capri Cargo Chaps Formal Go-to-hell High water Lowrise Jeans Jodhpurs Overalls Palazzo Parachute Pedal pushers Phat Shorts Bermuda cycling dolphin gym hotpants running Slim-fit Sweatpants Windpants Yoga pants Skirts A-line Ballerina Denim Men's Miniskirt Pencil Prairie Rah-rah Sarong Skort Tutu Wrap Full-Body Wear Suits and uniforms Ceremonial dress academic court diplomatic Folk Jodhpuri Jumpsuit Military full mess service sailor combat Miner Pantsuit Political Religious cassock clerical vestment School Prison Workwear boilersuit cleanroom hazmat space scrubs Dresses and gowns Formal, semi- formal, informal Backless Bouffant gown Coatdress Cocktail little black Evening ball gown debutante Plain Prairie Princess line Strapless Wedding Wrap Casual House Jumper Romper suit Sheath Shirtdress Slip Sundress Coats and outerwear Overcoats Car Chesterfield Covert Duffel Duster Greatcoat British Warm Guards Coat Greca Over-frock Riding shadbelly Trench Ulster Cloak opera Paletot Pea Polo Raincoat Mackintosh Suit coats Frock coat bekishe rekel Mess jacket Suit jacket Blazer smoking sports Teba Tailcoat dress morning Other Apron pinafore Blouson Cagoule Cape ferraiolo Inverness Mantle monastic royal mozzetta pellegrina Coatee Cut-off Gilet Jacket down flight goggle Harrington leather mackinaw Norfolk safari Jerkin Lab coat Parka Poncho Robe bathrobe dressing gown Shawl Ski suit Sleeved blanket Windbreaker Nightwear Babydoll Babygrow Blanket sleeper Negligee Nightgown Nightshirt Pajamas Swimwear Bikini Burkini Boardshorts Dry suit Monokini One-piece Rash guard Sling Square leg suit Swim briefs Swim diaper Trunks Wetsuit Legwear Sock Hold-ups Garter Pantyhose Stocking Tights Footwear List of shoe styles List of boots Boot Dress boot Flip-flops Sandal Shoe Dress shoe Court shoe Sneaker Slipper Accessories Adornments Armband Belt Boutonnière Coin purse Cufflink Cummerbund Gaiters Glasses Sunglasses Gloves Headband Handbag Inro Jewellery Livery Muff Pocket protector Pocket watch Sash Spats Suspenders Wallet Watch Non-worn items Hand fan Umbrella Walking stick Dress codes Western Formal morning dress white tie Semi-formal black lounge suit black tie Informal Business casual Smart casual Casual Related Clothing fetish Clothing swap Costume creature suit Halloween costume Cross-dressing Environmental impact Fashion haute couture made-to-measure ready-to-wear Fur clothing types Fursuit Global trade of secondhand clothing Laundry Laws List of individual dresses Reconstructed clothing Right to clothing Vintage clothing Clothing portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐jl9tp
Cached time: 20250817143205
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.008 seconds
Real time usage: 1.273 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5243/1000000
Revision size: 43976/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 284261/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13658/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 236616/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.565/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8197702/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  981.114      1 -total
 38.35%  376.255      1 Template:Reflist
 22.36%  219.367     29 Template:Cite_web
 12.64%  123.964      1 Template:Western_dress_codes
 12.41%  121.796      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.50%   93.211     13 Template:Navbox
  8.15%   79.971      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  7.60%   74.566      1 Template:Short_description
  5.67%   55.636      3 Template:Ambox
  5.37%   52.671      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:851600:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817143205 and revision id 1305702605. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dress_code&oldid=1305702605 " Category : Dress codes Hidden categories: CS1 Thai-language sources (th) Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles with limited geographic scope from April 2025 United States-centric Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Wikipedia articles that are excessively detailed from September 2019 All articles that are excessively detailed Wikipedia articles with style issues from September 2019 All articles with style issues Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 16:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dress code 38 languages Add topic

