Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Thought Toggle Thought subsection 2.1 Consciousness 2.2 The primacy of perception 2.3 Corporeity 2.4 Spatiality 2.5 Language 2.6 Art 2.7 Science 3 Influence Toggle Influence subsection 3.1 Anticognitivist cognitive science 3.2 Feminist philosophy 3.3 Ecophenomenology 4 Bibliography 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Maurice Merleau-Ponty 48 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kurdî Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Scots Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French phenomenological philosopher (1908–1961) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Maurice Merleau-Ponty" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Maurice Merleau-Ponty Born Maurice Jean Jacques Merleau-Ponty ( 1908-03-14 ) 14 March 1908 Rochefort-sur-Mer , Charente-Inférieure , France Died 3 May 1961 (1961-05-03) (aged 53) Paris , France Education Alma mater École Normale Supérieure University of Paris Academic advisors Émile Bréhier Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental [ 1 ] Phenomenology Western Marxism Main interests Aesthetics anthropology consciousness embodiment Gestalt theory meaning ontology perception politics psychology spatiality Notable ideas Embodied cognition invagination the flesh of the world speaking vs. spoken language Maurice Jean Jacques Merleau-Ponty [ 2 ] ( / ˌ m ɜːr l oʊ ˈ p ɒ n t i / MUR -loh PON -tee ; French: [mɔʁis mɛʁlo pɔ̃ti] ; 14 March 1908 – 3 May 1961) was a French phenomenological philosopher , strongly influenced by Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger . The constitution of meaning in human experience was his main interest and he wrote on perception , art , politics , religion , biology , psychology , psychoanalysis , language , nature , and history . He was the lead editor of Les Temps modernes , the leftist magazine he established with Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir in 1945.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] At the core of Merleau-Ponty's philosophy is a sustained argument for the foundational role that perception plays in the human experience of the world . Merleau-Ponty understands perception to be an ongoing dialogue between one's lived body and the world which it perceives, in which perceivers passively and actively strive to express the perceived world in concert with others. He was the only major phenomenologist of the first half of the twentieth century to engage extensively with the sciences. It is through this engagement that his writings became influential in the project of naturalising phenomenology, in which phenomenologists use the results of psychology and cognitive science .

Merleau-Ponty emphasised the body as the primary site of knowing the world, a corrective to the long philosophical tradition of placing consciousness as the source of knowledge , and maintained that the perceiving body and its perceived world could not be disentangled from each other. The articulation of the primacy of embodiment ( corporéité ) led him away from phenomenology towards what he was to call "indirect ontology " or the ontology of "the flesh of the world" ( la chair du monde ), seen in his final and incomplete work, The Visible and Invisible , and his last published essay, "Eye and Mind".

[ 6 ] Merleau-Ponty engaged with Marxism throughout his career. His 1947 book, Humanism and Terror , has been widely misunderstood as defense of the Moscow Trials , for instance by Marxist philosopher Slavoj Žižek .

[ 7 ] In his "Author's Preface", Merleau-Ponty explains how his essay avoids the definitive endorsement of a view on the Soviet Union , but instead engages with the Marxist theory of history as a critique of liberalism , in order to reveal an unresolved antinomy in modern politics, between humanism and terror : if human values can only be achieved through violent force, and if liberal ideas hide illiberal realities, how is just political action to be decided?

[ 8 ] Life [ edit ] Merleau-Ponty's grave at Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris, where he is buried with his mother Louise, his wife Suzanne, and his daughter Marianne Maurice Merleau-Ponty was born in 1908 in Rochefort-sur-Mer , Charente-Inférieure (now Charente-Maritime), France . His father died in 1913 when Merleau-Ponty was five years old.

[ 9 ] After secondary schooling at the Lycée Louis-le-Grand in Paris , Merleau-Ponty became a student at the École Normale Supérieure , where he studied alongside Jean-Paul Sartre , Simone de Beauvoir , Simone Weil , Jean Hyppolite , and Jean Wahl . As Beauvoir recounts in her autobiography, she developed a close friendship with Merleau-Ponty and became smitten with him, but ultimately found him too well-adjusted to bourgeois life and values for her taste. He attended Edmund Husserl 's "Paris Lectures" in February 1929.

[ 10 ] In 1929, Merleau-Ponty received his DES degree ( diplôme d'études supérieures [ fr ] , roughly equivalent to a M.A.

thesis) from the University of Paris , on the basis of the (now-lost) thesis La Notion de multiple intelligible chez Plotin (" Plotinus 's Notion of the Intelligible Many"), directed by Émile Bréhier .

[ 11 ] He passed the agrégation in philosophy in 1930.

[ citation needed ] Merleau-Ponty was raised as a Roman Catholic . He was friends with the Christian existentialist author and philosopher Gabriel Marcel and wrote articles for the Christian leftist journal Esprit , but he left the Catholic Church in 1937 because he felt his socialist politics were not compatible with the social and political doctrine of the Catholic Church.

[ 12 ] An article published in the French newspaper Le Monde in October 2014 makes the case of recent discoveries about Merleau-Ponty's likely authorship of the novel Nord. Récit de l'arctique (Grasset, 1928). Convergent sources from close friends (Beauvoir, Elisabeth "Zaza" Lacoin) seem to leave little doubt that Jacques Heller was a pseudonym of the 20-year-old Merleau-Ponty.

[ 13 ] Merleau-Ponty taught first at the Lycée de Beauvais (1931–33) and then got a fellowship to do research from the Caisse nationale de la recherche scientifique [ fr ] . From 1934 to 1935 he taught at the Lycée de Chartres . He then in 1935 became a tutor at the École Normale Supérieure, where he tutored a young Michel Foucault and Trần Đức Thảo and was awarded his doctorate on the basis of two important books: La structure du comportement (1942) and Phénoménologie de la Perception (1945). During this time, he attended Alexandre Kojève 's influential seminars on Hegel and Aron Gurwitsch 's lectures on Gestalt psychology . Merleau-Ponty possessed extensive knowledge in psychology, neurology , and psychiatry .

[ 14 ] In the spring of 1939, he was the first foreign visitor to the newly established Husserl Archives , where he consulted Husserl's unpublished manuscripts and met Eugen Fink and Herman Van Breda . In the summer of 1939, as France declared war on Nazi Germany , he served on the frontlines in the French Army , where he was wounded in battle in June 1940. Upon returning to Paris in the fall of 1940, he married Suzanne Jolibois, a Lacanian psychoanalyst , and founded an underground resistance group with Jean-Paul Sartre called "Under the Boot". He participated in an armed demonstration against the Nazi forces during the liberation of Paris .

[ 15 ] After teaching at the University of Lyon from 1945 to 1948, Merleau-Ponty lectured on child psychology and education at the Sorbonne from 1949 to 1952.

[ 16 ] He was awarded the Chair of Philosophy at the Collège de France from 1952 until his death in 1961, making him the youngest person to have been elected to a chair.

Besides his teaching, Merleau-Ponty was also political editor for the leftist journal Les Temps modernes from its founding in October 1945 until December 1952. In his youth, he had read Karl Marx 's writings [ 17 ] and Sartre even claimed that Merleau-Ponty converted him to Marxism .

[ 18 ] E. K. Kuby states that while Merleau-Ponty was not a member of the French Communist Party and did not identify as a Communist, he laid out an argument justifying the Moscow Trials and political violence for progressive ends in general in the work Humanism and Terror in 1947. Kuby states that, about three years after that, however, he renounced his earlier support for political violence, rejected Marxism, and advocated a liberal left position in Adventures of the Dialectic (1955).

[ 19 ] His friendship with Sartre and work with Les Temps modernes ended because of that, since Sartre still had a more favourable attitude towards Soviet communism . Merleau-Ponty was subsequently active in the French non-communist left and in particular in the Union of the Democratic Forces .

Merleau-Ponty died suddenly of a stroke in 1961 at age 53, apparently while preparing for a class on René Descartes , leaving an unfinished manuscript which was posthumously published in 1964, along with a selection of Merleau-Ponty's working notes, by Claude Lefort as The Visible and the Invisible . He is buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris with his mother Louise, his wife Suzanne and their daughter Marianne.

Thought [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Consciousness [ edit ] In his Phenomenology of Perception (first published in French in 1945), Merleau-Ponty develops the concept of the body-subject ( le corps propre ) as an alternative to the Cartesian " cogito ". This distinction is especially important in that Merleau-Ponty perceives the essences of the world existentially .

Consciousness , the world, and the human body as a perceiving thing are intricately intertwined and mutually "engaged". The phenomenal thing is not the unchanging object of the natural sciences , but a correlate of the human body and its sensory-motor functions. Taking up and "communing with" (Merleau-Ponty's phrase) the sensible qualities it encounters, the body as incarnated subjectivity intentionally elaborates things within an ever-present world frame, through use of its pre-conscious, pre-predicative understanding of the world's makeup. The elaboration, however, is "inexhaustible" (the hallmark of any perception according to Merleau-Ponty). Things are that upon which the body has a "grip" ( prise ), while the grip itself is a function of human connaturality with the world's things. The world and the sense of self are emergent phenomena in an ongoing "becoming".

The essential partiality of the view of things, their being given only in a certain perspective and at a certain moment in time does not diminish their reality, but on the contrary establishes it, as there is no other way for things to be copresent in the world and with other things than through such " Abschattungen " (sketches, faint outlines, adumbrations). The thing transcends perception, but is manifest precisely by presenting itself to a range of possible views. The object of perception is immanently tied to its background—to the nexus of meaningful relations among objects within the world. Because the object is inextricably within the world of meaningful relations, each object reflects the other (much in the style of Leibniz's monads ). Through involvement in the world – being-in-the-world – the perceiver tacitly experiences all the perspectives upon that object coming from all the surrounding things of its environment, as well as the potential perspectives that that object has upon the beings around it.

Each object is a "mirror of all others". The perception of the object through all perspectives is not that of a propositional, or clearly delineated, perception; rather, it is an ambiguous perception founded upon the body's primordial involvement and understanding of the world and of the meanings that constitute the landscape's perceptual Gestalt . Only after an integration within the environment so as to perceive objects as such can attention be turned toward particular objects within the landscape so as to define them more clearly. This attention, however, does not operate by clarifying what is already seen, but by constructing a new Gestalt oriented toward a particular object. Because the bodily involvement with things is always provisional and indeterminate, meaningful things are encountered in a unified though ever open-ended world.

The primacy of perception [ edit ] From the time of writing Structure of Behaviour and Phenomenology of Perception , Merleau-Ponty wanted to show, in opposition to the idea that drove the tradition beginning with John Locke , that perception was not the causal product of atomic sensations . This atomist-causal conception was being perpetuated in certain psychological currents of the time, particularly in behaviourism . According to Merleau-Ponty, perception has an active dimension, in that it is a primordial openness to the lifeworld (the " Lebenswelt ").

This primordial openness is at the heart of his thesis of the primacy of perception. The slogan of Husserl's phenomenology is "all consciousness is consciousness of something", which implies a distinction between "acts of thought" (the noesis ) and "intentional objects of thought" (the noema ). Thus, the correlation between noesis and noema becomes the first step in the constitution of analyses of consciousness. However, in studying the posthumous manuscripts of Husserl, who remained one of his major influences, Merleau-Ponty remarked that, in their evolution, Husserl's work brings to light phenomena which are not assimilable to noesis–noema correlation. This is particularly the case when one attends to the phenomena of the body (which is at once body-subject and body-object), subjective time (the consciousness of time is neither an act of consciousness nor an object of thought) and the other (the first considerations of the other in Husserl led to solipsism ).

The distinction between "acts of thought" (noesis) and " intentional objects of thought" (noema) does not seem, therefore, to constitute an irreducible ground. It appears rather at a higher level of analysis. Thus, Merleau-Ponty does not postulate that "all consciousness is consciousness of something", which supposes at the outset a noetic-noematic ground. Instead, he develops the thesis according to which "all consciousness is perceptual consciousness". In doing so, he establishes a significant turn in the development of phenomenology, indicating that its conceptualisations should be re-examined in the light of the primacy of perception, in weighing up the philosophical consequences of this thesis.

Corporeity [ edit ] Portrait of the 17th-century French philosopher René Descartes , one of the leading exponents of rationalism in the history of Western philosophy Taking the study of perception as his point of departure, Merleau-Ponty was led to recognize that one's own body ( le corps propre ) is not only a thing, a potential object of study for science, but is also a permanent condition of experience , a constituent of the perceptual openness to the world. He therefore underlines the fact that there is an inherence of consciousness and of the body of which the analysis of perception should take account. The primacy of perception signifies a primacy of experience, so to speak, insofar as perception becomes an active and constitutive dimension.

Merleau-Ponty demonstrates a corporeity of consciousness as much as an intentionality of the body, and so stands in contrast with the dualist ontology of mind and body in Descartes, a philosopher to whom Merleau-Ponty continually returned, despite the important differences that separate them. In the Phenomenology of Perception Merleau-Ponty wrote: "Insofar as I have hands, feet, a body, I sustain around me intentions which are not dependent on my decisions and which affect my surroundings in a way that I do not choose" (1962, p. 440).

Spatiality [ edit ] The question concerning corporeity connects also with Merleau-Ponty's reflections on space ( l'espace ) and the primacy of the dimension of depth ( la profondeur ) as implied in the notion of being in the world ( être au monde ; to echo Heidegger 's In-der-Welt-sein ) and of one's own body ( le corps propre ).

[ 20 ] Reflections on spatiality in phenomenology are also central to the advanced philosophical deliberations in architectural theory .

[ 21 ] Language [ edit ] The highlighting of the fact that corporeity intrinsically has a dimension of expressivity which proves to be fundamental to the constitution of the ego is one of the conclusions of The Structure of Behaviour (1942) that is constantly reiterated in Merleau-Ponty's later works. Following this theme of expressivity, he goes on to examine how an incarnate subject is in a position to undertake actions that transcend the organic level of the body, such as in intellectual operations and the products of one's cultural life.

Photograph of the Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure , considered to be the father of modern linguistics He carefully considers language , then, as the core of culture , by examining in particular the connections between the unfolding of thought and sense—enriching his perspective not only by an analysis of the acquisition of language and the expressivity of the body, but also by taking into account pathologies of language, painting, cinema, literature, poetry, and music.

This work deals mainly with language, beginning with the reflection on artistic expression in The Structure of Behavior —which contains a passage on El Greco that prefigures the remarks that he develops in "Cézanne's Doubt" (1945) and follows the discussion in Phenomenology of Perception . The work, undertaken while serving as the Chair of Child Psychology and Pedagogy at the University of the Sorbonne, is not a departure from his philosophical and phenomenological works, but rather an important continuation in the development of his thought.

As the course outlines of his Sorbonne lectures indicate, [ citation needed ] during this period he continues a dialogue between phenomenology and the diverse work carried out in psychology , all in order to return to the study of the acquisition of language in children, as well as to broadly take advantage of the contribution of Ferdinand de Saussure to linguistics , and to work on the notion of structure through a discussion of work in psychology, linguistics and social anthropology .

Art [ edit ] Merleau-Ponty distinguishes between primary and secondary modes of expression. This distinction appears in Phenomenology of Perception (p. 207, 2nd note [Fr. ed.]) and is sometimes repeated in terms of spoken and speaking language ( le langage parlé et le langage parlant ) ( The Prose of the World , p. 10). Spoken language ( le langage parlé ), or secondary expression, returns to the speaker's linguistic baggage and cultural heritage, as well as the brute mass of relationships between signs and significations . Speaking language ( le langage parlant ), or primary expression, such as it is, is language in the production of a sense, language at the advent of a thought, at the moment where it makes itself an advent of sense.

It is speaking language, that is to say, primary expression, that interests Merleau-Ponty and which keeps his attention through his treatment of the nature of production and the reception of expressions, a subject which also overlaps with an analysis of action, of intentionality, of perception, as well as the links between freedom and external conditions.

The notion of style occupies an important place in his essay "Indirect Language and the Voices of Silence" (the first chapter of Signes , 1960). In spite of certain similarities with André Malraux , Merleau-Ponty distinguishes himself from Malraux in respect to three conceptions of style, the last of which is employed in Malraux's The Voices of Silence . Merleau-Ponty remarks that in this work "style" is sometimes used by Malraux in a highly subjective sense, understood as a projection of the artist's individuality. Sometimes it is used, on the contrary, in a very metaphysical sense (in Merleau-Ponty's opinion, a mystical sense), in which style is connected with a conception of an "über-artist" expressing "the Spirit of Painting". Finally, it sometimes is reduced to simply designating a categorization of an artistic school or movement. (However, this account of Malraux's notion of style—a key element in his thinking—is open to serious question.

[ 22 ] ) For Merleau-Ponty, it is these uses of the notion of style that lead Malraux to postulate a separation between the objectivity of Italian Renaissance painting and the subjectivity of painting in his own time, a conclusion that Merleau-Ponty disputes. According to Merleau-Ponty, it is important to consider the heart of this problematic, by recognizing that style is first of all a demand owed to the primacy of perception, which also implies taking into consideration the dimensions of historicity and intersubjectivity . (However, Merleau-Ponty's reading of Malraux has been questioned in a recent major study of Malraux's theory of art which argues that Merleau-Ponty seriously misunderstood Malraux.) [ 23 ] For Merleau-Ponty, style is born of the interaction between two or more fields of being. Rather than being exclusive to individual human consciousness, consciousness is born of the pre-conscious style of the world, of Nature.

Science [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In his essay  "Cézanne's Doubt" (1945), in which he identifies Paul Cézanne 's impressionistic theory of painting as analogous to his own concept of radical reflection, the attempt to return to, and reflect on, prereflective consciousness, Merleau-Ponty identifies science as the opposite of art. In Merleau-Ponty's account, whereas art is an attempt to capture an individual's perception, science is anti-individualistic. In the preface to his Phenomenology of Perception , Merleau-Ponty presents a phenomenological objection to positivism : that it can reveal nothing about human subjectivity. All that a scientific text can explain is the particular individual experience of that scientist, which cannot be transcended. For Merleau-Ponty, science neglects the depth and profundity of the phenomena that it endeavors to explain.

Merleau-Ponty understood science to be an ex post facto abstraction. Causal and physiological accounts of perception, for example, explain perception in terms that are arrived at only after abstracting from the phenomenon itself. Merleau-Ponty chastised science for taking itself to be the area in which a complete account of nature may be given. The subjective depth of phenomena cannot be given in science as it is. This characterizes Merleau-Ponty's attempt to ground science in phenomenological objectivity and, in essence, to institute a "return to the phenomena".

Influence [ edit ] Anticognitivist cognitive science [ edit ] Merleau-Ponty's critical position with respect to science was stated in his Preface to the Phenomenology : he described scientific points of view as "always both naive and at the same time dishonest". Despite, or perhaps because of, this view, his work influenced and anticipated the strands of modern psychology known as post-cognitivism .

Hubert Dreyfus has been instrumental in emphasising the relevance of Merleau-Ponty's work to current post-cognitive research, and its criticism of the traditional view of cognitive science.

Dreyfus's seminal critique of cognitivism (or the computational account of the mind), What Computers Can't Do , consciously replays Merleau-Ponty's critique of intellectualist psychology to argue for the irreducibility of corporeal know-how to discrete, syntactic processes. Through the influence of Dreyfus's critique and neurophysiological alternative, Merleau-Ponty became associated with neurophysiological, connectionist accounts of cognition.

With the publication in 1991 of The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience , by Francisco Varela , Evan Thompson , and Eleanor Rosch , this association was extended, if only partially, to another strand of "anti-cognitivist" or post-representationalist cognitive science: embodied or enactive cognitive science, and later in the decade, to neurophenomenology . In addition, Merleau-Ponty's work has also influenced researchers trying to integrate neuroscience with the principles of chaos theory .

[ 24 ] It was through this relationship with Merleau-Ponty's work that cognitive science's affair with phenomenology was born, which is represented by a growing number of works, including Ron McClamrock , Existential Cognition: Computational Minds in the World (1995) Andy Clark , Being There (1997) Jean Petitot et al. (eds.), Naturalizing Phenomenology (1999) Alva Noë , Action in Perception (2004) Shaun Gallagher , How the Body Shapes the Mind (2005) Franck Grammont, Dorothée Legrand, and Pierre Livet (eds.), Naturalizing Intention in Action (2010) The journal Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences Feminist philosophy [ edit ] Merleau-Ponty has also been picked up by Australian and Nordic philosophers inspired by the French feminist tradition, including Rosalyn Diprose and Sara Heinämaa [ fi ] .

Heinämaa has argued for a rereading of Merleau-Ponty's influence on Simone de Beauvoir. (She has also challenged Dreyfus's reading of Merleau-Ponty as behaviorist [ citation needed ] , and as neglecting the importance of the phenomenological reduction to Merleau-Ponty's thought.) Merleau-Ponty's phenomenology of the body has also been taken up by Iris Young in her essay " Throwing Like a Girl ," and its follow-up, "'Throwing Like a Girl': Twenty Years Later".  Young analyzes the particular modalities of feminine bodily comportment as they differ from that of men.  Young observes that while a man who throws a ball puts his whole body into the motion, a woman throwing a ball generally restricts her own movements as she makes them, and that, generally, in sports, women move in a more tentative, reactive way.  Merleau-Ponty argues that people experience the world in terms of the "I can" – that is, oriented towards certain projects based on capacity and habituality.  Young's thesis is that in women, this intentionality is inhibited and ambivalent, rather than confident, experienced as an "I cannot".

Ecophenomenology [ edit ] Ecophenomenology can be described as the pursuit of the relationalities of worldly engagement, both human and those of other creatures (Brown & Toadvine 2003).

This engagement is situated in a kind of middle ground of relationality, a space that is neither purely objective, because it is reciprocally constituted by a diversity of lived experiences motivating the movements of countless organisms, nor purely subjective, because it is nonetheless a field of material relationships between bodies. It is governed exclusively neither by causality, nor by intentionality. In this space of in-betweenness, phenomenology can overcome its inaugural opposition to naturalism.

[ 25 ] David Abram explains Merleau-Ponty's concept of "flesh" ( chair ) as "the mysterious tissue or matrix that underlies and gives rise to both the perceiver and the perceived as interdependent aspects of its spontaneous activity", and he identifies this elemental matrix with the interdependent web of earthly life.

[ 26 ] This concept unites subject and object dialectically as determinations within a more primordial reality, which Merleau-Ponty calls "the flesh" and which Abram refers to variously as "the animate earth", "the breathing biosphere" or "the more-than-human natural world". Yet this is not nature or the biosphere conceived as a complex set of objects and objective processes, but rather "the biosphere as it is experienced and lived from within by the intelligent body — by the attentive human animal who is entirely a part of the world that he or she experiences. Merleau-Ponty's ecophenemonology with its emphasis on holistic dialog within the larger-than-human world also has implications for the ontogenesis and phylogenesis of language; indeed he states that "language is the very voice of the trees, the waves and the forest".

[ 27 ] Merleau-Ponty himself refers to "that primordial being which is not yet the subject-being nor the object-being and which in every respect baffles reflection. From this primordial being to us, there is no derivation, nor any break..." [ 28 ] Among the many working notes found on his desk at the time of his death, and published with the half-complete manuscript of The Visible and the Invisible , several make it evident that Merleau-Ponty himself recognized a deep affinity between his notion of a primordial "flesh" and a radically transformed understanding of "nature". Hence, in November 1960 he writes: "Do a psychoanalysis of Nature: it is the flesh, the mother." [ 29 ] And in the last published working note, written in March 1961, he writes: "Nature as the other side of humanity (as flesh, nowise as 'matter')." [ 30 ] This resonates with the conception of space, place, dwelling, and embodiment (in the flesh and physical, vs. virtual and cybernetic), especially as they are addressed against the background of the unfolding of the essence of modern technology.  Such analytics figure in a Heideggerian take on "econtology" as an extension of Heidegger's consideration of the question of being ( Seinsfrage ) by way of the fourfold ( Das Geviert ) of earth-sky-mortals-divinities ( Erde und Himmel, Sterblichen und Göttlichen ).  In this strand of "ecophenomenology", ecology is co-entangled with ontology, whereby the worldly existential analytics are grounded in earthiness, and environmentalism is orientated by ontological thinking.

[ 31 ] Bibliography [ edit ] The following table gives a selection of Merleau-Ponty's works in French and English translation.

Year Original French English translation 1942 La Structure du comportement (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1942) The Structure of Behavior – trans. by Alden Fisher (Boston: Beacon Press, 1963; London: Methuen, 1965) 1945 Phénoménologie de la perception (Paris: Gallimard, 1945) Phenomenology of Perception – trans. by Colin Smith (New York: Humanities Press, and London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1962); trans. revised by Forrest Williams (1981; reprinted, 2002); new trans. by Donald A. Landes (New York: Routledge, 2012) 1947 Humanisme et terreur, essai sur le problème communiste (Paris: Gallimard, 1947) Humanism and Terror: An Essay on the Communist Problem – trans. by John O'Neill (Boston: Beacon Press, 1969) 1948 Sens et non-sens (Paris: Nagel, 1948, 1966) Sense and Non-Sense – trans. by Hubert Dreyfus and Patricia Allen Dreyfus (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1964) 1949–50 Conscience et l'acquisition du langage (Paris: Bulletin de psychologie , 236, vol. XVIII, 3–6, Nov. 1964) Consciousness and the Acquisition of Language – trans. by Hugh J. Silverman (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1973) 1949–52 Merleau-Ponty à la Sorbonne: résumé de cours, 1949-1952 (Grenoble: Cynara, 1988) Child Psychology and Pedagogy: The Sorbonne Lectures 1949-1952 – trans. by Talia Welsh (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 2010) 1951 Les Relations avec autrui chez l'enfant (Paris: Centre de Documentation Universitaire, 1951, 1975) The Child's Relations with Others – trans. by William Cobb in The Primacy of Perception ed. by James M. Edie (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1964), 96-155 1953 Éloge de la Philosophie, Lecon inaugurale faite au Collége de France, Le jeudi 15 janvier 1953 (Paris: Gallimard, 1953) In Praise of Philosophy – trans. by John Wild and James M. Edie (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1963) 1955 Les aventures de la dialectique (Paris: Gallimard, 1955) Adventures of the Dialectic – trans. by Joseph Bien (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1973; London: Heinemann, 1974) 1958 Les Sciences de l'homme et la phénoménologie (Paris: Centre de Documentation Universitaire, 1958, 1975) Phenomenology and the Sciences of Man – trans. by John Wild in The Primacy of Perception ed. by James Edie (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1964), 43–95 1960 Éloge de la Philosophie et autres essais (Paris: Gallimard, 1960) In Praise of Philosophy and Other Essays – trans. by John Wild, James M. Edie and John O'Neill (Northwestern University Press, 1988) 1960 Signes (Paris: Gallimard, 1960) Signs – trans. by Richard McCleary (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1964) 1961 L'Œil et l'esprit (Paris: Gallimard, 1961) Eye and Mind – trans. by Carleton Dallery in The Primacy of Perception ed. by James Edie (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1964), 159–190; revised translation by Michael Smith in The Merleau-Ponty Aesthetics Reader (1993), 121-149 1964 Le Visible et l'invisible, suivi de notes de travail – edited by Claude Lefort (Paris: Gallimard, 1964) The Visible and the Invisible, Followed by Working Notes – trans. by Alphonso Lingis (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1968) 1968 Résumés de cours, Collège de France 1952-1960 (Paris: Gallimard, 1968) Themes from the Lectures at the Collège de France, 1952-1960 – trans. by John O'Neill (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1970) 1969 La Prose du monde (Paris: Gallimard, 1969) The Prose of the World – trans. by John O'Neill (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1973; London: Heinemann, 1974) See also [ edit ] Affordance Autopoiesis Body schema Difference (philosophy) Embodied cognition Embodied phenomenology Emergence Enactivism Gestalt psychology Habit Hylomorphism Incarnation Invagination (philosophy) Perspectivism Process philosophy Reflexivity Umwelt Virtuality (philosophy) Notes [ edit ] ^ "Category: Continental Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Toadvine, Ted (2019), "Maurice Merleau-Ponty" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2022-07-16 .

^ Reynolds, Jack (2008).

"Maurice Merleau-Ponty: life and works" .

Merleau-Ponty . pp.

3– 7.

doi : 10.1017/UPO9781844654024.001 .

ISBN 978-1-84465-402-4 . Retrieved 2 April 2025 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ "Maurice Merleau-Ponty" .

oxfordbibliographies.com . Retrieved 2 April 2025 .

^ "Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908—1961)" .

iep.utm.edu/ . Retrieved 2 April 2025 .

^ "Maurice Merleau-Ponty" .

plato.stanford.edu . Retrieved 2 April 2025 .

^ Slavoj Žižek , The Sublime Object of Ideology , 1989: 159.

^ Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Humanism and Terror: An Essay on the Communist Problem: xiii-xlvii.

^ Thomas Baldwin in Introduction to Merleau-Ponty's The World of Perception (New York: Routledge, 2008): 2.

^ Ted Toadvine, Lester Embree (eds.), Merleau-Ponty's Reading of Husserl , Springer Science & Business Media, 2013, p. 229.

^ Donald A. Landes, The Merleau-Ponty Dictionary , A&C Black, 2013, p. 2.

^ Matthews, Eric (2002).

The Philosophy of Merleau-Ponty . Chesham: Accumen. p. 3.

^ Emmanuel Alloa, " Merleau-Ponty, tout un roman " , Le Monde , 23.10.2014.

^ Sie, Maureen; Engelen, Bart (2021).

"Maurice Merleau-Ponty. 'Phenomenology of Perception' " .

openpresstiu.pubpub.org .

doi : 10.26116/second-thoughts-openpresstiu-jote . Retrieved 2 April 2025 .

^ Whiteside, Kerry H. (14 July 2014).

Merleau-Ponty and the Foundation of Existential Politics . Princeton University Press. p. 34.

ISBN 978-1-4008-5973-3 .

OCLC 1091433580 .

During the liberation of Paris he joined an armed street patrol.

^ Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Child Psychology and Pedagogy: The Sorbonne Lectures 1949-1952. Translated by Talia Welsh. Evanston: Northwestern University Press , 2010.

^ Martin Jay, (1986), Marxism and Totality: The Adventures of a Concept from Lukács to Habermas , pages 361–385.

^ Martin Jay, (1986), Marxism and Totality: The Adventures of a Concept from Lukács to Habermas , page 361.

^ Emma Kathryn Kuby, Between Humanism And Terror: The Problem Of Political Violence In Postwar France, 1944-1962 , Ph.D. thesis, Cornell University, 2011, pp. 243–244: "Merleau-Ponty provisionally defended Soviet "terror" in the name of humanism, writing that so long as the USSR's violence was authentically revolutionary in its aims, it was justified by the fact that it was helping to produce a socialist world in which all violence would be eliminated. ... Yet about three years after it was published, Merleau-Ponty, too, decided that he no longer believed political violence could be justified by the purported humanist aims of the revolution ".

^ For recent investigations of this question refer to the following: Nader El-Bizri , "A Phenomenological Account of the 'Ontological Problem of Space'," Existentia Meletai-Sophias , Vol. XII, Issue 3–4 (2002), pp. 345–364; see also the related analysis of space qua depth in: Nader El-Bizri , "La perception de la profondeur: Alhazen, Berkeley et Merleau-Ponty," Oriens-Occidens: sciences, mathématiques et philosophie de l'antiquité à l'âge classique (Cahiers du Centre d'Histoire des Sciences et des Philosophies Arabes et Médiévales, CNRS) , Vol. 5 (2004), pp. 171–184. Check also the connections of this question with Heidegger's accounts of the phenomenon of "dwelling" in: Nader El-Bizri , 'Being at Home Among Things: Heidegger's Reflections on Dwelling', Environment, Space, Place 3 (2011), pp. 47–71.

^ For discussions in this area of research in architectural phenomenology, refer to the following recent studies: Nader El-Bizri , 'On Dwelling: Heideggerian Allusions to Architectural Phenomenology ', Studia UBB. Philosophia , Vol. 60, No. 1 (2015): 5-3; Nader El-Bizri , 'Phenomenology of Place and Space in our Epoch: Thinking along Heideggerian Pathways', in The Phenomenology of Real and Virtual Places , ed. E. Champion (London : Routledge, 2018), pp. 123-143.

^ See: Derek Allan, Art and the Human Adventure, André Malraux's Theory of Art Archived 2017-03-07 at the Wayback Machine , Rodopi, 2009.

^ Derek Allan, Art and the Human Adventure: André Malraux's Theory of Art , Rodopi, 2009.

^ Skada, Christine; Walter Freeman (March 1990). "Chaos and the New Science of the Brain".

Concepts in Neuroscience .

1 : 275– 285.

^ Charles Brown and Ted Toadvine, (Eds) (2003).

Eco-Phenomenology: Back to the Earth Itself . Albany: SUNY Press.

^ Abram, D. (1996).

The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-than Human World . Pantheon Books, New York. pp.

66 .

ISBN 9780679438199 .

^ Abram, D. (1996).

The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-than-Human World . Pantheon Books, New York. pp.

65 .

ISBN 9780679438199 .

^ The Concept of Nature, I, Themes from the Lectures at the Collège de France 1952-1960 . Northwestern University Press. 1970. pp.

65– 66.

^ The Visible and the Invisible . Northwestern University Press. 1968. p. 267.

^ The Visible and the Invisible . Northwestern University Press. 1968. p. 274.

^ See the research of Nader El-Bizri in this regard in his philosophical investigation of the notion of χώρα ( Khôra ) as it figured in the Timaeus dialogue of Plato .  See for example: Nader El-Bizri , " Qui-êtes vous Khôra?

: Receiving Plato 's Timaeus ," Existentia Meletai-Sophias , Vol. XI, Issue 3-4 (2001), pp. 473–490; Nader El-Bizri , " ON KAI KHORA : Situating Heidegger between the Sophist and the Timaeus ," Studia Phaenomenologica , Vol. IV, Issue 1-2 (2004), pp. 73–98 [1] Archived 2018-12-28 at the Wayback Machine ; Nader El-Bizri , " Ontopoiēsis and the Interpretation of Plato 's Khôra ," Analecta Husserliana: The Yearbook of Phenomenological Research , Vol. LXXXIII (2004), pp. 25–45.  Refer also to the more specific analysis of related Heideggerian leitmotifs in: Nader El-Bizri , "Being at Home Among Things: Heidegger 's Reflections on Dwelling", Environment, Space, Place Vol. 3 (2011), pp. 47–71; Nader El-Bizri , "On Dwelling: Heideggerian Allusions to Architectural Phenomenology ", Studia UBB. Philosophia , Vol. 60, No. 1 (2015): 5-30; Nader El-Bizri , "Phenomenology of Place and Space in our Epoch: Thinking along Heideggerian Pathways", in The Phenomenology of Real and Virtual Places , ed. E. Champion (London : Routledge, 2018), pp. 123–143.

References [ edit ] Abram, D. (1988). "Merleau-Ponty and the Voice of the Earth" Environmental Ethics 10, no. 2 (Summer 1988): 101–20.

Abram, D. (1996).

The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception and Language in a More-than-Human World , New York: Pantheon Books.

Alloa, E. (2017) Resistance of the Sensible World. An Introduction to Merleau-Ponty , New York: Fordham University Press.

Alloa, E., F. Chouraqui & R. Kaushik, (2019) (eds.) Merleau-Ponty and Contemporary Philosophy , Albany: SUNY Press.

Barbaras, R. (2004) The Being of the Phenomenon. Merleau-Ponty's Ontology Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Carbone, M. (2004) The Thinking of the Sensible. Merleau-Ponty's A-Philosophy , Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Clark, A. (1997) Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World Together Again .  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Dillon, M. C. (1997) Merleau-Ponty's Ontology . Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Gallagher, S. (2003) How the Body Shapes the Mind . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Guilherme, Alexandre and Morgan, W. John, 'Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908-1961)-dialogue as being present to the other'. Chapter 6 in Philosophy, Dialogue, and Education: Nine modern European philosophers , Routledge, London and New York, pp. 89–108, ISBN 978-1-138-83149-0 .

Johnson, G., Smith, M. B. (eds.) (1993) The Merleau-Ponty Aesthetics Reader: Philosophy and Painting , Chicago: Northwestern UP 1993.

Landes, D. (2013) Merleau-Ponty and the Paradoxes of Expression , New York-London: Bloomsbury.

Lawlor, L., Evans, F. (eds.) (2000) Chiasms: Merleau-Ponty's Notion of Flesh , Albany: SUNY Press.

Petitot, J., Varela, F., Pachoud, B. and Roy, J-M. (eds.) (1999) Naturalizing Phenomenology: Issues in Contemporary Phenomenology and Cognitive Science . Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Toadvine, T. (2009) Merleau-Ponty's Philosophy of Nature . Evanston: Northwestern University Press.

Tilliette, X.

(1970) Maurice Merleau-Ponty ou la mesure de l'homme , Seghers, 1970.

Varela, F. J., Thompson, E. and Rosch, E. (1991) The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience .  Cambridge: MIT Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Maurice Merleau-Ponty .

Library resources about Maurice Merleau-Ponty Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Maurice Merleau-Ponty at 18 from the French Government website English Translations of Merleau-Ponty's Work Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy : Maurice Merleau-Ponty by Jack Reynolds Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : Maurice Merleau-Ponty by Ted Toadvine The Merleau-Ponty Circle — Association of scholars interested in the works of Merleau-Ponty Maurice Merleau-Ponty page at Mythos & Logos Chiasmi International — Studies Concerning the Thought of Maurice Merleau-Ponty in English, French and Italian O'Loughlin, Marjorie, 1995, " Intelligent Bodies and Ecological Subjectivities: Merleau-Ponty's Corrective to Postmodernism's "Subjects" of Education.

" Popen, Shari, 1995, " Merleau-Ponty Confronts Postmodernism: A Reply to O'Loughlin.

" Merleau-Ponty: Reckoning with the Possibility of an 'Other.' The Journal of French Philosophy — the online home of the Bulletin de la Société Américaine de Philosophie de Langue Française Online Merleau-Ponty Bibliography at PhilPapers.org v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican 2 Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐tqzxj
Cached time: 20250817043736
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.813 seconds
Real time usage: 1.002 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5823/1000000
Revision size: 51637/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 163194/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9756/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 113878/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.515/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 29000753/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  804.659      1 -total
 23.68%  190.511      1 Template:Reflist
 22.63%  182.095      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 11.41%   91.776      1 Template:IPA
  8.80%   70.770      1 Template:Cite_IEP
  8.59%   69.102      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  7.92%   63.738      3 Template:Navbox
  7.60%   61.172      1 Template:Short_description
  7.26%   58.405      9 Template:Cite_book
  7.25%   58.310      1 Template:Aesthetics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19373:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043736 and revision id 1304827813. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maurice_Merleau-Ponty&oldid=1304827813 " Categories : Maurice Merleau-Ponty 1908 births 1961 deaths 20th-century French philosophers Action theorists Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery Academic staff of the Collège de France French consciousness researchers and theorists École Normale Supérieure alumni Enactive cognition Environmental philosophers French epistemologists Existentialists French former Christians French magazine founders French social liberals French socialists French humanists French male non-fiction writers Former Marxists Former Roman Catholics Lycée Carnot teachers Lycée Louis-le-Grand alumni Marxist theorists Ontologists People from Rochefort, Charente-Maritime Phenomenologists French philosophers of art French philosophers of culture French philosophers of education French philosophers of language French philosophers of mind Philosophers of psychology French philosophers of science French political philosophers Academic staff of the University of Lyon Academic staff of the University of Paris University of Paris alumni Hidden categories: Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links CS1 errors: periodical ignored Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles needing additional references from July 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles containing French-language text Articles needing additional references from June 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2007 This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 11:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Maurice Merleau-Ponty 48 languages Add topic

