Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work 3 Publications 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Stuart Card 2 languages Deutsch فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American computer researcher Stuart K. Card (born December 21, 1943) is an American researcher and retired senior research fellow at Xerox PARC . He is considered to be one of the pioneers of applying human factors in human–computer interaction .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] With Jock D. Mackinlay , George G. Robertson and others he invented a number of information visualization techniques.

[ 3 ] He holds numerous patents in user interfaces and visual analysis.

[ 4 ] Biography [ edit ] Card received a B.A.

in physics from Oberlin College in 1966, and a Ph.D. in psychology from Carnegie Mellon University .

He started working as an adjunct faculty member at Stanford University in the late 1960s.

[ 5 ] Since 1974 he had been working at PARC and was the Area Manager of the User Interface Research group.  He retired from PARC in 2010 but has been a consulting professor in Stanford University's Computer Science department.

Card received several awards. In 2000 he was awarded the CHI Lifetime Achievement Award from the Association for Computing Machinery 's SIGCHI, and became Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery . In 2001 he was elected to the CHI Academy . In 2007, he was elected a member of the National Academy of Engineering , and was awarded The Franklin Institute 's Bower Award and Prize for Achievement in Science.

[ 6 ] On May 26, 2008, Card was made an Honorary Doctor of Science by Oberlin College.

Work [ edit ] Stuart Card's study of input devices led to the Fitts's law characterization of the computer mouse and was a major factor leading to the mouse's commercial introduction by Xerox, most notably in the Alto and Star projects, some of the very earliest GUI systems employing a desktop metaphor .

[ 7 ] The 1983 book The Psychology of Human–Computer Interaction , which he co-wrote with Thomas P. Moran and Allen Newell , became seminal work in the HCI field.  Further research into the theoretical characterizations of human–machine interaction led to developments including "the Model Human Processor , the GOMS theory of user interaction, information foraging theory, and statistical descriptions of Internet use".

[ 5 ] In the new millennium his research has been focusing on developing a "supporting science of human–information interaction and visual-semantic prototypes to aid sense making".

[ 5 ] Publications [ edit ] Card has written three books and more than 70 papers, and holds 22 patents.

1983.

The Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction . With Thomas P. Moran and Allen Newell.

1990.

Human Performance Models for Computer-Aided Engineering . Edited with J.I. Elkind, J.  Hochberg and B.M. Heuy. San Diego, CA : Academic Press.

1996.

IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization ’96 : proceedings, October 28–29, 1996, San Francisco, California . Edited with Stephen G. Eick and Nahum Gershon. Los Alamitos, Calif. : IEEE Computer Society.

1999.

Readings in information visualization : using vision to think . With Jock D. Mackinlay and Ben Shneiderman .

References [ edit ] ^ Stuart Card at Computer History Museum website computerhistory.org. Accessed 02.12.2021.

^ "Bower Award and Prize for Achievement in Science" .

The Franklin Institute . 15 January 2014 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ "Jock Mackinlay | Tableau Research" .

research.tableau.com . Retrieved 2017-12-31 .

^ "Google Patents" .

patents.google.com . Retrieved 2017-12-31 .

^ a b c Stuart Card Archived 2007-02-09 at the Wayback Machine at PARC, 2004. Retrieved 1 July 2008.

^ Stuart K. Card Archived 2007-10-12 at the Wayback Machine , Franklin Laureate Database. Retrieved 1 July 2008.

^ "ACM CHI Academy" .

SIGCHI . SIG CHI. Archived from the original on 7 September 2015 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Stuart Card at PARC.

SIGCHI Awards Oral history interview with Stuart Card (2020) .

Charles Babbage Institute . Retrieved from the University of Minnesota Digital Conservancy .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands Israel Academics Association for Computing Machinery DBLP Other IdRef Yale LUX v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stuart_Card&oldid=1270905955 " Categories : 2000 fellows of the Association for Computing Machinery Human–computer interaction researchers Living people Data and information visualization experts Members of the United States National Academy of Engineering Scientists at PARC (company) 1943 births The Benjamin Franklin Medal in Computer and Cognitive Science laureates Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 January 2025, at 20:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stuart Card 2 languages Add topic

