Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Logistics 3 Limitations of military supply chain 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Military supply-chain management 13 languages العربية Bosanski Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 کوردی Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Military supply chain management ) Logistics of producing and distributing military materials in times of war The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on War ( outline ) History Prehistoric Ancient Thermal Gunpowder Timeline Post-classical Castles Early modern Military revolution Pike and shot Napoleonic warfare Late modern Industrial warfare Fourth-gen warfare AI warfare Military Organization Command and control Defense ministry Reserves Ranks Branches: Army Navy Air force Marines Coast guard Border guard Special forces Cyber force Space force Specialties: Staff Engineers Intel Recon Medical Police Diving Pilot Land units: Infantry Armor Cavalry Artillery Special forces Signal corps Naval units: Warships Submarines Aircraft carriers Landing craft Auxiliary ships Air units: Fighters Bombers Command Close air support Electronic-warfare Reconnaissance Combat systems: Fire-control system Fire-control radar Director (military) Combat information center Sonar Radar Historical: Ship gun fire-control Gun data computer Torpedo data computer Development: Basic training Military manoeuvrers Combat training Battlespace Aerospace Aerial Airborne Space Land Cold-region Desert Fortification Jungle Mountain Urban Subterranean Tunnel Sea Amphibious Blue Brown Green Surface Underwater Seabed Cyber Information Weapons Air defence Armor Artillery Barrage Biological Camouflage Cavalry Horses Air cavalry Chemical Combined arms Conventional Cyber Denial Disinformation Drone / Robot Electromagnetic Firearms Infantry Loitering Missile Music Nuclear Psychological Radiological Submarine Unconventional Tactics List of military tactics Aerial Airlift Air assault Airbridge Airdrop Anti-aircraft Anti-sub Anti-tank Battle Cavalry Charge CQC Counterattack Counterinsurgency Convoy Defeat in detail Foxhole Drone Envelopment Formation Guerrilla Naval Rapid dominance Encirclement Investment Siege Swarm Screen Tactical objective Target saturation Trench Withdrawal Operational Military operation Special Operations research Blitzkrieg Expeditionary Deep operation Maneuver Operational manoeuvre group Raid Covert Stay-behind Strategy List of military strategies and concepts Military campaign Anti-access Attrition Commerce raiding Counter-offensive Culminating Defence in depth Fabian Empty fort Mosaic Deception Defensive Depth Goal Nuclear Naval Offensive Scorched earth Grand strategy Asymmetric Blockade Broken-backed Class Cold war Colonial Conquest Containment Divide and conquer Economic Endemic Fleet in being Irregular Liberation Limited Network-centric New generation Perpetual Political Princely Proxy Religious Resource Strategic Succession Technology Theater Total war World war Administrative Branch Policy Staff Training Service Sociology Organization Area of responsibility Chain of command Command and control Doctrine Order of battle Principles of war Economy of force Medicine Engineers Intelligence Ranks Technology and equipment Personnel Recruitment Conscription Draft evasion Mobilization Training Specialism Soldier Morale Volunteer Women Children Transgender Harassment Conscientious objector Conscription and sexism Counter-recruitment Logistics History War economy Arms industry Materiel Supply-chain management Military–industrial complex Base MOB FOB Outpost Science Power projection Loss-of-strength gradient Lanchester's laws Force multiplication Morale Law Belligerent Occupation Armistice Ceasefire Court-martial Desertion Geneva Conventions Geneva Protocol Islamic rules Justice Lawful / Unlawful combatant Perfidy Regular / Irregular Jewish laws on war Right of conquest Right of self-defence Rules of engagement Self-determination Martial law War crime War and genocide War treason Theory Air supremacy Appeasement Command of the sea Deterrence theory Full-spectrum dominance Overmatch Just war theory Principles of war Philosophy of war Security dilemma Tripwire force Wargaming Simulation Exercises Combat effectiveness Center of gravity Non-warfare Arms control Counter-insurgency Deterrence Disaster response Grey-zone Gunboat diplomacy Humanitarian aid Law enforcement Low-intensity conflict Military engineering Peacekeeping Peacebuilding Peace through strength Show of force Culture Awards and decorations Battle cry Warrior War film Military science fiction War novel Anti-war movement Foot drill War song Uniform Wargame Militarization / Militarism Antimilitarism Camp follower Books Seven Military Classics The Art of War De re militari Strategemata Related Women in war War resister War studies Horses in warfare Wartime sexual violence Fifth column Mercenary Pacifism Privateer Private military company Soldiers are murderers Lists Battles Military occupations Military terms Operations Sieges War crimes Wars Weapons Writers v t e Military supply-chain management is a cross-functional approach to procuring , producing and delivering products and services for military materiel applications. Military supply chain management includes sub-suppliers, suppliers, internal information and funds flow .

[ 1 ] Terminology [ edit ] A supply involves the procurement , distribution , maintenance while in storage , and salvage of supplies, including the determination of kind and quantity of supplies.

United States Department of Defense definitions refer to a "producer phase" and a "consumer phase": the producer phase of a military supply extends from determination of procurement schedules to acceptance of finished supplies by the military services the consumer phase of a military supply extends from receipt of finished supplies by the military services, through issue for use or consumption .

[ 2 ] A supply chain is a set of linked activities associated with providing material from a raw material stage to an end user as a finished good .

[ 3 ] Supply control is the process by which an item of supply is controlled within the supply system, including requisitioning, receipt, storage, stock control , shipment , disposition, identification , and accounting .

[ 4 ] A supply point is a location where supplies, services and materials are located and issued. As a single moving entity, [ 5 ] a supply point location is temporary and mobile, normally being occupied for up to 72 hours.

[ 6 ] Sub-suppliers are those suppliers who provide materials to other suppliers within the supply chain. In other supply chain management contexts they are referred to by tier, second-tier suppliers serving first-tier suppliers, etc.

[ 7 ] The European Union refers to sub-suppliers in its objective to improve cross-border market access in the defence sector.

[ 8 ] Logistics [ edit ] Navy Petty Officer fires a supply line to the USNS Supply Main article: Military logistics Military logistics is the science of planning and carrying out the movement and maintenance of armed forces . In its most comprehensive sense, those aspects of military operations that deal with: a.

design and development , acquisition , storage , movement , distribution , maintenance , evacuation , and disposition of materiel; b. movement, evacuation, and hospitalization of personnel; c. acquisition or construction , maintenance, operation and disposition of facilities; and d. acquisition or furnishing of services.

[ 9 ] The main difference between the concept of logistic management and supply-chain management is the level of information gathered, processes, analysed and used for decision making. An SCM-based organization not only having concerns with its immediate clients but also handles and forecasts the factors affecting directly or indirectly their supplier or suppliers or on their client or clients. If we exclude this information part out of supply chain model then we can see the logistic management part of the business.

The up / down stream flow of information, showing the flow of information in supply-chain management vs. logistics management systems.

Limitations of military supply chain [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Unlike standard supply-chain management practices world-wide, some major concepts are not supported in the military domain. For example, the " just-in-time " (JIT) model emphasizes holding less (or no) inventory, whereas in military supply chains, due to the high costs of a stock-out (potentially placing lives in danger), keeping huge inventory is a more acceptable practice. Some examples of these are the ammunition dump and oil depot .

Likewise, the military procurement process has much different criteria than the normal business procurement process.

[ citation needed ] Military needs call for reliability of supply during both peace and war, as compared to price and technological factors.

See also [ edit ] Ammunition dump Loss of Strength Gradient Principles of sustainment Supply-chain management References [ edit ] ^ Defense Technical Information Center.

"DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms – Supply Chain Management" . Archived from the original on 2011-06-29 . Retrieved 2009-10-29 .

^ Defense Technical Information Center.

"DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms – Supply" . Archived from the original on 2011-06-29 . Retrieved 2009-10-29 .

^ Defense Technical Information Center , DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms – Supply Chain ^ Defense Technical Information Center, DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms – Supply Control ^ Belzer, D. J. N., Visualizing distribution as an effect, rather than as a service , US Army Sustainment , published 28 December 2018, accessed 25 September 2023 ^ Defense Technical Information Center, DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms – Supply Point ^ SCM Portal, Supplier Tiering , Procurement Glossary supplied by CIPS , accessed 11 July 2021 ^ EUR-Lex, Commission Recommendation (EU) 2018/624 of 20 April 2018 on cross-border market access for sub-suppliers and SMEs in the defence sector , published 20 April 2018, accessed 25 September 2023 ^ Defense Technical Information Center, DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms – Logistics External links [ edit ] Department of Defense - Supply Chain Material Management Regulation NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐j9sw7
Cached time: 20250812034057
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.370 seconds
Real time usage: 0.489 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1241/1000000
Revision size: 7670/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 73436/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1918/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 25208/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.214/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4251760/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  377.128      1 -total
 26.09%   98.402      1 Template:History_of_war
 25.88%   97.598      1 Template:Reflist
 24.92%   93.991      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 22.36%   84.322      2 Template:Cite_web
 19.39%   73.119      1 Template:Short_description
 15.17%   57.219      1 Template:Global
 13.70%   51.684      2 Template:Ambox
 10.74%   40.485      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.41%   20.395      5 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6546396:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812034057 and revision id 1238313018. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Military_supply-chain_management&oldid=1238313018 " Categories : Military supply chain management Military logistics Military terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from September 2023 United States-centric Articles needing additional references from August 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 This page was last edited on 3 August 2024, at 07:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Military supply-chain management 13 languages Add topic

