Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Club record Toggle Club record subsection 2.1 Varsity match results 3 Membership & organisation 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Cambridge University Australian Rules Football Club Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Student sports club at Cambridge University Cambridge University Australian Rules Football Club (CUARFC, also known as the Lions), founded in the early 20th century, is the Australian rules football club for Cambridge University . Both men's and women's teams represent the club in the National University League, [ 1 ] the Fitzpatrick Cup, and the annual Oxford-Cambridge Varsity match , among other things.

History [ edit ] Australia's High Commissioner in London with the captains of the Oxford and Cambridge teams in 1949 The club has been active for over 100 years, with the first recorded men's game against Oxford taking place on March 18, 1911.

[ 2 ] The women's game has developed more recently, with the first women's varsity match in 2018 ending in a tie.

The 90th Varsity match was the subject of a short ABC documentary.

[ 3 ] The connection between the university and the sport in fact stretches much further back to when Tom Wills , one of the founders of the game, studied there (seemingly to be more concerned about playing cricket than academics), then returning to Australia to set up the Melbourne Football Club .

[ 4 ] Club record [ edit ] Varsity match results [ edit ] Main article: Oxford Cambridge Intervarsity Australian Rules Football Match Membership & organisation [ edit ] Membership of the club is not restricted to Cambridge University students or staff, although a significant proportion of the club would fall into these groups. The club naturally has a large Australian membership, as well as many Irish players, due to the similarity of the game to Gaelic football .

Players have a wide range of sporting backgrounds, ranging from having not played much sport at all, to having played Australian rules previously for a large part of their lives.

The club is managed by a committee, elected annually, consisting of the President, Treasurer, and other responsible people.

The club also has strong ties with the North London Lions , and a handful of players have ended up playing for both teams.

See also [ edit ] AFL Europe Australian Rules Football in Europe Australian Rules Football in the United Kingdom References [ edit ] ^ "National University League – AFL England" .

www.aflengland.org . Retrieved 11 February 2022 .

^ afleurope (13 March 2020).

"Oxford and Cambridge to meet for 100th Varsity Match • AFL Europe" .

AFL Europe . Retrieved 10 August 2021 .

^ "Australian Rules Football" .

www.sport.ox.ac.uk . Retrieved 9 August 2021 .

^ De Moore, Greg (2011).

Tom Wills : first wild man of Australian sport . Crows Nest, N.S.W.: Allen & Unwin.

ISBN 978-1-74237-598-4 .

OCLC 730051341 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Sport at Cambridge University National University League ABC documentary for 90th Varsity match (on YouTube) v t e Australian rules football in England Governing body AFL England Former: AFL Britain National team Men: Great Britain Bulldogs Women: Great Britain Swans Leagues AFL London Aussie Rules UK Grounds The Oval Motspur Park Peckham Rye Battersea Park Clubs Birmingham Bears Bristol Dockers Cambridge University Clapham Demons Guildford Crows Huddersfield Rams London Swans North London Lions Oxford University Putney Magpies Reading Kangaroos Shepherds Bush Raiders South East London Giants Wandsworth Demons West London Wildcats Wimbledon Hawks Former Clubs Earls Court Kangaroos Lea Valley Saints Liverpool Blues London Hawks Northwestern Miners Swindon Devils v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cambridge_University_Australian_Rules_Football_Club&oldid=1300895796 " Categories : Australian rules football clubs established in 1911 Australian rules football clubs in England Sport at the University of Cambridge University Australian rules football clubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 00:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cambridge University Australian Rules Football Club Add languages Add topic

