Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 World Trade Organization 3 Trade in goods 4 Principles of International Trade Laws 5 Trade and intellectual property 6 Cross-border transactions 7 Dispute settlement 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents International trade law 8 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch فارسی Nederlands Polski Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rules for trade between countries This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "International trade law" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on World trade Policy Import Export Balance of trade Trade law Trade pact Trade bloc Trade creation Trade diversion Export orientation Import substitution Trade finance Trade facilitation Trade route Domestic trade Tax Restrictions Trade barriers Tariffs Non-tariff barriers Import quotas Tariff-rate quotas Import licenses Customs duties Export subsidies Technical barriers Bribery Exchange rate controls Embargo Safeguards Countervailing duties Anti-dumping duties Voluntary export restraints History Mercantilism Protectionism Laissez-faire Free trade Economic nationalism Economic integration Organizations International Monetary Fund International Trade Centre World Trade Organization World Customs Organization International Chamber of Commerce Economic integration Preferential trading area Free-trade area Currency union Customs union Single market Economic union Fiscal union Customs and monetary union Economic and monetary union Issues Intellectual property rights Smuggling Competition policy Government procurement Global labor arbitrage Outsourcing Globalization Fair trade Trade justice Emissions trading Trade sanctions War Currency war Trade costs Trade war Trade and development Lists Imports Exports Balance of trade Tariffs Largest consumer markets Leading trade partners By country Trade mission Trading nation United States Argentina Pakistan Romania Vietnam India Theory Comparative advantage Competitive advantage Heckscher–Ohlin model New trade theory Economic geography Intra-industry trade Gravity model of trade Ricardian trade theories Balassa–Samuelson effect Linder hypothesis Leontief paradox Lerner symmetry theorem Terms of trade v t e Business administration Accounting Management accounting Financial accounting Audit Business entity ( list ) Corporate group Corporation sole Company Conglomerate Holding company Cooperative Corporation Joint-stock company Limited liability company Partnership Privately held company Sole proprietorship State-owned enterprise Corporate governance Annual general meeting Board of directors Supervisory board Advisory board Audit committee Corporate law Commercial law Constitutional documents Contract Corporate crime Corporate liability Insolvency law International trade law Mergers and acquisitions Corporate title Chairman Chief business officer / Chief brand officer Chief executive officer / Chief operating officer Chief financial officer Chief human resources officer Chief information officer / Chief marketing officer Chief product officer / Chief technology officer Economics Commodity Public economics Labour economics Development economics International economics Mixed economy Planned economy Econometrics Environmental economics Open economy Market economy Knowledge economy Microeconomics Macroeconomics Economic development Economic statistics Finance Financial statement Insurance Factoring Cash conversion cycle Insider dealing Capital budgeting Commercial bank Derivative Financial statement analysis Financial risk Public finance Corporate finance Managerial finance International finance Liquidation Stock market Financial market Tax Financial institution Capital management Venture capital Types of management Asset Brand Business intelligence Business development Capacity Capability Change innovation Commercial Marketing Communications Configuration Conflict Content Customer relationship Distributed Earned value Electronic business Enterprise resource planning management information system Financial Human resource development Incident Knowledge Legal Materials Network administrator Office Operations services Performance Power Process Product life-cycle Product Project Property Quality Records Resource Risk crisis Sales Security Service Strategic Supply chain Systems administrator Talent Technology Organization Architecture Behavior Communication Culture Conflict Development Engineering Hierarchy Patterns Space Structure Trade Business analysis Business ethics Business plan Business judgment rule Consumer behaviour International business Business model International trade Trade route Business process Business statistics Business and economics portal v t e International trade law includes the appropriate rules and customs for handling trade between countries.

[ 1 ] However, it is also used in legal writings as trade between private sectors. This branch of law is now an independent field of study as most governments have become part of the world trade, as members of the World Trade Organization (WTO).

[ 2 ] Since the transaction between private sectors of different countries is an important part of the WTO activities, this latter branch of law is now part of the academic works and is under study in many universities across the world.

[ 3 ] Overview [ edit ] International trade law should be distinguished from the broader field of international economic law .  The latter could be said to encompass not only WTO law, but also law governing the international monetary system and currency regulation, as well as the law of international development .

[ 4 ] The international trade law includes rules, regulations and customs governing trade between nations.

[ 5 ] International trade law is the tool used by the nation’s government for taking corrective actions against trade. International trade law focuses on applying domestic rules to international trade rules and applying treaty-based international trade law governing trade.

[ 6 ] The body of rules for transnational trade in the 21st century was derived from medieval commercial laws called the lex mercatoria and lex maritima —respectively, "the law for merchants on land" and "the law for merchants on the sea." [ 7 ] Modern trade law (extending beyond bilateral treaties) began shortly after the Second World War , with the negotiation of a multilateral treaty to deal with trade in goods: the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).

[ 8 ] International trade law is based on theories of economic liberalism developed in Europe and later the United States from the 18th century onwards.

[ 9 ] International Trade Law is an aggregate of legal rules of "international legislation" and new lex mercatoria, regulating relations in international trade.

"International legislation" – international treaties and acts of international intergovernmental organizations regulating relations in international trade.

lex mercatoria – "the law for merchants on land". Alok Narayan defines "lex mercatoria" as "any law relating to businesses" which was criticised by Professor Julius Stone.
and lex maritime – "the law for merchants on sea. Alok in his recent article criticised this definition to be "too narrow" and "merely-creative". Professor Dodd and Professor Malcolm Shaw of Leeds University supported this proposition.

[ citation needed ] The Lex Mercatoria is the grouping of legal rules that guide and underlie international trade, which acts totally independently of the positive law of states, being considered normative.

[ 10 ] Currently, the new Lex Mercatoria has been prepared.

[ 11 ] The former Lex Mercatoria was generated in light of the characteristic demands of the time in question, including the values, culture, and future provisions of the time, whereas, the new one is recognized as having the responsibility of common international trade law.

[ 12 ] World Trade Organization [ edit ] In 1995, the World Trade Organization , a formal international organization to regulate trade, was established.

[ citation needed ] The purposes and structure of the organization are governed by the Agreement Establishing The World Trade Organization , also known as the " Marrakesh Agreement ".  It does not specify the actual rules that govern international trade in specific areas. These are found in separate treaties, annexed to the Marrakesh Agreement.

The scope of WTO: (a) provide a framework for administration and implementation of agreements;
(b) forum for further negotiations;
(c) trade policy review mechanism; and
(d) promote greater coherence among members economics policies Principles of the WTO: (a) A principle of non-discrimination (most-favored-nation treatment obligation and the national treatment obligation)
(b) market access (reduction of tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade) 
(c) balancing trade liberalization and other societal interests
(d) harmonization of national regulation (TRIPS agreement, TBT agreement, SPS agreement) Trade in goods [ edit ] The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) has been the backbone of international trade law since 1948 after the charter for international trade had been agreed upon in Havana .  It contains rules relating to "unfair" trading practices— dumping and subsidies . Many things impacted GATT like the Uruguay Round and the North American Free Trade Agreement .

[ 13 ] In 1994 the World Trade Organization (WTO) was established to take the place of the GATT. This is because the GATT was meant to be a temporary fix to trade issues, and the founders hoped for something more concrete. It took many years for this to come about, however, because of the lack of money. The British Economy was in crisis and there was not much backing from Congress to pass the new agreement.

[ 14 ] The idea of these agreements (WTO and GATT) was to create an equal field for all countries in trade.

[ 15 ] This way all countries got something of equal value out of the trade. This was a difficult thing to do since every country has a different economy size. This led to the Trade Expansion act of 1962.

[ citation needed ] Principles of International Trade Laws [ edit ] National Treatment Principle: Imported and locally-produced goods should be treated equally—at least after the foreign goods have entered the market. The same should apply to foreign and domestic services, and to foreign and local trademarks, copyrights and patents. These principles apply to trade in goods, trade in services as well as trade related aspects of intellectual property rights.

[ citation needed ] Most Favored Nation (MFN) Principle:  The MFN principles ensures that every time a WTO Member lowers a trade barrier or opens up a market, it has to do so for the like goods or services from all WTO Members, without regard of the Members’ economic size or level of development. The MFN principle requires to accord to all WTO Members any advantage given to any other country. A WTO Member could give an advantage to other WTO Members, without having to accord advantage to non- Members but only WTO Members benefit from the most favorable treatment.

[ citation needed ] Trade and intellectual property [ edit ] The World Trade Organization Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ( TRIPS ) agreement required signatory nations to raise intellectual property rights (also known as intellectual monopoly privileges). This arguably has had a negative impact on access to essential medicines in some nations such as less developed countries, as the local economy is not as capable of producing more technical products such as pharmaceuticals.

[ citation needed ] Cross-border transactions [ edit ] Cross-border operations are subject to taxation by more than one country. Commercial activity that occurs among several jurisdictions or countries is called a cross-border transaction. Those involved in any international business development or international trade should be knowledgeable in tax law , as every country enforces different laws on foreign businesses. International tax planning ensures that cross-border businesses stay tax compliant and avoid or lessen double taxation .

[ citation needed ] Dispute settlement [ edit ] Most prominent in the area of dispute settlement in international trade law is the WTO dispute settlement system. The WTO dispute settlement body is operational since 1995 and has been very active since then with 369 cases in the time between 1 January 1995 and 1 December 2007.

[ 16 ] Nearly a quarter of disputes reached an amicable solution, in other cases the parties to the dispute resorted to adjudication. The WTO dispute settlement body has exclusive and compulsory jurisdiction over disputes on WTO law (Article 23.1 Dispute Settlement Understanding [ 13 ] ).

See also [ edit ] Case law International trade World Trade Organization Notes [ edit ] ^ Library, University of California Berkeley School of Law.

"International Trade Law" .

www.law.berkeley.edu . Archived from the original on 4 June 2016 . Retrieved 1 May 2016 .

^ "International Trade Law" .

www.law.georgetown.edu .

Archived from the original on 26 September 2019 . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ "What is International Trade Law? | Becoming an International Trade Lawyer" .

Archived from the original on 26 September 2019 . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ "What is international trade law and why is it relevant to WHO FCTC implementation?" .

WHO FCTC Secretariat’s Knowledge Hub on legal challenges . 7 April 2017. Archived from the original on 26 September 2019 . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ Warburton, Christopher E.S. (30 March 2010).

"International trade law and trade theory" .

Journal of International Trade Law and Policy .

9 (1): 64– 82.

doi : 10.1108/14770021011029618 .

ISSN 1477-0024 .

^ "International Trade Law" .

www.law.georgetown.edu .

Archived from the original on 1 August 2021 . Retrieved 20 July 2021 .

^ Monica, 1776 Main Street Santa; California 90401-3208.

"International Trade Law" .

www.rand.org .

Archived from the original on 26 September 2019 . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "WTO | Understanding the WTO – principles of the trading system" .

www.wto.org .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2018 . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ "Rules of World Trade Organization | International Trade | American Express" .

www.americanexpress.com . Archived from the original on 26 September 2019 . Retrieved 26 September 2019 .

^ "Lex Mercatoria: Lex Mercatoria: International Commercial Law & E-Commerce Infrastructure Monitor (1993–2009)" .

www.jus.uio.no . Archived from the original on 7 September 2019 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "The Lex Mercatoria (Old and New) and the TransLex-Principles | Trans-Lex.org" .

www.trans-lex.org .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2019 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "Theory of the Lex Mercatoria" .

www.lawteacher.net .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2019 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ a b Matsushita, Mitsuo (April 2004). "Governance of International Trade Under World Trade Organization Agreements-Relationships Between World Trade Organization Agreements and Other Trade Agreements".

Journal of World Trade .

38 (2): 185– 210.

doi : 10.54648/TRAD2004008 .

S2CID 152943023 .

ProQuest 217554638 .

^ "GATT (Hansard, 14 June 1994)" .

api.parliament.uk .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2019 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ Kapstein, Ethan B (Spring 1999). "Distributing the gains: Justice and international trade".

Journal of International Affairs .

52 (2). New York: 533– 555.

ProQuest 220713673 .

^ van den Bossche, Peter (2008).

The Law and Policy of the World Trade Organization – Text, Cases and Materials . Maastricht University: Cambridge University Press. p.

169 .

ISBN 978-0-521-72759-4 .

References [ edit ] van den Bossche, Peter (2008).

The Law and Policy of the World Trade Organization – Text, Cases and Materials . Maastricht University: Cambridge University Press. pp.

917 .

ISBN 978-0-521-72759-4 .

Dixon, Martin (2013).

Textbook on International law (7th ed.). Oxford Press. pp.

286– 319.

ISBN 978-0-19-957445-2 .

Dixon, Martin; McCorquodale, Robert; Williams, Sarah (2011).

Cases and Materials on International Law (5th ed.). Oxford Press. pp.

479– 521.

ISBN 978-0-19-956271-8 .

Yang, Junsok (March 2013).

"The Effect of International Trade on Rule of Law" .

Journal of East Asian Economic Integration .

17 (1). Seoul: 27– 53.

doi : 10.11644/KIEP.JEAI.2013.17.1.258 .

S2CID 153335560 .

ProQuest 1399973050 .

Matsushita, Mitsuo (April 2004). "Governance of International Trade Under World Trade Organization Agreements-Relationships Between World Trade Organization Agreements and Other Trade Agreements".

Journal of World Trade .

38 (2): 185– 210.

doi : 10.54648/TRAD2004008 .

S2CID 152943023 .

ProQuest 217554638 .

Kapstein, Ethan B (Spring 1999). "Distributing the gains: Justice and international trade".

Journal of International Affairs .

52 (2). New York: 533– 555.

ProQuest 220713673 .

Fenwick, C (1935). "International Law and International Trade".

The American Journal of International Law .

29 (2). American Society of International Law: 284– 286.

doi : 10.2307/2190492 .

JSTOR 2190492 .

S2CID 147354823 .

Coughlin, Cletus C (2010). "Measuring International Trade Policy: A Primer on Trade Restrictiveness Indices".

Review - Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis .

92 (5): 381– 394.

ProQuest 792958786 .

Bird, Frederick; Vance, Thomas; Woolstencroft, Peter. "Fairness in International Trade and Investment: North American Perspectives" (Document). Journal of Business Ethics.

ProQuest 198090588 .

Arcade, Insurance (22 February 2019).

"Cross Border Transactions and Double Taxation Agreement" .

Insurance Arcade . Retrieved 25 February 2019 .

Druzin, B.H. (Spring 2010).

"Law Without the State: The Theory of High Engagement and the Emergence of Spontaneous Legal Order within Commercial Systems" .

Georgetown Journal of International Law .

41 : 559– 620.

Archived from the original on 3 May 2014 . Retrieved 14 December 2023 .

McLure, C.E.; Hellerstein, W. (6 September 2002).

"Does Sales-Only Apportionment Violate International Trade Rules?" . Elsevier Inc . Retrieved 14 December 2023 .

External links [ edit ] International Bar Association International Trade Center – a UN organization Trade Law Centre for Southern Africa World Trade Institute – at the University of Berne v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_trade_law&oldid=1302952983 " Categories : Commercial policy International law International trade International trade law Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Use dmy dates from December 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2013 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 08:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International trade law 8 languages Add topic

