Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development 2 Summary of primary elements 3 Adlerian view 4 Jungian views 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Depth psychology 30 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français Gaeilge Հայերեն Italiano עברית Кыргызча Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Psychological approach Depth psychology (from the German term Tiefenpsychologie ) refers to the practice and research of the science of the unconscious , covering both psychoanalysis and psychology .

[ 1 ] It is also defined as the psychological theory that explores the relationship between the conscious and the unconscious, as well as the patterns and dynamics of motivation and the mind.

[ 2 ] The theories of Sigmund Freud , Carl Gustav Jung , and Alfred Adler are all considered its foundations.

[ 3 ] Development [ edit ] The term "depth psychology" was coined by Eugen Bleuler and refers to psychoanalytic approaches to therapy and research that take the unconscious into account.

[ 4 ] The term was rapidly accepted in the year of its proposal (1914) by Sigmund Freud , to cover a topographical view of the mind in terms of different psychic systems.

[ 5 ] He is considered to have revolutionized this field, which he viewed in his later years as his most significant work.

[ 6 ] Since the 1970s, depth psychology has come to refer to the ongoing development of theories and therapies pioneered by Pierre Janet , William James , and Carl Gustav Jung , as well as Freud.  All explore relationships between the conscious and the unconscious (thus including both psychoanalysis and Jungian psychology).

[ 7 ] Summary of primary elements [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( September 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Depth psychology states that the psyche process is partly conscious , partly unconscious, and partly semi-conscious.

[ 1 ] In practice, depth psychology seeks to explore underlying motives as an approach to various mental disorders .  Depth psychologists believe that the uncovering of deeper, often unconscious, motives is intrinsically healing in and of itself.  It seeks knowledge of the deep layers underlying behavioral and cognitive processes .

In modern times, the initial work, development, theories, and therapies of Sigmund Freud , Carl Jung , Alfred Adler and Otto Rank have grown into three main perspectives on depth psychology: Psychoanalytic: Melanie Klein and Donald Winnicott (among others); object relations theory ; Neo-Freudianism Adlerian: Adler's individual psychology Jungian: Jung's analytical psychology ; James Hillman's archetypal psychology , Stephen Aizenstat Ph.D.

[ 8 ] Adlerian view [ edit ] Further information: Alfred Adler § Influence on depth psychology Adlerian psychology has been regarded as depth psychology due to its aim of discovering the buried unconscious phenomena. It is one of the first frameworks that approached the individual as a fundamentally social being, one that needs to be situated in a socio-cultural context in order to be understood.

[ 9 ] It is also described as a representation of the ego psychology and views the ego as an independent and creative entity that facilitates the interaction with social reality instead of merely a handmaiden of the id .

[ 9 ] The Adlerian approach to psychoanalysis includes a set of tools that allows an individual to break through a self-centered way of life. For instance, it eliminates the core style of life and fictional final goal of a patient through Socratic method as opposed to counselling.

[ 10 ] Jungian views [ edit ] Many scholars believe that Jung's most significant contribution to depth psychology was his conceptualization of the "collective unconscious".

[ 11 ] While Freud cited the conceptualization unconscious forces was limited to repressed or forgotten personal experiences, Jung emphasized the qualities that an individual shares with other people.

[ 11 ] This is demonstrated in his notion that all minds, all lives, are ultimately embedded in some sort of myth-making in the form of themes or patterns. This myth-making or creation of a mythical image lies at the depth of the unconscious, where an individual's mind widens out and merges into the mind of mankind.

[ 12 ] Mythology is therefore not a series of old explanations for natural events, but rather the richness and wonder of humanity played out in a symbolical, thematic, and patterned storytelling.

[ citation needed ] There is also the case of the Jungian archetypes. According to Jung, archetypes are primordial elements of the Collective Unconscious.

[ 13 ] They form the unchanging context from which the contents of cyclic and sequent changes derive their meanings. Duration is the secret of action.

[ 14 ] He also stated that the psyche spontaneously generates mythico-religious symbolism or themes, and is therefore spiritual or metaphysical, as well as instinctive, in nature. An implication of this is that the choice of whether to be a spiritual person may be beyond the individual, whether and how we apply it, including to nonspiritual aspirations.

Another Jungian position in depth psychology involves his belief that the unconscious contains repressed experiences and other personal-level issues in its "upper" layers and "transpersonal" ( e.g.

collective, non-I, archetypal) forces in its depths. The semi-conscious contains or is, an aware pattern of personality, including everything in a spectrum from individual vanity to the personality of the workplace.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Archive for Research in Archetypal Symbolism Complex Individual psychology Post-Freudianism Psychoanalysis Psychotherapy Triune brain References [ edit ] ^ a b Šolc, Vladislav; Didier, George J. (2018-12-01).

Dark Religion: Fundamentalism from The Perspective of Jungian Psychology . Chiron Publications.

ISBN 978-1-63051-400-6 .

^ Clayton, Susan; Myers, Gene (2011).

Conservation Psychology: Understanding and Promoting Human Care for Nature . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. p. 208.

ISBN 978-1-4443-5641-0 .

^ Lewis, John Wren (June 1958). "A Survey of Adler's Writing".

New Scientist .

4 (83): 224– 225.

^ Henri Ellenberger , The Discovery of the Unconscious (1970) p. 562 ^ Sigmund Freud, On Metapsychology (PFL 11) p. 175-6 ^ Polka, Brayton (2001).

Depth Psychology, Interpretation, and the Bible: An Ontological Essay on Freud . London: McGill-Queen's Press - MQUP. p. 20.

ISBN 0-7735-2125-9 .

^ Chalquist, Craig.

"What Is Depth Psychology?" .

terrapsych.com . Re-engaging the Soul of Place (Spring Journal Books, 2007). Archived from the original on 2012-12-24 . Retrieved 2013-02-19 .

^ "What is Depth Psychology? - an Introduction" .

^ a b Marcus, Paul; Rosenberg, Alan (1998).

Psychoanalytic Versions of the Human Condition: Philosophies of Life and Their Impact on Practice . New York: NYU Press. pp.

64– 65.

ISBN 0-8147-5501-1 .

^ Adler, Alfred (2006).

The Collected Clinical Works of Alfred Adler: The general system of individual psychology, Volume 12 . Alfred Adler Institute. p. 271.

ISBN 0-9770186-2-8 .

^ a b Engler, Barbara (2013).

Personality Theories, Ninth Edition . Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. p. 68.

ISBN 978-1-285-08881-5 .

^ Pandikattu, Kuruvila (2001).

Gandhi: The Meaning of Mahatma for the Millennium, Volume V . Washington, D.C.: CRVP. p. 240.

ISBN 978-1-56518-156-4 .

^ Jung, C. G. (1998).

Jung on Mythology . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. p. 231.

ISBN 978-0-691-01736-5 .

^ Dr. Fredricks, Randi.

"Depth Psychology" .

Theoretical Approaches: Depth Psychology . Randi Fredricks. Archived from the original on 2013-04-12 . Retrieved 2013-02-19 .

^ Adams, Lee (17 September 2019).

"Dr" .

Jung’s Bias Toward Spiritual Practices of the East . Retrieved 3 May 2020 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wilber, Ken (1999).

Integral Psychology: Consciousness, Spirit, Psychology, Therapy . Boston: Shambhala.

ISBN 9781570625541 .

OCLC 612034803 .

External links [ edit ] Look up depth psychology in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Depth Psychology List: Find or List depth psychology oriented therapists, coaches, and practitioners of various types The C.G. Jung Page Depth Psychology Alliance: Online Community for exploring Depth Psychology topics, news, discussion, events Depth Insights: Media for Depth Psychology including podcasts and the semi-annual scholarly e-Zine, Depth Insights Pacifica Graduate Institute Institute of Transpersonal Psychology Integral Science What is Jungian Psychotherapy?

v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Depth_psychology&oldid=1296151583 " Categories : Analytical psychology Psychodynamic psychotherapy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2014 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 04:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Depth psychology 30 languages Add topic

