Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 European aristocratic roots 1.2 Development and definition 1.3 The teddy bear's connection 2 Fair chase today 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Fair chase 3 languages العربية Deutsch Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hunting term Fair chase is a term used by hunters to describe an ethical approach to hunting big game animals .

North America 's oldest wildlife conservation group, the Boone and Crockett Club , defines "fair chase" as requiring the targeted game animal to be wild and free-ranging.

[ 1 ] "Wild" refers to an animal that is naturally bred and lives freely in nature. "Free-ranging" means an animal that is not restrained by traps or artificial barriers, so it has a fair chance of successfully escaping from the hunt.

Fair chase has been the honor code of North American hunters for over a century and the principle underlying many hunting laws , and is taught to new hunters in hunter certification courses.

Fair Chase is also a registered trademark of the Boone and Crockett Club .

History [ edit ] The concept and the popularization of the term "fair chase" is credited to Theodore Roosevelt and perpetuated by the Boone and Crockett Club, a conservation organization of Roosevelt's creation.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] European aristocratic roots [ edit ] Ethics, or a code of conduct, in hunting first emerged centuries ago among European hunters who were primarily the wealthy landowners and royalty. While the commoner hunted to stay alive, the aristocrat hunted for sport , and it was this sporting approach that separated the two. These ethics did not transfer to the majority of immigrants that settled in the New World . Basic human survival and commercial enterprises often overlooked any hunting ethics. After two hundred years of unregulated hunting by recreational and commercial market hunters, the negative effects were severe. By the end of this "era of extermination", wildlife and especially big game populations were in drastic condition. Some species had already been lost to extinction, many others were on the edge of it.

[ citation needed ] In the early part of the 20th century, a sense of pride and accomplishment began to emerge among sportsmen that came with their newly accepted responsibility to conserve. Doing right by the game being hunted meant working with conservation and population recovery efforts, including the creation of the National Wildlife Refuge System . As for the hunt itself, using restraint shifted the emphasis of measuring success from the quantity of game taken to the quality of the chase. The hunting experience became more important than the number killed, and success was now more memorable because the hunting experience became sustainable in the long term.

[ 4 ] Development and definition [ edit ] The earliest recorded North American usage of the term "fair chase" is in the fifth article of the Boone and Crockett Club constitution, adopted in February 1888. At this time in American history, there were no laws governing the taking of game for food or for sport. Water-killing deer (driving deer with hounds or pushers into lakes where hunters waited in boats to either shoot, club, or cut the throats of deer) was a widespread practice, especially in the Adirondack Mountains .

Article X of the club's constitution declared that the killing of game while swimming was an "offense" for which a member may be suspended or expelled from the club.

[ 5 ] Later writings by club members Roosevelt, George Bird Grinnell , and Aldo Leopold articulated the term "fair chase" to the public through books and magazine articles. Most notable of these were the club's Acorn book series on hunting (1893 – 1933), Leopold's Sand County Almanac , [ 6 ] and Grinnell's Forest and Stream magazine (now Field & Stream ).

In 1893, Roosevelt wrote about hunting and fair chase in his book titled The Wilderness Hunter .

[ 7 ] The teddy bear's connection [ edit ] Clifford Berryman's cartoon The history of the teddy bear has a close connection to fair chase. During his presidency in 1902, Roosevelt was in Mississippi to settle a border dispute. His hosts knew Roosevelt was an avid hunter and arranged for a black bear hunt for the president. In the thick brush swamps of Mississippi it was a common practice of the day to hunt bears with hounds. Out of concern for the president's safety, the guides insisted that he stay in camp until a bear was brought to bay by the hounds, and subsequently a small bear was caught and tied to a tree. When Roosevelt arrived at the scene he refused to shoot the defenseless animal.

[ 8 ] Being omitted from the chase was unsettling to Roosevelt, who prided himself in living the hardy life of an outdoorsman —the harder the hunt the better—and he did not earn this bear though a fair pursuit. Political cartoonist Clifford Berryman immediately drew a cartoon depicting Roosevelt refusing to shoot the restrained bear. The story made national headlines and a shopkeeper, Morris Michtom in Brooklyn, New York, had his wife sew a stuffed bear to sell in his store. He wrote Roosevelt asking permission to call the child's toy "Teddy's Bear", and he consented.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Fair chase today [ edit ] When in the field, the initial question for every fair chase hunter is whether the animal has a reasonable opportunity to elude the hunter. If the animal does not, the hunt can never be "fair chase". For example, a fair chase hunter does not shoot an animal hampered by deep snow or entangled in a barbed-wire fence.

There are also laws that regulate hunting. Ethical, fair chase hunting therefore begins with obeying game laws. A fair chase hunter must acquaint themselves with the laws that govern hunting, as they reflect considerations for safety, the sustainable use of the wildlife resources, and the minimum level of conduct that the public will tolerate in a particular state, province, region, or country. If something is illegal it cannot, by definition, be fair chase. On the other hand, just because something is legal does not make it fair chase.

[ 10 ] There are certain aspects of fair chase hunting that extend beyond written laws. For example, shooting at a running deer is not illegal, nor are there any laws regarding shooting at extremely long ranges with a firearm or bow. To those who believe in the responsibility to kill quickly and cleanly, taking such risky shots would be unethical. A large part of the time-honored tradition of hunting has to do with the fact that sportsmen police themselves and others both within and beyond the rule of law.

[ 11 ] "Canned shoots", also known as " canned hunting ", may be legal in some North American states and provinces, but they are not representative of fair chase. Canned shoots involve the "pursuit" and killing of a big game animal kept in or released from captivity to be shot in an artificial hunting situation where a kill is virtually guaranteed.

[ 12 ] When Internet hunting was introduced in 2005, allowing people to hunt over the Internet using remotely controlled guns, the practice was widely criticized by hunters as violating the principles of fair chase. A spokesperson of the National Rifle Association of America (NRA) stated, "The NRA has always maintained that fair chase, being in the field with your firearm or bow, is an important element of hunting tradition. Sitting at your desk in front of your computer, clicking at a mouse, has nothing to do with hunting." [ 13 ] The Pope and Young Club, a US-based organization that promotes bowhunting, declares that a fair chase shall not involve the taking of animals under the following conditions: Helplessly in a trap , struggling in deep snow , mud or water , or on ice .

By " jacklighting " or blind-shining at night.

By the use of any tranquilizers or poisons .

While inside escape-proof fenced enclosures.

From any powered vehicle or powerboat .

By the use of any powered vehicle or powerboat for herding or driving animals, including use of aircraft to land alongside or to communicate with or direct a hunter on the ground.

By the use of electronic devices for attracting, locating or pursuing game or guiding the hunter to such game, or by the use of a bow and arrow to which any electronic device is attached with the exception of lighted nocks and recording devices that cast no light towards the target and do not aid in rangefinding, sighting or shooting the bow.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Turkey shoot References [ edit ] ^ "Fair Chase Statement" .

Boone and Crockett Club .

^ "Minutes from first meeting of the Boone and Crockett Club" .

Montana Memory Project - University of Montana Mansfield Library . Boone and Crockett Club. Archived from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2015-09-30 .

^ Mauro, Anthony (2004).

The New Age Hunter . iUniverse, Inc. p. 35.

ISBN 0-595-32316-2 .

^ Richard J. Ladle, Robert J. Whittaker (2011).

Conservation Biogeography . West Sussex, UK: Blackwell Publishing LTD.

ISBN 978-1-4443-3503-3 .

^ "Boone and Crockett Archive" .

Montana Memory Project - University of Montana Mansfield Library . Boone and Crockett Club. Archived from the original on 2016-04-26 . Retrieved 2015-09-30 .

^ Leopold, Aldo (1942).

Sand County Almanac . Oxford University Press. p. 226.

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1893).

The Wilderness hunter . New York, New York: G.P Putnam's Sons. pp.

44– 45.

^ a b "Real Teddy Bear Story" .

Theodore Roosevelt Association . Theodore Roosevelt Association.

Archived from the original on June 5, 2020.

^ "The Story of the Teddy Bear - Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace National Historic Site" .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2020.

^ Posewitz, James (1994).

Beyond Fair Chase . Helena, Montana: Falcon Press Publishing.

ISBN 1-56044-302-2 .

^ Posewitz, James (1994).

Beyond Fair Chase . Helena, Montana: Falcon Press Publishing.

ISBN 1-56044-302-2 .

^ DeMello, Margo (2012).

Animals and Society: An Introduction to Human-Animal Studies . Columbia University Press. p. 74.

ISBN 978-0-231-15294-5 .

^ Humane Society Wildlife Abuse Campaign, Fact Sheet on Internet Hunting ^ "Fair Chase" .

Chatfield, Minnesota : Pope and Young Club . Retrieved September 19, 2023 .

v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fair_chase&oldid=1248873872 " Categories : Hunting Hunting in the United States Ethical principles Animal rights Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020 This page was last edited on 1 October 2024, at 22:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fair chase 3 languages Add topic

