Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and background Toggle History and background subsection 1.1 Ferdinand de Saussure 1.2 Lévi-Strauss 1.3 Lacan and Piaget 1.4 'Third order' 1.5 Althusser 1.6 Assiter 2 In linguistics Toggle In linguistics subsection 2.1 Prague School 3 In anthropology 4 In literary criticism and theory 5 In economics Toggle In economics subsection 5.1 New Structural Economics (NSE) 6 Interpretations and general criticisms 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 9.1 Primary sources Toggle the table of contents Structuralism 67 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intellectual current and methodological approach in the social science For other uses, see Structuralism (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e Structuralism is an intellectual current and methodological approach, primarily in the social sciences , that interprets elements of human culture by way of their relationship to a broader system.

[ 1 ] It works to uncover the structural patterns that underlies all things that humans do , think , perceive , and feel .

Alternatively, as summarized by philosopher Simon Blackburn , structuralism is: [ 2 ] "The belief that phenomena of human life are not intelligible except through their interrelations. These relations constitute a structure, and behind local variations in the surface phenomena there are constant laws of abstract structure." History and background [ edit ] The term structuralism is ambiguous, referring to different schools of thought in different contexts. As such, the movement in humanities and social sciences called structuralism relates to sociology .

Emile Durkheim based his sociological concept on 'structure' and 'function', and from his work emerged the sociological approach of structural functionalism .

Apart from Durkheim's use of the term structure , the semiological concept of Ferdinand de Saussure became fundamental for structuralism. Saussure conceived language and society as a system of relations. His linguistic approach was also a refutation of evolutionary linguistics .

Structuralism in Europe developed in the early 20th century, mainly in France and the Russian Empire , in the structural linguistics of Ferdinand de Saussure and the subsequent Prague , Moscow , and Copenhagen schools of linguistics. As an intellectual movement, structuralism became the heir to existentialism . After World War II, an array of scholars in the humanities borrowed Saussure's concepts for use in their respective fields. French anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss was arguably the first such scholar, sparking a widespread interest in structuralism.

Throughout the 1940s and 1950s, existentialism , such as that propounded by Jean-Paul Sartre , was the dominant European intellectual movement . Structuralism rose to prominence in France in the wake of existentialism, particularly in the 1960s. The initial popularity of structuralism in France led to its spread across the globe. By the early 1960s, structuralism as a movement was coming into its own and some believed that it offered a single unified approach to human life that would embrace all disciplines.

By the late 1960s, many of structuralism's basic tenets came under attack from a new wave of predominantly French intellectuals/philosophers such as historian Michel Foucault , Jacques Derrida , Marxist philosopher Louis Althusser , and literary critic Roland Barthes . Though elements of their work necessarily relate to structuralism and are informed by it, these theorists eventually came to be referred to as post-structuralists . Many proponents of structuralism, such as Lacan , continue to influence continental philosophy and many of the fundamental assumptions of some of structuralism's post-structuralist critics are a continuation of structuralist thinking.

Russian functional linguist Roman Jakobson was a pivotal figure in the adaptation of structural analysis to disciplines beyond linguistics, including philosophy, anthropology, and literary theory. Jakobson was a decisive influence on anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss , by whose work the term structuralism first appeared in reference to social sciences . Lévi-Strauss' work in turn gave rise to the structuralist movement in France , also called French structuralism, influencing the thinking of other writers, most of whom disavowed themselves as being a part of this movement. This included such writers as Louis Althusser and psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan , as well as the structural Marxism of Nicos Poulantzas .

Roland Barthes and Jacques Derrida focused on how structuralism could be applied to literature .

Ferdinand de Saussure [ edit ] The origins of structuralism are connected with the work of Ferdinand de Saussure on linguistics along with the linguistics of the Prague and Moscow schools. In brief, Saussure's structural linguistics propounded three related concepts.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Saussure argued for a distinction between langue (an idealized abstraction of language) and parole (language as actually used in daily life). He argued that a "sign" is composed of a "signified" ( signifié , i.e. an abstract concept or idea) and a "signifier" ( signifiant , i.e. the perceived sound/visual image).

Because different languages have different words to refer to the same objects or concepts, there is no intrinsic reason why a specific signifier is used to express a given concept or idea. It is thus "arbitrary." Signs gain their meaning from their relationships and contrasts with other signs. As he wrote, "in language, there are only differences 'without positive terms.

' " [ 4 ] Lévi-Strauss [ edit ] Structuralism rejected the concept of human freedom and choice, focusing instead on the way that human experience and behaviour is determined by various structures. The most important initial work on this score was Lévi-Strauss's 1949 volume The Elementary Structures of Kinship . Lévi-Strauss had known Roman Jakobson during their time together at the New School in New York during WWII and was influenced by both Jakobson's structuralism, as well as the American anthropological tradition.

In Elementary Structures , he examined kinship systems from a structural point of view and demonstrated how apparently different social organizations were different permutations of a few basic kinship structures. In the late 1958, he published Structural Anthropology , a collection of essays outlining his program for structuralism.

Lacan and Piaget [ edit ] Blending Freud and Saussure, French (post)structuralist Jacques Lacan applied structuralism to psychoanalysis . Similarly, Jean Piaget applied structuralism to the study of psychology , though in a different way. Piaget, who would better define himself as constructivist , considered structuralism as "a method and not a doctrine," because, for him, "there exists no structure without a construction, abstract or genetic." [ 5 ] 'Third order' [ edit ] Proponents of structuralism argue that a specific domain of culture may be understood by means of a structure that is modelled on language and is distinct both from the organizations of reality and those of ideas, or the imagination—the "third order." [ 6 ] In Lacan's psychoanalytic theory, for example, the structural order of " the Symbolic " is distinguished both from " the Real " and " the Imaginary ;" similarly, in Althusser's Marxist theory, the structural order of the capitalist mode of production is distinct both from the actual, real agents involved in its relations and from the ideological forms in which those relations are understood.

Althusser [ edit ] Although French theorist Louis Althusser is often associated with structural social analysis , which helped give rise to " structural Marxism ," such association was contested by Althusser himself in the Italian foreword to the second edition of Reading Capital . In this foreword Althusser states the following: Despite the precautions we took to distinguish ourselves from the 'structuralist' ideology…, despite the decisive intervention of categories foreign to 'structuralism'…, the terminology we employed was too close in many respects to the 'structuralist' terminology not to give rise to an ambiguity. With a very few exceptions…our interpretation of Marx has generally been recognized and judged, in homage to the current fashion, as 'structuralist'.… We believe that despite the terminological ambiguity, the profound tendency of our texts was not attached to the 'structuralist' ideology.

[ 7 ] Assiter [ edit ] In a later development, feminist theorist Alison Assiter enumerated four ideas common to the various forms of structuralism: [ 8 ] a structure determines the position of each element of a whole; every system has a structure; structural laws deal with co-existence rather than change; and structures are the "real things" that lie beneath the surface or the appearance of meaning.

In linguistics [ edit ] Main article: Structural linguistics Part of a series on Linguistics Outline History Index General linguistics Diachronic Lexicography Morphology Phonology Pragmatics Semantics Syntax Syntax–semantics interface Typology Applied linguistics Acquisition Anthropological Applied Mathematical Computational Conversation analysis Corpus linguistics Discourse analysis Determinism Distance Documentation Ethnography of communication Ethnomethodology Forensic History of linguistics Interlinguistics Neurolinguistics Philology Philosophy of language Phonetics Psycholinguistics Sociolinguistics Text Translating and interpreting Writing systems Theoretical frameworks Formalist Constituency Dependency Distributionalism Generative Glossematics Functional Cognitive Construction grammar Functional discourse grammar Grammaticalization Interactional linguistics Prague circle Systemic functional Usage-based Structuralism Topics Autonomy of syntax Compositionality Conservative and innovative language Descriptivism Etymology Iconicity Internet linguistics LGBTQ linguistics Origin of language Orismology Orthography Philosophy of linguistics Prescriptivism Second-language acquisition Theory of language Terminology Portal v t e In Ferdinand de Saussure 's Course in General Linguistics , the analysis focuses not on the use of language ( parole , 'speech'), but rather on the underlying system of language ( langue ). This approach examines how the elements of language relate to each other in the present, synchronically rather than diachronically . Saussure argued that linguistic signs were composed of two parts: a signifiant ('signifier'): the "sound pattern" of a word, either in mental projection—e.g., as when one silently recites lines from signage, a poem to one's self—or in actual, any kind of text, physical realization as part of a speech act .

a signifié '(signified'): the concept or meaning of the word.

This differed from previous approaches that focused on the relationship between words and the things in the world that they designate.

[ 9 ] Although not fully developed by Saussure, other key notions in structural linguistics can be found in structural "idealism." A structural idealism is a class of linguistic units ( lexemes , morphemes , or even constructions ) that are possible in a certain position in a given syntagm , or linguistic environment (such as a given sentence). The different functional role of each of these members of the paradigm is called 'value' ( French : valeur ).

Prague School [ edit ] In France, Antoine Meillet and Émile Benveniste continued Saussure's project, and members of the Prague school of linguistics such as Roman Jakobson and Nikolai Trubetzkoy conducted influential research. The clearest and most important example of Prague school structuralism lies in phonemics . Rather than simply compiling a list of which sounds occur in a language, the Prague school examined how they were related. They determined that the inventory of sounds in a language could be analysed as a series of contrasts.

Thus, in English, the sounds /p/ and /b/ represent distinct phonemes because there are cases ( minimal pairs ) where the contrast between the two is the only difference between two distinct words (e.g. 'pat' and 'bat'). Analyzing sounds in terms of contrastive features also opens up comparative scope—for instance, it makes clear the difficulty Japanese speakers have differentiating /r/ and /l/ in English and other languages is because these sounds are not contrastive in Japanese.

Phonology would become the paradigmatic basis for structuralism in a number of different fields.

Based on the Prague school concept, André Martinet in France, J. R. Firth in the UK and Louis Hjelmslev in Denmark developed their own versions of structural and functional linguistics .

In anthropology [ edit ] Main article: Structural anthropology Part of a series on Anthropology Outline History Types Archaeological Biological Cultural Linguistic Social Archaeological Aerial Aviation Battlefield Biblical Bioarchaeological Environmental Ethnoarchaeological Experimental Feminist Forensic Maritime Paleoethnobotanical Zooarchaeological Biological Anthrozoological Biocultural Evolutionary Forensic Molecular Neurological Nutritional Paleoanthropological Primatological Social Cultural Applied Art Cognitive Cyborg Development Digital Ecological Environmental Economic Political economy Feminist Food Historical Institutional Kinship Legal Media Medical Museums Musical Political Psychological Public Religion Symbolic Transpersonal Urban Visual Linguistic Anthropological Descriptive Ethnological Ethnopoetical Historical Ideology Semiotic Sociological Research framework Anthropometry Ethnography cyber Ethnology Cross-cultural comparison Participant observation Holism Reflexivity Thick description Cultural relativism Ethnocentrism Emic and etic Key concepts Culture Development Ethnicity Evolution sociocultural Gender Kinship and descent Meme Prehistory Race Society Value Colonialism / Postcolonialism Key theories Actor–network theory Alliance theory Boasian anthropology Cross-cultural studies Cultural materialism Culture theory Diffusionism Feminism Functionalism Historical particularism Interpretive Performance studies Political economy Practice theory Structuralism Post-structuralism Systems theory Lists Anthropologists by nationality Anthropology by year Bibliography Journals List of indigenous peoples Organizations v t e According to structural theory in anthropology and social anthropology , meaning is produced and reproduced within a culture through various practices, phenomena, and activities that serve as systems of signification.

A structuralist approach may study activities as diverse as food-preparation and serving rituals, religious rites, games, literary and non-literary texts, and other forms of entertainment to discover the deep structures by which meaning is produced and reproduced within the culture. For example, Lévi-Strauss analysed in the 1950s cultural phenomena including mythology, kinship (the alliance theory and the incest taboo ), and food preparation. In addition to these studies, he produced more linguistically-focused writings in which he applied Saussure's distinction between langue and parole in his search for the fundamental structures of the human mind, arguing that the structures that form the "deep grammar" of society originate in the mind and operate in people unconsciously. Lévi-Strauss took inspiration from mathematics .

[ 10 ] Another concept used in structural anthropology came from the Prague school of linguistics , where Roman Jakobson and others analysed sounds based on the presence or absence of certain features (e.g., voiceless vs. voiced). Lévi-Strauss included this in his conceptualization of the universal structures of the mind, which he held to operate based on pairs of binary oppositions such as hot-cold, male-female, culture-nature, cooked-raw, or marriageable vs. tabooed women.

A third influence came from Marcel Mauss (1872–1950), who had written on gift-exchange systems. Based on Mauss, for instance, Lévi-Strauss argued an alliance theory —that kinship systems are based on the exchange of women between groups—as opposed to the ' descent'-based theory described by Edward Evans-Pritchard and Meyer Fortes . While replacing Mauss at his Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes chair, the writings of Lévi-Strauss became widely popular in the 1960s and 1970s and gave rise to the term "structuralism" itself.

In Britain, authors such as Rodney Needham and Edmund Leach were highly influenced by structuralism. Authors such as Maurice Godelier and Emmanuel Terray combined Marxism with structural anthropology in France. In the United States, authors such as Marshall Sahlins and James Boon built on structuralism to provide their own analysis of human society. Structural anthropology fell out of favour in the early 1980s for a number of reasons. D'Andrade suggests that this was because it made unverifiable assumptions about the universal structures of the human mind. Authors such as Eric Wolf argued that political economy and colonialism should be at the forefront of anthropology. More generally, criticisms of structuralism by Pierre Bourdieu led to a concern with how cultural and social structures were changed by human agency and practice, a trend which Sherry Ortner has referred to as ' practice theory '.

One example is Douglas E. Foley's Learning Capitalist Culture (2010), in which he applied a mixture of structural and Marxist theories to his ethnographic fieldwork among high school students in Texas. Foley analyzed how they reach a shared goal through the lens of social solidarity when he observed "Mexicanos" and "Anglo-Americans" come together on the same football team to defeat the school's rivals.

[ 11 ] : 36–7 However, he also continually applies a marxist lens and states that he, "wanted to wow peers with a new cultural marxist theory of schooling." [ 11 ] : 176 Some anthropological theorists, however, while finding considerable fault with Lévi-Strauss's version of structuralism, did not turn away from a fundamental structural basis for human culture. The Biogenetic Structuralism group for instance argued that some kind of structural foundation for culture must exist because all humans inherit the same system of brain structures. They proposed a kind of neuroanthropology which would lay the foundations for a more complete scientific account of cultural similarity and variation by requiring an integration of cultural anthropology and neuroscience —a program that theorists such as Victor Turner also embraced.

In literary criticism and theory [ edit ] Main article: Semiotic literary criticism In literary theory , structuralist criticism relates literary texts to a larger structure, which may be a particular genre , a range of intertextual connections (such as patterns of metaphor [ 12 ] ),
a model of a universal narrative structure , or a system of recurrent patterns or motifs.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The field of structuralist semiotics argues that there must be a structure in every text, which explains why it is easier for experienced readers than for non-experienced readers to interpret a text.

[ 15 ] Everything that is written seems to be governed by rules, or "grammar of literature", that one learns in educational institutions and that are to be unmasked.

[ 16 ] A potential problem for a structuralist interpretation is that it can be highly reductive; as scholar Catherine Belsey puts it: "the structuralist danger of collapsing all difference." [ 17 ] An example of such a reading might be if a student concludes the authors of West Side Story did not write anything "really" new, because their work has the same structure as Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet . In both texts a girl and a boy fall in love (a "formula" with a symbolic operator between them would be "Boy + Girl") despite the fact that they belong to two groups that hate each other ("Boy's Group - Girl's Group" or "Opposing forces") and conflict is resolved by their deaths. Structuralist readings focus on how the structures of the single text resolve inherent narrative tensions. If a structuralist reading focuses on multiple texts, there must be some way in which those texts unify themselves into a coherent system. The versatility of structuralism is such that a literary critic could make the same claim about a story of two friendly families ("Boy's Family + Girl's Family") that arrange a marriage between their children despite the fact that the children hate each other ("Boy - Girl") and then the children commit suicide to escape the arranged marriage; the justification is that the second story's structure is an 'inversion' of the first story's structure: the relationship between the values of love and the two pairs of parties involved have been reversed.

Structuralist literary criticism argues that the "literary banter of a text" can lie only in new structure, rather than in the specifics of character development and voice in which that structure is expressed. Literary structuralism often follows the lead of Vladimir Propp , Algirdas Julien Greimas , and Claude Lévi-Strauss in seeking out basic deep elements in stories, myths , and more recently, anecdotes, which are combined in various ways to produce the many versions of the ur-story or ur-myth.

There is considerable similarity between structural literary theory and Northrop Frye 's archetypal criticism , which is also indebted to the anthropological study of myths. Some critics have also tried to apply the theory to individual works, but the effort to find unique structures in individual literary works runs counter to the structuralist program and has an affinity with New Criticism .

In economics [ edit ] Main article: Structuralist economics Yifu Lin criticizes early structural economic systems and theories, discussing the failures of it. He writes: "The structuralism believes that the failure to develop advanced capital-intensive industries spontaneously in a developing country is due to market failures caused by various structural rigidities..." "According to neoliberalism, the main reason for the failure of developing countries to catch up with developed countries was too much state intervention in the market, causing misallocation of resources, rent seeking and so forth." Rather these failures are more so centered around the unlikelihood of such quick development of these advanced industries within developing countries.

[ 18 ] New Structural Economics (NSE) [ edit ] New structural economics is an economic development strategy developed by World Bank Chief Economist Justin Yifu Lin . The strategy combines ideas from both neoclassical economics and structural economics.

NSE studies two parts: the base and the superstructure . A base is a combination of forces and relations of production, consisting of, but not limited to, industry and technology, while the superstructure consists of hard infrastructure and institutions. This results in an explanation of how the base impacts the superstructure which then determines transaction costs .

[ 19 ] Interpretations and general criticisms [ edit ] Structuralism is less popular today than other approaches, such as post-structuralism and deconstruction . Structuralism has often been criticized for being ahistorical and for favouring deterministic structural forces over the ability of people to act . As the political turbulence of the 1960s and 1970s (particularly the student uprisings of May 1968 ) began affecting academia, issues of power and political struggle moved to the center of public attention.

[ 20 ] In the 1980s, deconstruction —and its emphasis on the fundamental ambiguity of language rather than its logical structure—became popular. By the end of the century, structuralism was seen as a historically important school of thought , but the movements that it spawned, rather than structuralism itself, commanded attention.

[ 21 ] Several social theorists and academics have strongly criticized structuralism or even dismissed it. French hermeneutic philosopher Paul Ricœur (1969) criticized Lévi-Strauss for overstepping the limits of validity of the structuralist approach, ending up in what Ricœur described as "a Kantianism without a transcendental subject ." [ 22 ] Anthropologist Adam Kuper (1973) argued that: [ 23 ] 'Structuralism' came to have something of the momentum of a millennial movement and some of its adherents felt that they formed a secret society of the seeing in a world of the blind. Conversion was not just a matter of accepting a new paradigm. It was, almost, a question of salvation.

Philip Noel Pettit (1975) called for an abandoning of "the positivist dream which Lévi-Strauss dreamed for semiology ," arguing that semiology is not to be placed among the natural sciences .

[ 24 ] Cornelius Castoriadis (1975) criticized structuralism as failing to explain symbolic mediation in the social world; [ 25 ] he viewed structuralism as a variation on the " logicist " theme, arguing that, contrary to what structuralists advocate, language—and symbolic systems in general—cannot be reduced to logical organizations on the basis of the binary logic of oppositions .

[ 26 ] Critical theorist Jürgen Habermas (1985) accused structuralists like Foucault of being positivists ; Foucault, while not an ordinary positivist per se, paradoxically uses the tools of science to criticize science, according to Habermas [ 27 ] (see Performative contradiction and Foucault–Habermas debate ). Sociologist Anthony Giddens (1993) is another notable critic; while Giddens draws on a range of structuralist themes in his theorizing, he dismisses the structuralist view that the reproduction of social systems is merely "a mechanical outcome." [ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Antihumanism Engaged theory Genetic structuralism Holism Isomorphism Post-structuralism Russian formalism Structuralist film theory Structuration theory Émile Durkheim Structural functionalism Structuralism (philosophy of science) Structuralism (philosophy of mathematics) Structuralism (psychology) Structural change Structuralist economics References [ edit ] ^ Calhoun, Craig , ed. 2002. "Structuralism." In Dictionary of the Social Sciences . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195123715 .

^ a b Blackburn, Simon , ed. 2008. "Structuralism." In Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy (2nd rev. ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-954143-0 . p. 353.

^ de Saussure, Ferdinand . 1916.

Cours de linguistique generale , published by C. Bally and A. Sechehaye . Paris: Payot.

^ de Saussure, Ferdinand . [1916] 1959.

Course in General Linguistics , translated by W. Baskin. New York: Philosophical Library . p. 120.

^ Jean Piaget, Le structuralisme , ed. PUF, 1968.

^ Deleuze, Gilles . [2002] 2004. "How Do We Recognise Structuralism?" Pp. 170–92 in Desert Islands and Other Texts 1953-1974 ( Semiotext(e) Foreign Agents series ), translated by D. Lapoujade, edited by M. Taormina. Los Angeles: Semiotext(e) .

ISBN 1-58435-018-0 . pp. 171–73.

^ Louis Althusser and Étienne Balibar .

Reading Capital trans. Ben Brewster. London: NLB, 1970. p. 7.

^ Assiter, Alison (June 1984).

"Althusser and structuralism" .

British Journal of Sociology .

35 (2): 272– 296.

doi : 10.2307/590235 .

JSTOR 590235 . Archived from the original on 2018-10-02 . Retrieved 2013-07-15 .

^ Suryo, Roy, and Talbot Roosevelt. [1989].

Landmarks in Linguistic Thought (1st ed.). pp. 178–79.

^ Dosse, François . 1997.

History of Structuralism: Volume 1: The Rising Sign, 1945-1966 . University of Minnesota Press. p. 24.

^ a b E. Foley, Douglas (2010).

Learning Capitalist Culture: Deep in the Heart of Tejas . Baltimore, MD: University of Pennsylvania.

ISBN 978-0-8122-2098-8 .

OCLC 461631692 .

^ Suzanne Hecht Juhasz (December 1970).

Patterns of Metaphor: Their Function in Some Modern Long Poems: Studies in Williams, Pound, Stevens, and Eliot . University of California. p. 1 . Retrieved 26 February 2025 .

A reason why unifying structure in modern long poems has often escaped notice is that readers have not been sensitive to the organizing function of metaphor.

^ Barry, P. 2002. "Structuralism." Pp. 39–60 in Beginning Theory: An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory . Manchester: Manchester University Press .

^ Slavutin, Evgeny, and Vladimir Pimonov . 2018.

Plot Structure . Moscow: Nauka / Flinta Publishing.

^ Nöth, Winfried . 1995.

Handbook of Semiotics . Indiana University Press. p. 312.

^ Selden, Raman, Peter Widdowson, and Peter Brooker. 2005.

A Reader's Guide to Contemporary Literary Theory (5th ed.). Harlow. p. 76.

^ Belsey, Catherine . 1983. "Literature, History, Politics." Pp. 17–27 in Literature and History 9.

^ Yifu Lin, Justin (January 2019). "New Structural Economics: The Third Generation of Development Economics".

Boston University: Global Development Policy Center : 2– 3.

^ "About NSE" .

Institute of New Structural Economics . June 17, 2024.

^ Marshall, J. D., ed. 2004.

Poststructuralism, Philosophy, Pedagogy . Springer. p. xviii.

^ Finlayson, Alan , and Jeremy Valentine. 2002.

Politics and post-structuralism: an introduction . Edinburgh University Press. p. 8.

^ Ricœur, Paul . [1969] 2004.

The Conflict of Interpretations: Essays in Hermeneutics [ Le conflit des interprétations: Essais d’herméneutique ].

Continuum . pp. 49, 78ff.

^ Kuper, Adam . 1973.

Anthropologists and Anthropology: The British School 1922–72 . Penguin. p. 206.

^ Pettit, Philip . 1975.

The Concept of Structuralism: A Critical Analysis . University of California Press. p. 117.

^ Castoriadis, Cornelius . [1975] 1987.

The Imaginary Institution of Society [ L'institution imaginaire de la société ]. Cambridge: Polity Press. p. 116–17.

^ C. Castoriadis (1997), The Imaginary: Creation in the Social-Historical Domain . In: World in Fragments . Stanford: Stanford University Press, 3–18.

^ Habermas, J. (1990), The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity (originally published in German in 1985 as Der Philosophische Diskurs der Moderne ), MIT Press, 1990, p. 276.

^ Giddens, Anthony . 1993.

New rules of sociological method: A positive critique of interpretative sociologies.

Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. p. 121.

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Structuralism .

Angermuller, Johannes . 2015.

Why There Is No Poststructuralism in France: The Making of an Intellectual Generation.

London: Bloomsbury.

Roudinesco, Élisabeth . 2008.

Philosophy in Turbulent Times: Canguilhem , Sartre , Foucault , Althusser , Deleuze , Derrida . New York: Columbia University Press.

Primary sources [ edit ] Althusser, Louis .

Reading Capital .

Barthes, Roland .

S/Z .

Deleuze, Gilles . 1973. "À quoi reconnaît-on le structuralisme?" Pp. 299–335 in Histoire de la philosophie, Idées, Doctrines. Vol. 8: Le XXe siècle , edited by F. Châtelet . Paris: Hachette de Saussure, Ferdinand . 1916.

Course in General Linguistics .

Foucault, Michel .

The Order of Things .

Jakobson, Roman .

Essais de linguistique générale .

Lacan, Jacques .

The Seminars of Jacques Lacan .

Lévi-Strauss, Claude .

The Elementary Structures of Kinship .

—— 1958.

Structural Anthropology [ Anthropologie structurale ] —— 1964–1971.

Mythologiques Wilcken, Patrick, ed.

Claude Levi-Strauss: The Father of Modern Anthropology .

v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach C. P. Snow Berlin Circle Vienna Circle Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐tnphq
Cached time: 20250817043834
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.642 seconds
Real time usage: 0.800 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3429/1000000
Revision size: 33790/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 186029/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3109/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 116302/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.339/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19704334/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  562.753      1 -total
 19.75%  111.151      1 Template:Reflist
 17.37%   97.772      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.13%   79.522      6 Template:Lang
 13.73%   77.294      1 Template:Sociology
  9.50%   53.451      5 Template:Navbox
  8.80%   49.497      1 Template:Short_description
  8.46%   47.604      3 Template:ISBN
  7.33%   41.272      1 Template:Commonscat
  6.90%   38.840      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:27763:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043834 and revision id 1303304779. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Structuralism&oldid=1303304779 " Categories : Structuralism Linguistic theories and hypotheses Literary criticism Philosophical anthropology Psychoanalytic theory Sociological theories Theories of language Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from August 2016 Use American English from December 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles containing French-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 05:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Structuralism 67 languages Add topic

