Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary Toggle Summary subsection 1.1 Chapter 1 1.2 Chapter 2 1.3 Chapter 3 1.4 Chapter 4 1.5 Chapter 5 2 Influence 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Utilitarianism (book) 15 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی 한국어 Íslenska עברית 日本語 Српски / srpski Suomi 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1861 essay by John Stuart Mill This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Utilitarianism Author John Stuart Mill Language English Subject Ethics Publication date 1863 Text Utilitarianism at Wikisource Utilitarianism is an 1861 essay written by English philosopher and economist John Stuart Mill , considered to be a classic exposition and defense of utilitarianism in ethics. It was originally published as a series of three separate articles in Fraser's Magazine in 1861 before it was collected and reprinted as a single work in 1863.

[ 1 ] The essay explains utilitarianism to its readers and addresses the numerous criticism against the theory during Mill's lifetime. It was heavily criticized upon publication; however, since then, Utilitarianism gained significant popularity [ 2 ] and has been considered "the most influential philosophical articulation of a liberal humanistic morality that was produced in the nineteenth century." [ 3 ] Summary [ edit ] Mill took many elements of his version of utilitarianism from Jeremy Bentham , the great nineteenth-century legal reformer and the propounder of utilitarianism, who along with William Paley were the two most influential English utilitarians prior to Mill.  Like Bentham, Mill believed that happiness (or pleasure, which both Bentham and Mill equated with happiness) was the only thing humans do and should desire for its own sake. Since happiness is the only intrinsic good, and since more happiness is preferable to less, the goal of the ethical life is to maximize happiness. This is what Bentham and Mill call "the principle of utility" or "the greatest-happiness principle." Both Bentham and Mill thus endorse "classical" or "hedonistic" forms of utilitarianism.

[ 4 ] Although Mill agreed with Bentham about many of the foundational principles of ethics, he also had some major disagreements. In particular, Mill tried to develop a more refined form of utilitarianism that would harmonize better with ordinary morality and highlight the importance in the ethical life of intellectual pleasures, self-development, high ideals of character, and conventional moral rules.

Chapter 1 [ edit ] In Chapter 1, titled "General Remarks," Mill notes that there has been little progress in ethics. Since the beginning of philosophy, the same issues have been debated over and over again, and philosophers continue to disagree sharply over the basic starting points of ethics. Mill argues that these philosophical disputes have not seriously damaged popular morality, largely because conventional morality is substantially, though implicitly, utilitarian. He concludes the chapter by noting that he will not attempt to give a strict "proof" of the greatest-happiness principle. Like Bentham, Mill believed that ultimate ends and first principles cannot be demonstrated, since they lie at the foundation of everything else that we know and believe. Nevertheless, he claims, "[c]considerations may be presented capable of determining the intellect," [ 5 ] which amount to something close to a proof of the principle of utility.

Chapter 2 [ edit ] In the second chapter, Mill formulates a single ethical principle, the principle of utility or greatest-happiness principle, from which he says all utilitarian ethical principles are derived: "The creed which accepts as the foundation of morals utility , or the greatest happiness principle , holds that actions are right in proportion as they tend to promote happiness, wrong as they tend to produce the reverse of happiness. By happiness is intended pleasure, and the absence of pain; by unhappiness, pain, and the privation of pleasure." [ 6 ] Mill then spends the bulk of Chapter 2 responding to a number of common criticisms of utilitarianism. These include charges that utilitarianism: is a doctrine worthy only of swine (for holding that pleasure is the only thing that is desirable for its own sake) (p. 17) Is overly permissive because, critics argue, most humans will prefer the lower kinds of happiness out of laziness.

is an unrealistic ethos, because as critics argue, many masses live in societies with overwhelming pain and deep unhappiness.

fails to recognize that sustained happiness is unobtainable (p. 23) is too demanding (for claiming that it is always our duty to create the greatest possible happiness in the world) (p. 29) makes people cold and unsympathetic (by focusing solely on the consequences of actions, rather than on features such as motives and character, which require a more sensitive and empathetic response) (p. 31) is a godless ethics (by failing to recognize that ethics is rooted in God's commands or will) (p. 33) confuses goodness with expediency (p. 34) fails to recognize that in making ethical decisions there usually is no time to calculate long-term consequences (p. 35) tempts people to disobey ordinary moral rules (by inviting them to ignore such rules when they appear to conflict with the general happiness) (p. 37) In response to the charge that utilitarianism is a doctrine fit only for swine, Mill abandons Bentham's apparent view that pleasures differ only in quantity, not quality. He notes that most people who have experienced both physical and intellectual pleasures tend to greatly prefer the latter. Few people, he claims, would choose to trade places with an animal, a fool, or an ignoramus for any amount of bodily pleasure they might thereby acquire. And since "the sole evidence it is possible to produce that something is desirable, is that people do actually desire it," [ 7 ] it follows that intellectual pleasures (e.g., the pleasures of friendship, art, reading, and conversation) are higher and more desirable kinds of pleasures than bodily pleasures, and that a rational pursuit of one's long-term happiness requires development of one's higher faculties.

In reply to the objection that there generally is not enough time to calculate how a given act might affect the long-term general happiness, Mill sketches a kind of "two-tier" approach to ethics that accords an important place to moral rules in ethical decision-making.

[ 8 ] Mill argues that traditional moral rules such as "Keep your promises" and "Tell the truth" have been shown by long experience to promote the welfare of society. Normally we should follow such "secondary principles" without reflecting much on the consequences of our acts. As a rule, only when such second-tier principles conflict is it necessary (or wise) to appeal to the principle of utility directly.

[ 9 ] Chapter 3 [ edit ] In the third chapter, Mill asks what "sanctions" (that is, rewards and punishments) undergird the obligation to promote the general happiness. He explores a variety of ways in which both external and internal sanctions – that is, the incentives provided by others and the inner feelings of sympathy and conscience – encourage people to think about how their actions affect the happiness of others. The ultimate sanction, Mill claims, is internal. Humans are social animals who naturally desire "to be in unity with our fellow creatures." [ 10 ] To prefer selfish goals over the public good runs counter to this deep-seated natural impulse.

Chapter 4 [ edit ] In the fourth chapter Mill offers his famous quasi-proof of the greatest-happiness principle. The core of his argument is this: Everyone desires happiness.

The only proof that something is desirable is that people do actually desire it.

So, each person's happiness is a good to that person.

Therefore, the general happiness is a good to the aggregate of all persons.

[ 11 ] Many critics have claimed that this argument relies on a dubious assumption about how individual happiness is related to the general happiness.

[ 12 ] There might be times when the general happiness can only be promoted by sacrificing the happiness of certain individuals. In such cases, is the general happiness a good to those individuals? Other critics have questioned whether it makes sense to speak of aggregates as having desires, [ 13 ] or whether the fact that something is desired proves that it is desirable.

[ 14 ] Chapter 5 [ edit ] The fifth and longest chapter concludes by discussing what Mill considers "the only real difficulty" [ 15 ] with utilitarian ethics: whether it might sometimes license acts of flagrant injustice. Critics of utilitarianism often claim that judging actions solely in terms of their effects on the general happiness is incompatible with a robust respect for individual rights and a duty to treat people as they deserve.  Mill appreciates the force of this objection and argues that feelings of justice are rooted in both a natural human desire to retaliate for injuries and a natural instinct for sympathy for those who have been wrongly injured; that justice has a utilitarian basis since an injustice is committed only when a person's rights have been violated, and an alleged right should be protected by society only when doing so promotes the general happiness; that people disagree deeply about what sorts of things are and are not just, and utilitarianism provides the only rational basis for resolving such conflicts.

Influence [ edit ] Mill's Utilitarianism remains "the most famous defense of the utilitarian view ever written" [ 16 ] and is still widely assigned in university ethics courses around the world. Largely owing to Mill, utilitarianism rapidly became the dominant ethical theory in Anglo-American philosophy.

[ 17 ] Though some contemporary ethicists would not agree with all elements of Mill's moral philosophy, utilitarianism remains a live option in ethical theory today.

See also [ edit ] Annals of the Parish , by John Galt References [ edit ] ^ Mill, John Stuart (1863).

Utilitarianism (1 ed.). London: Parker, Son & Bourn, West Strand . Retrieved 6 June 2015 – via Google Books.

^ Henry Sidgwick, Outlines of the History of Ethics . Indianapolis: Hackett, 1988, p. 245. (Originally published in 1902.) ^ J. B. Schneewind, "John Stuart Mill," in Paul Edwards, ed.

The Encyclopedia of Philosophy , vol. 5. New York: Macmillan, 1967, p. 319.

^ Geoffrey Scarre, Utilitarianism . New York: Routledge, 1996, pp. 133-151.

^ John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism . Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1987, pp. 16-17.

^ Mill, Utilitarianism, pp. 16-17.

^ Mill, Utilitarianism , p. 50.

^ Richard Norman, The Moral Philosophers: An Introduction to Ethics , 2nd ed. New York: Oxford, 1998. p. 100.

^ Mill, Utilitarianism , pp. 35-37.

^ Mill, Utilitarianism , p. 45.

^ Mill Utilitarianism , p. 50.

^ Scarre, Utilitarianism , p. 97.

^ Sidgwick, Outlines of the History of Ethics , p. 246.

^ Scarre, Utilitarianism , p. 97; G. E. Moore, Principia Ethica . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1903, p. 67.

^ Mill, Utilitarianism , p. 94.

^ Scarre, Utilitarianism , p. 82.

^ J. B. Schneewind, Sidgwick's Ethics and Victorian Moral Philosophy . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978, p. 174.

Bibliography [ edit ] Mill, John Stuart (1998). Crisp, Roger (ed.).

Utilitarianism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-875163-X .

Further reading [ edit ] Alican, Necip Fikri (1994).

Mill's Principle of Utility: A Defense of John Stuart Mill's Notorious Proof . Amsterdam and Atlanta: Editions Rodopi B.V.

ISBN 978-90-518-3748-3 .

Bayles, M. D. (1968).

Contemporary Utilitarianism . Anchor Books, Doubleday.

Bentham, Jeremy (2009).

An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (Dover Philosophical Classics) . Dover Publications Inc.

ISBN 978-0486454528 .

Brandt, Richard B. (1979).

A Theory of the Good and the Right . Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0-19-824550-5 .

Lyons, David (1965).

Forms and Limits of Utilitarianism . Oxford University Press(UK).

ISBN 978-0198241973 .

Mill, John Stuart (2011).

A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive (Classic Reprint) . Forgotten Books.

ISBN 978-1440090820 .

Mill, John Stuart (1981). "Autobiography". In Robson, John (ed.).

Collected Works, volume XXXI . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 0-7100-0718-3 .

Moore, G.E. (1903).

Principia Ethica . Prometheus Books UK.

ISBN 0879754982 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Rosen, Frederick (2003).

Classical Utilitarianism from Hume to Mill . Routledge.

Scheffler, Samuel (August 1994).

The Rejection of Consequentialism: A Philosophical Investigation of the Considerations Underlying Rival Moral Conceptions, Second Edition . Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0198235118 .

Smart, J. J. C.; Williams, Bernard (January 1973).

Utilitarianism: For and Against . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521098229 .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Utilitarianism Full text version of "Utilitarianism.com" Fraser's Magazine, vol. 64 , containing the first version (1861) of Mill's Utilitarianism as a series of three articles (p. 391-406, 525-534, 659-673).

Mill, J.S.

Utilitarianism . Parker, Son, and Bourn: London, 1863 , a digitised copy from the Internet Archive .

Mill, J.S.

Utilitarianism , second edition. Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green: London, 1864 , a digitised copy from Google Book Search .

Mill, J.S.

Utilitarianism , third edition. Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer: London, 1867 , a digitised copy from Google Book Search .

Contains Utilitarianism, slightly modified for easier reading Mill, J.S.

Utilitarianism , fourth edition. Longmans, Green, Reader, and Dyer: London, 1871 , a digitised copy from Google Book Search .

Utilitarianism, 7th edition, 1879 at Project Gutenberg Utilitarianism public domain audiobook at LibriVox Utilitarianism (1871 edition, transcribed by the Fair Use Repository) Utilitarianism (1863 edition, transcribed by the University of Adelaide Library) Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy: John Stuart Mill: Utilitarianism v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e John Stuart Mill Essays Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy (1844) " A Few Words on Non-Intervention " (1859) " The Subjection of Women " (1869) Books A System of Logic (1843) Principles of Political Economy (1848) On Liberty (1859) Considerations on Representative Government (1861) Utilitarianism (1863) Three Essays on Religion (1874) Articles John Stuart Mill Institute Mill's Methods Authority control databases : National France BnF data Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Utilitarianism_(book)&oldid=1280469972 " Categories : 1863 non-fiction books Books by John Stuart Mill Classical liberalism Ethics books Works about utilitarianism Works originally published in Fraser's Magazine Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles with style issues from October 2023 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use British English from September 2013 Use dmy dates from January 2024 Articles that link to Wikisource CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 14 March 2025, at 19:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Utilitarianism (book) 15 languages Add topic

