Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Thorstein Veblen 2 John R. Commons 3 Wesley Mitchell 4 Clarence Ayres 5 Adolf Berle 6 John Kenneth Galbraith 7 New institutional economics 8 Criticism 9 Response 10 Journals 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Institutional economics 31 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economics that focuses on institutions For the branch of economics that studies optimal design of institutions, see mechanism design and social choice theory .

For the branch of economics that models the behavior of governments and institutions, see public choice .

Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Institutional economics focuses on understanding the role of the evolutionary process and the role of institutions in shaping economic behavior . Its original focus lay in Thorstein Veblen 's instinct-oriented dichotomy between technology on the one side and the "ceremonial" sphere of society on the other. Its name and core elements trace back to a 1919 American Economic Review article by Walton H. Hamilton .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Institutional economics emphasizes a broader study of institutions and views markets as a result of the complex interaction of these various institutions (e.g. individuals, firms, states, social norms). The earlier tradition continues today as a leading heterodox approach to economics.

[ 3 ] "Traditional" institutionalism rejects the reduction of institutions to simply tastes, technology , and nature (see naturalistic fallacy ).

[ 4 ] Tastes, along with expectations of the future, habits, and motivations, not only determine the nature of institutions but are limited and shaped by them. If people live and work in institutions on a regular basis, it shapes their world views. Fundamentally, this traditional institutionalism (and its modern counterpart institutionalist political economy) emphasizes the legal foundations of an economy (see John R. Commons ) and the evolutionary, habituated, and volitional processes by which institutions are erected and then changed (see John Dewey , Thorstein Veblen , and Daniel Bromley ). Institutional economics focuses on learning, bounded rationality , and evolution (rather than assuming stable preferences, rationality and equilibrium). It was a central part of American economics in the first part of the 20th century, including such famous but diverse economists as Thorstein Veblen , Wesley Mitchell , and John R. Commons .

[ 5 ] Some institutionalists see Karl Marx as belonging to the institutionalist tradition, because he described capitalism as a historically bounded social system; other institutionalist economists [ who?

] disagree with Marx's definition of capitalism, instead seeing defining features such as markets, money and the private ownership of production as indeed evolving over time, but as a result of the purposive actions of individuals.

A significant variant is the new institutional economics from the later 20th century, which integrates later developments of neoclassical economics into the analysis.

Law and economics has been a major theme since the publication of the Legal Foundations of Capitalism by John R. Commons in 1924. Since then, there has been heated debate on the role of law (a formal institution) on economic growth.

[ 6 ] Behavioral economics is another hallmark of institutional economics based on what is known about psychology and cognitive science, rather than simple assumptions of economic behavior.

Some of the authors associated with this school include Daron Acemoglu , Robert H. Frank , Warren Samuels , Marc Tool, Geoffrey Hodgson , Daniel Bromley , Jonathan Nitzan , Shimshon Bichler , Elinor Ostrom , Anne Mayhew, John Kenneth Galbraith and Gunnar Myrdal , but even the sociologist C. Wright Mills was highly influenced by the institutionalist approach in his major studies.

Thorstein Veblen [ edit ] Main articles: Thorstein Veblen and The Theory of the Leisure Class Thorstein Veblen came from a Norwegian immigrant family in rural Mid-western America.

Thorstein Veblen (1857–1929) wrote his first and most influential book while he was at the University of Chicago , on The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899).

[ 7 ] In it he analyzed the motivation in capitalism for people to conspicuously consume their riches as a way of demonstrating success.

Conspicuous leisure was another focus of Veblen's critique.

In The Theory of Business Enterprise (1904), Veblen distinguished the motivations of industrial production for people to use things from business motivations that used, or misused, industrial infrastructure for profit, arguing that the former is often hindered because businesses pursue the latter. Output and technological advance are restricted by business practices and the creation of monopolies. Businesses protect their existing capital investments and employ excessive credit, leading to depressions and increasing military expenditure and war through business control of political power. These two books, focusing on criticism first of consumerism , and second of profiteering, did not advocate change.

Through the 1920s and after the Wall Street Crash of 1929 Thorstein Veblen's warnings of the tendency for wasteful consumption and the necessity of creating sound financial institutions seemed to ring true.

Thorstein Veblen wrote in 1898 an article entitled "Why is Economics Not an Evolutionary Science?" [ 8 ] and he became the precursor of current evolutionary economics .

John R. Commons [ edit ] Main article: John R. Commons John R. Commons (1862–1945) also came from mid-Western America. Underlying his ideas, consolidated in Institutional Economics (1934) was the concept that the economy is a web of relationships between people with diverging interests. There are monopolies, large corporations, labour disputes and fluctuating business cycles. They do however have an interest in resolving these disputes.

Commons thought that government should be the mediator between the conflicting groups. Commons himself devoted much of his time to advisory and mediation work on government boards and industrial commissions.

Wesley Mitchell [ edit ] Main article: Wesley Mitchell Wesley Clair Mitchell (1874–1948) was an American economist known for his empirical work on business cycles and for guiding the National Bureau of Economic Research in its first decades. Mitchell's teachers included economists Thorstein Veblen and J. L. Laughlin and philosopher John Dewey.

Clarence Ayres [ edit ] Main article: Clarence Edwin Ayres Clarence Ayres (1891–1972) was the principal thinker of what some have called the Texas school of institutional economics. Ayres developed on the ideas of Thorstein Veblen with a dichotomy of "technology" and "institutions" to separate the inventive from the inherited aspects of economic structures. He claimed that technology was always one step ahead of the socio-cultural institutions.

Ayres was heavily influenced by the philosophy of John Dewey. Dewey and Ayres both utilized the instrumental theory of value to analyze problems and propose solutions. According to this theory, something has value if it enhances or furthers the life process of mankind. Therefore, this should become the criterion to be utilized in determining the future courses of action.

It can be argued that Ayres was not an "institutionalist" in any normal sense of the term, since he identified institutions with sentiments and superstition and in consequence institutions only played a kind of residual role in this theory of development which core center was that of technology. Ayres was under strong influence of Hegel and institutions for Ayres had the same function as "Schein" (with the connotation of deception, and illusion) for Hegel. A more appropriate name for Ayres' position would be that of a "techno-behaviorist" rather than an institutionalist.

Adolf Berle [ edit ] Main article: Adolf Berle Adolf Augustus Berle Jr.

Adolf A. Berle (1895–1971) was one of the first authors to combine legal and economic analysis, and his work stands as a founding pillar of thought in modern corporate governance . Like Keynes, Berle was at the Paris Peace Conference, 1919 , but subsequently resigned from his diplomatic job dissatisfied with the Versailles Treaty terms. In his book with Gardiner C. Means , The Modern Corporation and Private Property (1932), he detailed the evolution in the contemporary economy of big business, and argued that those who controlled big firms should be better held to account.

Directors of companies are held to account to the shareholders of companies, or not, by the rules found in company law statutes. This might include rights to elect and fire the management, require for regular general meetings, accounting standards, and so on. In 1930s America, the typical company laws (e.g. in Delaware ) did not clearly mandate such rights. Berle argued that the unaccountable directors of companies were therefore apt to funnel the fruits of enterprise profits into their own pockets, as well as manage in their own interests. The ability to do this was supported by the fact that the majority of shareholders in big public companies were single individuals, with scant means of communication, in short, divided and conquered.

Berle served in President Franklin Delano Roosevelt 's administration through the depression, and was a key member of the so-called " Brain trust " developing many of the New Deal policies. In 1967, Berle and Means issued a revised edition of their work, in which the preface added a new dimension. It was not only the separation of controllers of companies from the owners as shareholders at stake. They posed the question of what the corporate structure was really meant to achieve.

Stockholders toil not, neither do they spin, to earn [dividends and share price increases]. They are beneficiaries by position only. Justification for their inheritance... can be founded only upon social grounds... that justification turns on the distribution as well as the existence of wealth. Its force exists only in direct ratio to the number of individuals who hold such wealth. Justification for the stockholder's existence thus depends on increasing distribution within the American population. Ideally the stockholder's position will be impregnable only when every American family has its fragment of that position and of the wealth by which the opportunity to develop individuality becomes fully actualized.

[ 9 ] John Kenneth Galbraith [ edit ] Main article: John Kenneth Galbraith John Kenneth Galbraith (1908–2006) worked in the New Deal administration of Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Although he wrote later, and was more developed than the earlier institutional economists, Galbraith was critical of orthodox economics throughout the late twentieth century. In The Affluent Society (1958), Galbraith argues voters reaching a certain material wealth begin to vote against the common good. He uses the term " conventional wisdom " to refer to the orthodox ideas that underpin the resulting conservative consensus.

[ 10 ] In an age of big business, it is unrealistic to think only of markets of the classical kind. Big businesses set their own terms in the marketplace, and use their combined resources for advertising programmes to support demand for their own products. As a result, individual preferences actually reflect the preferences of entrenched corporations, a "dependence effect", and the economy as a whole is geared to irrational goals.

[ 11 ] In The New Industrial State Galbraith argues that economic decisions are planned by a private bureaucracy, a technostructure of experts who manipulate marketing and public relations channels. This hierarchy is self-serving, profits are no longer the prime motivator, and even managers are not in control. Because they are the new planners, corporations detest risk, requiring steady economic and stable markets. They recruit governments to serve their interests with fiscal and monetary policy.

While the goals of an affluent society and complicit government serve the irrational technostructure, public space is simultaneously impoverished. Galbraith paints the picture of stepping from penthouse villas on to unpaved streets, from landscaped gardens to unkempt public parks. In Economics and the Public Purpose (1973) Galbraith advocates a "new socialism" ( social democracy ) as the solution, with nationalization of military production and public services such as health care , plus disciplined salary and price controls to reduce inequality and hamper inflation.

New institutional economics [ edit ] Main article: New institutional economics With the new developments in the economic theory of organizations, information , property rights, [ 12 ] and transaction costs , [ 13 ] an attempt was made to integrate institutionalism into more recent developments in mainstream economics , under the title new institutional economics .

[ 14 ] Criticism [ edit ] Critics of institutionalism have maintained that the concept of "institution" is so central for all social science that it is senseless to use it as a buzzword for a particular theoretical school. And as a consequence, the elusive meaning of the concept of "institution" has resulted in a bewildering and never-ending dispute about which scholars are "institutionalists" or not—and a similar confusion about what is supposed to be the core of the theory. In other words, institutional economics has become so popular because it means all things to all people, which in the end of the day is the meaning of nothing.

[ 15 ] Indeed, it can be argued that the term "institutionalists" was misplaced from the very beginning, since Veblen, Hamilton and Ayres were preoccupied with the evolutionary (and "objectifying") forces of technology and institutions had a secondary place within their theories. Institutions were almost a kind of "anti-stuff"; their key concern was on technology and not on institutions. Rather than being "institutional," Veblen, Hamilton and Ayres’ position is anti-institutional.

[ 15 ] Response [ edit ] This section may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) According to Thaler and Sunstein, [ 16 ] a person is not generally best described as an Econ, a person with mainly self-interest in mind, but rather as a Human. Institutional economics, consistent with Thaler and Sunstein, sees humans as social and part of a community, which has been extracted from neoclassical economics.

[ 17 ] The Metaeconomics Frame and Dual Interest Theory argues that it is essential to integrate institutional and neoclassical economics.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Journals [ edit ] Journal of Economic Issues and article-abstract links to 2008.

Journal of Institutional Economics with links to selected articles and to article abstracts.

Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics Evolutionary and Institutional Economics Review See also [ edit ] Institutional economists (category) Constitutional economics Critical juncture theory Democracy and economic growth History of economic thought Economic sociology Historical school of economics , a related school developed in Prussia Institutional logic New institutionalism Perspectives on Capitalism Substantivism Notes [ edit ] ^ Walton H. Hamilton (1919). "The Institutional Approach to Economic Theory," American Economic Review , 9(1), Supplement, pp. 309–18 . Reprinted in R. Albelda, C. Gunn, and W. Waller  (1987), Alternatives to Economic Orthodoxy: A Reader in Political Economy , pp.

204- 12.

^ D.R. Scott, "Veblen not an Institutional Economist." The American Economic Review . Vol. 23. No.2. June 1933. pp. 274–77.

^ Warren J. Samuels ([1987] 2008). "institutional economics," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics .

Abstract.

^ "AMERICAN INSTITUTIONAL SCHOOL" . 19 March 2009. Archived from the original on 19 March 2009 . Retrieved 1 April 2018 .

^ Malcolm, Dewey and Reese Rutherford (2008). "institutionalism, old," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition, v. 4, pp. 374–81.

Abstract.

^ Li, Rita Yi Man and Li, Yi Lut (2013) The relationship between law and economic growth: A paradox in China Cities, Asian Social Science, Vol. 9, No. 9, pp. 19–30, https://ssrn.com/abstract=2290481 ^ Heilbroner, Robert (2000) [1953].

The Worldly Philosophers (seventh ed.). London: Penguin Books . pp. 221, 228– 33, 244.

ISBN 978-0-140-29006-6 .

^ Veblen, Th. 1898 "Why is Economics Not an Evolutionary Science?", The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 12 .

^ Berle (1967) p. xxiii ^ Galbraith (1958) Chapter 2 (Although Galbraith claimed to coin the phrase 'conventional wisdom,' the phrase is used several times in a book by Thorstein Veblen that Galbraith might have read, The Instinct of Workmanship .) ^ Galbraith (1958) Chapter 11 ^ Dean Lueck (2008). "property law, economics and," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract.

^ M. Klaes (2008). "transaction costs, history of," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract.

^ • Ronald Coase (1998). "The New Institutional Economics," American Economic Review , 88(2), pp.

72–74 .

• _____ (1991). "The Institutional Structure of Production," Nobel Prize Lecture PDF , reprinted in 1992, American Economic Review , 82(4), pp.

713–19 .

• Douglass C. North (1995). "The New Institutional Economics and Third World Development," in The New Institutional Economics and Third World Development , J. Harriss, J. Hunter, and C. M. Lewis, ed., pp.

17–26.

• Elinor Ostrom (2005). "Doing Institutional Analysis: Digging Deeper than Markets and Hierarchies," Handbook of New Institutional Economics , C. Ménard and  M. Shirley, eds.

Handbook of New Institutional Economics , pp.

819 –48.

Springer.

• Oliver E. Williamson (2000). "The New Institutional Economics: Taking Stock, Looking Ahead," Journal of Economic Literature , 38(3), pp.

595–613 Archived 2011-05-11 at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b David Hamilton, "Why is Institutional economics not institutional?" The American Journal of Economics and Sociology. Vol. 21. no. 3. July 1962. pp. 309–17.

^ Thaler., R.H.; Sunstein, C.R. (2008).

Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness . New Haven, MA: Yale University Press.

^ Marglin, Stephen A. (2008).

The Dismal Science: How Thinking Like an Economist Undermines Community . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

^ Lynne, G.D. (2006). "Toward a Dual Motive Metaeconomic Theory".

Journal of Socio-Economics .

35 (4): 634– 651.

doi : 10.1016/j.socec.2005.12.019 .

^ Lynne, G.D. (2006). Altman, Morris (ed.).

On the Economics of Subselves: Toward a Metaeconomics, Chp 6 Handbook of Contemporary Behavioral Economics . New York: M.E. Sharpe. pp.

99– 122.

^ Lynne, G.D.; Czap, N.V.; Czap, H.V.; Burbach, M.E. (2016). "Theoretical Foundation for Empathy Conservation: Toward Avoiding the Tragedy of the Common".

Review of Behavioral Economics .

3 ( 3– 4): 245– 279.

doi : 10.1561/105.00000052 .

References [ edit ] Kapp, K. William (2011).

The Foundations of Institutional Economics , Routledge.

Bromley, Daniel (2006).

Sufficient Reason: Volitional Pragmatism and the Meaning of Economic Institutions , Princeton University Press.

Chang, Ha-Joon (2002).

Globalization, Economic Development and the Role of the State , Zed Books.

Cheung, Steven N. S.

(1970). "The Structure of a Contract and the Theory of a Non-Exclusive Resource," Journal of Law and Economics , 13(1), pp.

49–70 .

Commons, John R. (1931). "Institutional Economics," American Economic Review Vol. 21 : p pp. 648–57 .

Commons, John R. (1931). "Institutional Economics," American Economic Review , Vol. 21, No. 4 (Dec.), Vol. 26, No. 1, (1936): pp. 237–49 .

Commons, John R. (1934 [1986]).

Institutional Economics: Its Place in Political Economy , Macmillan.

Description and preview.

Davis, John B. (2007). "The Nature of Heterodox Economics," Post-autistic Economics Review, issue no. 40.

[1] Archived 2007-09-26 at the Wayback Machine Davis, John B. "Why Is Economics Not Yet a Pluralistic Science?", Post-autistic Economics Review , issue no. 43, 15 September, pp. 43–51.

Easterly, William (2001). "Can Institutions Resolve Ethnic Conflict?" Economic Development and Cultural Change , Vol. 49, No. 4), pp.

687–706 Archived 2017-07-04 at the Wayback Machine .

Durlauf, Steven N., and Lawrence E. Blume, eds. From The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2008): Polterovich, Victor . "institutional traps." Abstract.

Rutherford, Malcolm. "institutionalism, old." Abstract.

Samuels, Warren J.

[1987]. "institutional economics." Abstract.

Fiorito, Luca and Massimiliano Vatiero, (2011). "Beyond Legal Relations: Wesley Newcomb Hohfeld's Influence on American Institutionalism".

Journal of Economics Issues , 45 (1): 199–222.

Galbraith, John Kenneth (1973). "Power & the Useful Economist," American Economic Review 63:1–11.

Geoffrey M. Hodgson (1998). "The Approach of Institutional Economics," Journal of Economic Literature , 36(1), pp.

166–92 (close Bookmarks).

Archived 2011-05-11 at the Wayback Machine Hodgson, Geoffrey M. ed. (2003).

Recent Developments in Institutional Economics , Elgar.

Description and contents.

Hodgson, Geoffrey M. (2004).

The Evolution of Institutional Economics: Agency, Structure and Darwinism in American Institutionalism , London and New York: Routledge.

Hodgson, Geoffrey M. and Thorbjørn Knudsen, " Darwin's Conjecture " The Montreal Review (August, 2011).

Hodgson, Samuels, & Tool (1994).

The Elgar Companion to Institutional & Evolutionary Economics , Edward Elgar.

Keaney, Michael, (2002). "Critical Institutionalism: From American Exceptionalism to International Relevance", in Understanding Capitalism: Critical Analysis From Karl Marx to Amartya Sen , ed. Doug Dowd, Pluto Press.

Nicita, A.

[ it ] , and M. Vatiero (2007). "The Contract and the Market: Towards a Broader Notion of Transaction?" Studi e Note di Economia , 1:7–22.

North, Douglass C.

(1990).

Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance , Cambridge University Press.

Elinor Ostrom (2005). "Doing Institutional Analysis: Digging Deeper than Markets and Hierarchies," Handbook of New Institutional Economics , C. Ménard and M. Shirley, eds.

Handbook of New Institutional Economics , pp.

819 –848.

Springer.

Rutherford, Malcolm (2001). "Institutional Economics: Then and Now," Journal of Economic Perspectives , Vol. 15, No. 3 (Summer), pp. 173–94 .

Rutherford, Malcolm (2011).

The Institutionalist Movement in American Economics, 1918-1947: Science and Social Control , Cambridge University Press.

Li, Rita Yi Man (2011). "Everyday Life Application of Neo-institutional Economics: A Global Perspective", Germany, Lambert.

Samuels, Warren J.

(2007), The Legal-Economic Nexus, Routledge.

Schmid, A. Allan (2004).

Conflict & Cooperation: Institutional & Behavioral Economics , Blackwell.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Institutional economics .

Association for Evolutionary Economics World Interdisciplinary Network for Institutional Research Douglass North Nobel lecture Institutional & Behavioral Economics American Institutional School Archived 2009-03-19 at the Wayback Machine Thorstein Veblen, Bibliography T. Veblen: The Leisureclass T. Veblen: Why is Economics Not an Evolutionary Science?

T. Veblen: The Beginning of Ownership av Thorstein Veblen T. Veblen: Theory of Business Enterprise Geoffrey Hodgson's website v t e Microeconomics Major topics Aggregation Budget set Consumer choice Convexity and non-convexity Cost Average Marginal Opportunity Implicit Social Sunk Transaction Cost–benefit analysis Deadweight loss Distribution Economies of scale Economies of scope Elasticity Cross elasticity of demand Income elasticity of demand Price elasticity of demand Price elasticity of supply Equilibrium General Exchange Externality Firms Goods and services Goods Service Household Income–consumption curve Information Indifference curve Intertemporal choice Market Market failure Market structure Competition Monopolistic Perfect Duopoly Monopoly Bilateral Complementary Monopsony Oligopoly Oligopsony Pareto efficiency Preferences Price Price controls Price ceiling Price floor Price discrimination Price signal Price system / Free Pricing Production Profit Public goods Rationing Rent Returns to scale Risk aversion Scarcity Shortage / Excess supply Substitution effect Surplus Social choice Supply and demand Demand / Law of demand Supply / Law of supply Uncertainty Utility Expected Marginal Wage Subfields Behavioral Business Computational Development Statistical decision theory Econometrics Engineering economics Civil engineering economics Evolutionary Experimental Game theory Green Industrial organization Institutional Labour Law Managerial Mathematical Microfoundations of macroeconomics Operations research Optimization Welfare See also Economics Applied Macroeconomics Political economy Business portal Category v t e Institutional economics Institutional economists Werner Abelshauser Clarence Edwin Ayres Joe S. Bain Shimshon Bichler Robert A. Brady Daniel Bromley Ha-Joon Chang John Maurice Clark John R. Commons Richard T. Ely Robert H. Frank John Kenneth Galbraith Walton Hale Hamilton Orris C. Herfindahl Albert O. Hirschman Geoffrey Hodgson János Kornai Simon Kuznets Hunter Lewis Jesse W. Markham Wesley Clair Mitchell Gunnar Myrdal Jonathan Nitzan Warren Samuels François Simiand Herbert A. Simon Frank Stilwell George W. Stocking Sr.

Lars Pålsson Syll Thorstein Veblen Edward Lawrence Wheelwright Erich Zimmermann New institutional economists Daron Acemoglu Armen Alchian Masahiko Aoki Steven N. S. Cheung Ronald Coase Harold Demsetz Avner Greif Claude Ménard Douglass North Mancur Olson Elinor Ostrom ( Bloomington school ) Oliver E. Williamson Behavioral economists George Ainslie Dan Ariely Nava Ashraf Ofer Azar Douglas Bernheim Samuel Bowles Sarah Brosnan Colin Camerer David Cesarini Kay-Yut Chen Rachel Croson Werner De Bondt Paul Dolan Stephen Duneier Catherine C. Eckel Armin Falk Urs Fischbacher Herbert Gintis Uri Gneezy David Halpern Charles A. Holt David Ryan Just Daniel Kahneman Djuradj Caranovic Ariel Kalil George Katona Jeffrey R. Kling George Loewenstein Graham Loomes Brigitte C. Madrian Gary McClelland Matteo Motterlini Sendhil Mullainathan Michael Norton Matthew Rabin Howard Rachlin Klaus M. Schmidt Eldar Shafir Hersh Shefrin Robert J. Shiller Uwe Sunde Richard Thaler Amos Tversky Robert W. Vishny Georg Weizsäcker Economic sociologists Jens Beckert Fred L. Block James S. Coleman Paul DiMaggio Paula England Mark Granovetter Donald Angus MacKenzie Joel M. Podolny Lynette Spillman Richard Swedberg Laurent Thévenot Carlo Trigilia Harrison White Viviana Zelizer Key concepts and ideas Accelerator effect Administered prices Barriers to entry Bounded rationality Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Conventional wisdom Countervailing power Effective competition Herfindahl index Hiding hand principle Hirschman cycle Instrumentalism Kuznets cycles Market concentration Market power Market structure Penalty of taking the lead Satisficing Shortage economy Structure–conduct–performance paradigm Technostructure Theory of two-level planning Veblen goods Veblenian dichotomy Related fields Cultural economics Development economics English historical school of economics Evolutionary economics Evolutionary psychology French historical school Historical school of economics Legal realism Microeconomics Post-Keynesian economics v t e Schools of economic thought Pre-modern Ancient schools Medieval Islamic Scholasticism Modern era Early modern Cameralism Mercantilism Physiocrats School of Salamanca Late modern American (National) Austrian Birmingham Classical Ricardian Distributist English historical Freiwirtschaft French liberal Georgism German historical Malthusian Manchester Marginalism Marxist economics Marxian critique of political economy Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne Socialist Contemporary (20th and 21st centuries) Behavioral Buddhist Capability approach Carnegie Chartalism Modern Monetary Theory Chicago Constitutional Cracovian Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiburg Geneva Institutional Keynesian Neo- Neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis New Post- Circuitism Keynes–Marx synthesis Monetarism Market Neo-Malthusian Neo-Marxian Neo-Ricardian Neo-Schumpeterian Neoliberalism New classical Rational expectations theory Real business-cycle theory New institutional New neoclassical synthesis Organizational Public choice Regulation Saltwater/freshwater Stockholm Structuralist Supply-side Technocracy movement Thermoeconomics Virginia Social credit Related Critique of political economy History of economic thought History of macroeconomic thought Economics Political economy Mainstream economics Heterodox economics Post-autistic economics Degrowth World-systems theory Economic systems v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal v t e Thorstein Veblen Books The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899) The Theory of Business Enterprise (1904) The Engineers and the Price System (1921) Concepts Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Miscellaneous Institutional economics Evolutionary economics Thorstein Veblen Farmstead Veblen-Commons Award Veblen good Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐744bd5f668‐gp9w9
Cached time: 20250812121108
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.664 seconds
Real time usage: 0.856 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3059/1000000
Revision size: 29426/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 186842/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9183/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 113507/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.391/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8327338/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  646.344      1 -total
 22.11%  142.917      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 21.57%  139.432      1 Template:Reflist
 19.94%  128.850      1 Template:Economics_sidebar
 14.09%   91.044      6 Template:Navbox
 11.79%   76.195      1 Template:Cite_web
 10.34%   66.802      1 Template:Short_description
  8.47%   54.756      2 Template:Hlist
  7.39%   47.796      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.96%   44.969      1 Template:Economics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:859910:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812121108 and revision id 1285863969. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Institutional_economics&oldid=1285863969 " Categories : Institutional economics Thorstein Veblen Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2014 Wikipedia articles that are too technical from August 2022 All articles that are too technical Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 07:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Institutional economics 31 languages Add topic

