Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Doctrine 3 Nestorian Schism Toggle Nestorian Schism subsection 3.1 Christian denomination tree 4 Church of the East Toggle Church of the East subsection 4.1 Assyrian Church of the East 5 Modern discourse 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Nestorianism 62 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Umbrella term used for several related but distinct sets of Christian teachings For the church sometimes known as the Nestorian Church, see Church of the East .

"Nestorian" redirects here. For other uses, see Nestorian (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Christology Concepts Christ (Messiah) Kyrios Son of God God the Son Logos Incarnation Pre-existence Active obedience Communicatio idiomatum Consubstantiality Exaltation Humiliation God-man Homoiōma Hypostatic union Person Prosopon Imitation Intercession Kenosis Syncatabasis Knowledge Love Perfection Wisdom Threefold office Redeemer Doctrines Christological doctrines Adoptionism Apollinarism Binitarianism Eutychianism Chalcedonism ( Neo ) Docetism Dyoenergism Monoenergism Dyothelitism Monothelitism Dyophysitism Monophysitism Miaphysitism Henotikon Homoousionism Homoiousianism Homoianism Nestorianism Theopaschism By denomination Extra calvinisticum Lutheran Christology v t e A depiction of Nestorius being defrocked and having his vestments removed at the Council of Ephesus . A 15c mural in Ferapontov Monastery .

Nestorianism is a term used in Christian theology and Church history to refer to several mutually related but doctrinally distinct sets of teachings that fall under the umbrella term Dyophysitism , such as two natures in Christ (human and Divine) or two persons in Christ (the Man and the Word).

[ 1 ] The extent to which those two definitions are actually distinct is also debatable.

[ 2 ] The first meaning of the term is related to the teachings of Christian theologian Nestorius ( d.

c.

AD 450 ) as according to his immediate opponents at the Council of Ephesus and traditionally used by Miaphysites . The second meaning of the term relates to a set of later theological teachings that were traditionally labeled as Nestorian by Chalcedonians but differ in the teachings of Nestorius in origin, scope and terminology.

[ 3 ] Per the latter definition, the Oxford English Dictionary defines Nestorianism as: "The doctrine of Nestorius, Patriarch of Constantinople (appointed in 428), by which Christ is asserted to have had distinct human and divine persons." [ 4 ] The original definition of Nestorianism, as articulated by Nestorius himself, is preserved primarily in his surviving writings on topics such as Mariology and Christology . Although many of his works were lost or destroyed, others have been transmitted through his opponents or preserved in Church of the East libraries. Most notable among these is the Bazaar of Heracleides , composed during his exile following Chalcedon . The modern rediscovery of the Bazaar has prompted renewed scholarly interest in reconstructing Nestorius’s own theological positions, which appear to diverge in significant respects from the “two‐person” formulation of Christology attributed to him by both his contemporaries and later critics.

[ 5 ] His theology was influenced by teachings of Theodore of Mopsuestia ( d.

428 ), the most prominent theologian of the Antiochian School . Nestorian Mariology prefers the title Christotokos, which encompasses the term Theotokos ('God-bearer') for Mary , thus emphasizing distinction between divine and human aspects of the Incarnation , and at the same time their unity in the person of Christ. Nestorian Christology promotes the concept of a prosopic union of two concrete realities (divine and human) in Jesus Christ , [ 6 ] as opposed to the concept of a hypostatic union of two hypostases into one. The distinction is between 'two hypostases in one person' and 'two hypostases united into one hypostasis', respectively. Hypostasis is not seen as subject, but rather a nature existing in reality. This Christological position is viewed by the West as radical dyophysitism , [ 7 ] and, according to Chalcedonian Christianity , differs from their dyophysitism , that was reaffirmed at the Council of Chalcedon (451).

[ 8 ] Such teachings brought Nestorius into conflict with other prominent church leaders, most notably Cyril of Alexandria , who issued 12 anathemas against him (430). Nestorius and his teachings were eventually condemned as heretical at the Council of Ephesus in 431, and again at the Council of Chalcedon in 451. His teachings were considered as heretical not only in Chalcedonian Christianity , but even more so in Oriental Orthodoxy .

[ 8 ] The Church of the East would affirm the orthodoxy of Nestorius, lining up with the tradition of the School of Antioch of its time.

After the condemnation, some supporters of Nestorius, who were followers of the Antiochian School and the School of Edessa , relocated to the Sasanian Empire , where they were affiliated with the local Assyrian community of the satrapy of Asuristan ( Assyria ), many who were followers of the Assyrian Church , known as the Church of the East , while others were Syriac Orthodox . During the period from 484 to 612, gradual development led to the creation of specific doctrinal views within the Church of the East.

[ 9 ] Evolution of those views was finalized by prominent East Syriac theologian Babai the Great ( d.

628 ) who was using the specific Syriac term qnoma ( ܩܢܘܡܐ ) as a designation for dual (divine and human) substances within one prosopon (person) of Christ. Such views were officially adopted by the Church of the East at a council held in 612.

[ 10 ] Opponents of such views in the West inaccurately labeled them as "Nestorian", leading to the practice of mislabeling the Church of the East as Nestorian, and indeed the Assyrian people themselves as "Nestorians".

[ 11 ] However, in modern religious studies it has been criticized as improper and misleading, [ 12 ] even though Nestorius is officially venerated as a saint in the Assyrian Church of the East.

[ 13 ] As a consequence, both in scholarly literature and in the field of inter-denominational relations, the term Nestorian increasingly focuses on its primary meaning, the original teachings of Nestorius, rather than referring to the far older-originating Assyrian Church of the East or its offshoot, the Chaldean Catholic Church .

[ 14 ] History [ edit ] Nestorian priests in a procession on Palm Sunday , in a seventh- or eighth-century wall painting from a Nestorian church in Qocho , China Nestorianism was condemned as heresy at the Council of Ephesus (431). The Armenian Church rejected the Council of Chalcedon (451) because they believed Chalcedonian Definition was too similar to Nestorianism. The Persian Nestorian Church , on the other hand, supported the spread of Nestorianism in Persarmenia . The Armenian Church and other eastern churches saw the rise of Nestorianism as a threat to the independence of their Church.

Peter the Iberian , a Georgian prince, also strongly opposed the Chalcedonian Creed.

[ 15 ] Thus, in 491, Catholicos Babken I of Armenia, along with the Albanian and Iberian bishops met in Vagharshapat and issued a condemnation of the Chalcedonian Definition.

[ 16 ] Nestorians held that the Council of Chalcedon proved the orthodoxy of their faith and had started persecuting non-Chalcedonian or Miaphysite Syriac Christians during the reign of Peroz I . In response to pleas for assistance from the Syriac Church , Armenian prelates issued a letter addressed to Persian Christians reaffirming their condemnation of the Nestorianism as heresy.

[ 15 ] Following the exodus to Persia , scholars expanded on the teachings of Nestorius and his mentors, particularly after the relocation of the School of Edessa to the city of Nisibis under Persian control in 489, where it became known as the School of Nisibis .

[ citation needed ] Nestorian monasteries propagating the teachings of the Nisibis school flourished in 6th century Persarmenia.

[ 15 ] Despite this initial Eastern expansion, the Nestorians' missionary success was eventually deterred.

David J. Bosch observes, "By the end of the fourteenth century, however, the Nestorian and other churches—which at one time had dotted the landscape of all of Central and even parts of East Asia—were all but wiped out. Isolated pockets of Christianity survived only in India. The religious victors on the vast Central Asian mission field of the Nestorians were Islam and Buddhism ".

[ 17 ] Doctrine [ edit ] Christological spectrum during the 5th–7th centuries showing the views of the Church of the East (light blue), the Chalcedonian Churches (light purple), and the Miaphysite Churches (pink) A historical misinterpretation of the Nestorian view was that it taught that the human and divine persons of Christ are separate.

[ 18 ] Nestorianism is described as a radical form of dyophysitism [ 7 ] that, according to Chalcedonians, differs from their version of dyophysitism on several points, mainly by opposition to the concept of hypostatic union . It can be seen as the antithesis to Eutychian Monophysitism , which emerged in reaction to Nestorianism after the conclusion of the Council of Ephesus . Where Nestorianism holds that Christ had two distinct natures, divine and human, Monophysitism holds that he had but a single nature, his human nature being absorbed into his divinity. A brief definition of Nestorian Christology can be given as: " Jesus Christ, who is not identical with the Son but personally united with the Son, who lives in him, is one hypostasis and one nature: human." [ 19 ] This contrasts with Nestorius' own teaching that the Word , which is eternal, and the Flesh, which is not, came together in a hypostatic union, 'Jesus Christ', Jesus thus being both fully man and God, of two ousia ( Ancient Greek : οὐσία ) (essences) but of one prosopon (person).

[ 20 ] Both Nestorianism and Monophysitism were condemned as heretical at the Council of Chalcedon and the Second Council of Ephesus .

Nestorius developed his Christological views as an attempt to understand and explain rationally the incarnation of the divine Logos , the Second Person of the Holy Trinity as the man Jesus. He had studied at the School of Antioch where his mentor had been Theodore of Mopsuestia ; Theodore and other Antioch theologians had long taught a literalist interpretation of the Bible and stressed the distinctiveness of the human and divine natures of Jesus. Nestorius took his Antiochene leanings with him when he was appointed Patriarch of Constantinople by Byzantine emperor Theodosius II in 428.

Nestorius's teachings sparked controversy when he publicly challenged the long-established title of Theotokos [ 21 ] ('God-Bearer') for the Virgin Mary . He argued that this title, while orthodox per se, was inadequate to fully encompass the nature of the Incarnation , as it singled out Christ's divinity with no reference to His humanity. To address this perceived limitation, he proposed the alternative title of Christotokos ('Christ-Bearer') as a more appropriate designation for Mary.

[ 22 ] He also advanced the image of Jesus as a warrior-king and rescuer of Israel over the traditional image of the Christus dolens .

[ 23 ] Nestorius' opponents found his teaching too close to the heresy of adoptionism – the idea that Christ had been born a man who had later been "adopted" as God's son. Nestorius was especially criticized by Cyril , Patriarch of Alexandria , who argued that Nestorius's teachings undermined the unity of Christ's divine and human natures at the Incarnation . Some of Nestorius's opponents argued that he put too much emphasis on the human nature of Christ, and others debated that the difference that Nestorius implied between the human nature and the divine nature created a fracture in the singularity of Christ, thus creating two Christ figures.

[ 24 ] Nestorius himself always insisted that his views were orthodox, though they were deemed heretical at the Council of Ephesus in 431, leading to the Nestorian Schism , when churches supportive of Nestorius and the rest of the Christian Church separated. However, this formulation was never adopted by all churches termed 'Nestorian'. Indeed, the modern Assyrian Church of the East, which reveres Nestorius, does not fully subscribe to Nestorian doctrine, though it does not employ the title Theotokos .

[ 25 ] Nestorian Schism [ edit ] Main article: Nestorian Schism Nestorianism became a distinct sect following the Nestorian Schism , beginning in the 430s. Nestorius had come under fire from Western theologians, most notably Cyril of Alexandria . Cyril had both theological and political reasons for attacking Nestorius; on top of feeling that Nestorianism was an error against true belief, he also wanted to denigrate the head of a competing patriarchate.

[ citation needed ] Cyril and Nestorius asked Pope Celestine I to weigh in on the matter. Celestine found that the title Theotokos [ 21 ] was sufficiently orthodox, and authorized Cyril to ask Nestorius to recant. Cyril, however, used the opportunity to further attack Nestorius, who pleaded with Emperor Theodosius II to call a council so that all grievances could be aired.

[ 25 ] In 431 Theodosius II called the Council of Ephesus . The council ultimately sided with Cyril, who held that the Christ is of (not in ) two natures ( hypostases) perfectly united into one nature ( hypostasis ) without mixture or separation, [ 26 ] and that the Virgin Mary, conceiving and bearing this divine person, is truly and sufficiently called the Mother of God ( Theotokos ). The council accused Nestorius of heresy , and deposed him as patriarch.

[ 27 ] Upon returning to his monastery in 436, he was banished to Upper Egypt. Nestorianism was officially anathematized, a ruling reiterated at the Council of Chalcedon in 451. However, a number of churches, particularly those associated with the School of Edessa , supported Nestorius – though not necessarily his doctrine – and broke with the churches of the West. Many of Nestorius' supporters relocated to the Sasanian Empire of Iran, home to a vibrant but persecuted Christian minority.

[ 28 ] In Upper Egypt, Nestorius wrote his Book of Heraclides , responding to the two councils at Ephesus (431, 449).

[ 20 ] Christian denomination tree [ edit ] Major denominational families in Christianity: This box: view talk edit Western Christianity Eastern Christianity Protestantism Anabaptism Anglicanism Lutheranism Reformed (Latin Church) Catholic Church (Eastern Catholic Churches) Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox Churches Church of the East Schism (1552) Assyrian Church of the East Ancient Church of the East Protestant Reformation (16th century) Great Schism (11th century) Council of Ephesus (431) Council of Chalcedon (451) Early Christianity Great Church ( Full communion ) (Not shown are ante-Nicene , nontrinitarian , and restorationist denominations.) Church of the East [ edit ] Main article: Church of the East See also: Ancient Christianity in the Indian Subcontinent The Daqin Pagoda , controversially claimed to be part of an early Nestorian church in what was then Chang'an , now Xi'an , China, built during the Tang dynasty (AD 618–907) Entry of Jesus Christ into Jerusalem , with a female figure dressed in a Tang dynasty costume , AD 683–770 Chinese stone inscription of a Nestorian Cross from a monastery of Fangshan District in Beijing (then called Dadu, or Khanbaliq ), dated to the Yuan Dynasty (AD 1271–1368) of medieval China Epitaph of a Nestorian, unearthed at Chifeng , Inner Mongolia The western provinces of the Persian Empire had been home to Christian communities, headed by metropolitans, and later patriarchs of Seleucia-Ctesiphon . The Christian minority in Persia was frequently persecuted by the Zoroastrian majority, which accused local Christians of political leanings towards the Roman Empire . In 424, the Church in Persia declared itself independent, in order to ward off allegations of any foreign allegiance. By the end of the 5th century, the Persian Church increasingly aligned itself with the teachings of Theodore of Mopsuestia and his followers, many of whom became dissidents after the Councils of Ephesus (431) and Chalcedon (451). The Persian Church became increasingly opposed to doctrines promoted by those councils, thus furthering the divide between Chalcedonian and Persian currents.

[ 8 ] In 486, the Metropolitan Barsauma of Nisibis publicly accepted Nestorius' mentor Theodore of Mopsuestia as a spiritual authority. In 489, when the School of Edessa in Mesopotamia was closed by Byzantine Emperor Zeno for its pro-Nestorian teachings, the school relocated to its original home of Nisibis, becoming again the School of Nisibis , leading to the migration of a wave of Christian dissidents into Persia. The Persian patriarch Babai (497–502) reiterated and expanded upon the church's esteem for Theodore of Mopsuestia .

Now firmly established in Persia, with centers in Nisibis, Ctesiphon , and Gundeshapur , and several metropoleis , the Persian Church began to branch out beyond the Sasanian Empire. However, through the sixth century, the church was frequently beset with internal strife and persecution by Zoroastrians. The infighting led to a schism, which lasted from 521 until around 539 when the issues were resolved. However, immediately afterward Roman-Persian conflict led to the persecution of the church by the Sassanid emperor Khosrow I ; this ended in 545. The church survived these trials under the guidance of Patriarch Aba I , who had converted to Christianity from Zoroastrianism.

[ 28 ] The church emerged stronger after this period of ordeal, and increased missionary efforts farther afield. Missionaries established dioceses in the Arabian Peninsula and India (the Saint Thomas Christians ). They made some advances in Egypt , despite the strong Miaphysite presence there.

[ 29 ] Missionaries entered Central Asia and had significant success converting local Turkic tribes.

The Anuradhapura Cross discovered in Sri Lanka strongly suggests a strong presence of Nestorian Christianity in Sri Lanka during the 6th century AD according to Humphrey Codrington , who based his claim on a 6th-century manuscript, Christian Topography , that mentions of a community of Persian Christians who were known to reside in Taprobanê (the Ancient Greek name for Sri Lanka).

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Nestorian missionaries were firmly established in China during the early part of the Tang dynasty (618–907); the Chinese source known as the Nestorian Stele records a mission under a Persian proselyte named Alopen as introducing Nestorian Christianity to China in 635. The Jingjiao Documents (also described by the Japanese scholar P. Y. Saeki as "Nestorian Documents") or Jesus Sutras are said to be connected with Alopen.

[ 33 ] Following the Arab conquest of Persia , completed in 644, the Persian Church became a dhimmi community under the Rashidun Caliphate . The church and its communities abroad grew larger under the caliphate. By the 10th century it had 15 metropolitan sees within the caliphate's territories, and another five elsewhere, including in China and India.

[ 28 ] After that time, however, Nestorianism went into decline.

[ disputed – discuss ] Assyrian Church of the East [ edit ] Saint Mary Church : an ancient Assyrian church located in the city of Urmia , West Azerbaijan Province , Iran In a 1996 article published in the Bulletin of the John Rylands Library , Fellow of the British Academy Sebastian Brock wrote: "the term 'Nestorian Church' has become the standard designation for the ancient oriental church which in the past called itself 'The Church of the East', but which today prefers the fuller title 'The Assyrian Church of the East '. The Common Christological Declaration between the Catholic Church and the Assyrian Church of the East signed by Pope John Paul II and Mar Dinkha IV underlines the Chalcedonian Christological formulation as the expression of the common faith of these Churches and recognizes the legitimacy of the title Theotokos ." [ 34 ] In a 2017 paper, Mar Awa Royel , Bishop of the Assyrian Church , stated the position of that church: "After the Council of Ephesus (431), when Nestorius the patriarch of Constantinople was condemned for his views on the unity of the Godhead and the humanity in Christ, the Church of the East was branded as 'Nestorian' on account of its refusal to anathematize the patriarch." [ 35 ] Several historical records suggest that the Assyrian Church of the East may have been in Sri Lanka between the mid-5th and 6th centuries.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Modern discourse [ edit ] The accusations of Nestorianism have been used in contemporary theological discourse. One notable example is the case of John MacArthur , as he has asserted that when Mary gave birth to Jesus, she did not give birth to God, but rather gave birth to Jesus in his humanity and that "it’s heretical to call the blood of Jesus Christ the blood of God." [ 36 ] [ 37 ] These statements have been critiqued as resembling Nestorianism by other Christians.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Nestorius Miaphysitism Monophysitism Hypostatic union Nestorian Evangelion Nestorianism and the church in India Christian influences in Islam References [ edit ] ^ Brock 2006 , p. 177.

^ Wood, Philip John (Jan 2022).

"Miaphysites in Iraq during the Last Great War of Antiquity (c. 604–28) and its Aftermath" .

The Journal of Ecclesiastical History .

73 (1): 20– 37.

doi : 10.1017/S0022046920003061 .

ISSN 0022-0469 .

^ Baum & Winkler 2003 , p. 4.

^ "Nestorianism" .

Oxford English Dictionary .

^ Driver, G. R.; Hodgson, Leonard.

The Bazaar Of Heracleides .

Oxford University Press — Center for the Preservation of Ancient Religious Texts.

^ Chesnut 1978 , pp. 392–409.

^ a b Burgess 1989 , pp. 90, 229, 231.

^ a b c Meyendorff 1989 .

^ Brock 1999 , pp. 281–298.

^ Brock 2006 .

^ Baum & Winkler 2003 , pp. 3–5.

^ Brock 1996 , pp. 23–35.

^ Baum & Winkler 2003 , pp. 4–5.

^ Seleznyov 2010 , pp. 165–190.

^ a b c Stopka, Krzysztof (2016).

Armenia Christiana: Armenian Religious Identity and the Churches of Constantinople and Rome (4th–15th Century) . Wydawnictwo UJ. pp.

62– 68.

ISBN 978-83-233-9555-3 – via Google Books .

^ Kleinbauer, W. Eugene (September 1972). "Zvartnots and the Origins of Christian Architecture in Armenia".

The Art Bulletin . Vol. 54, no. 3. p. 261.

^ Bosch, David (1991).

Transforming Mission: Paradigm Shifts in Theology of Mission .

Orbis Books . p. 204.

ISBN 978-1-60833-146-8 – via Google Books .

^ Hogan.

Dissent from the Creed . pp.

123– 125.

^ Martin Lembke, lecture in the course "Meetings with the World's Religions", Centre for Theology and Religious Studies, Lund University , Spring Term 2010.

^ a b Hodgson & Driver 1925 .

^ a b Artemi, Eirini (December 2012).

"Cyril of Alexandria's critique of the term Theotokos by Nestorius Constantinople" .

Acta Theologica .

32 (2): 1– 16.

doi : 10.4314/actat.v32i2.1 . Retrieved 2019-10-22 .

^ Palmer-Anghel, Martin; Ramsay, Jay; Kwok, Man-ho (1995).

Kuan Yin: Myths and Prophecies of the Chinese Goddess of Compassion . London: Thorsons . p. 22.

ISBN 978-1-85538-417-0 .

^ Neely, Brent (July 2017).

"At cross purposes" .

Transformations .

34 (3): 176– 213.

doi : 10.1177/0265378816631552 .

JSTOR 90010414 .

S2CID 171352591 . Retrieved September 7, 2022 .

^ Bentley, Jerry (1993).

Old World Encounters: Cross-Cultural Contacts and Exchanges in Pre-Modern Times . New York: Oxford University Press . p.

105 .

^ a b "Nestorius" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved January 29, 2010 .

^ Fairbairn, Donald (2021-04-01).

"The Council of Ephesus of 431: Documents and Proceedings. Translated by Richard Price" .

The Journal of Theological Studies .

72 (1): 450– 453.

doi : 10.1093/jts/flab055 .

ISSN 0022-5185 .

^ "Cyril of Alexandria, Third Epistle to Nestorius, with 'Twelve Anathemas' " .

Monachos.net . Archived from the original on July 4, 2008.

^ a b c "Nestorianism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved January 28, 2010.

^ Campbell, Ted (1996).

Christian Confessions: A Historical Introduction . Westminster: John Knox Press . p. 62.

ISBN 978-0-664-25650-0 – via Google Books .

^ a b "Mar Aprem Metropolitan Visits Ancient Anuradhapura Cross in Official Trip to Sri Lanka" . Assyrian Church News. Archived from the original on 2015-02-26 . Retrieved 6 August 2013 .

^ a b Weerakoon, Rajitha (June 26, 2011).

"Did Christianity exist in ancient Sri Lanka?" . Sunday Times . Retrieved 2 August 2021 .

^ a b "Main interest" .

Daily News . 22 April 2011. Archived from the original on 2015-03-29 . Retrieved 2 August 2021 .

^ Riegert, Ray (2006).

The Lost Sutras of Jesus: Unlocking the Ancient Wisdom of the Xian Monks . Ulysses Press. pp.

9– 23.

ISBN 1-56975-522-1 – via Google Books .

^ "Common Christological Declaration between the Catholic Church and the Assyrian Church of the East" . Retrieved 8 February 2020 .

^ "The Assyrian Church of the East: A Panoramic View of a Glorious History- Mar Awa Royel" .

Church of Beth Kokheh Journal . 2017-10-04 . Retrieved 2019-10-25 .

^ MacArthur, John (1987-01-01).

"The Blood of Christ" .

Grace to You .

^ MacArthur, John (2006-04-02).

"Exposing the Idolatry of Mary Worship: An Overview" .

Grace to You .

^ Horn, Trent (2024-08-14).

" "Mary is NOT the Mother of God" REBUTTED" .

Catholic Answers .

^ Hymers, Robert (2005-07-23).

"DR. MACARTHUR AND THE BLOOD OF GOD" .

Sermons For the World .

Sources [ edit ] Badger, George Percy (1852).

The Nestorians and Their Rituals . Vol. 1. London: Joseph Masters – via Google Books .

Badger, George Percy (1852).

The Nestorians and Their Rituals . Vol. 2. London: Joseph Masters.

ISBN 9780790544823 – via Google Books .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Baum, Wilhelm ; Winkler, Dietmar W. (2003).

The Church of the East: A Concise History . London & New York: Routledge -Curzon.

ISBN 9781134430192 – via Google Books .

Bethune-Baker, James F.

(1908).

Nestorius and His Teaching: A Fresh Examination of the Evidence . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9781107432987 – via Google Books .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Brock, Sebastian P.

(1996).

"The 'Nestorian' Church: A Lamentable Misnomer" (PDF) .

Bulletin of the John Rylands Library .

78 (3): 23– 35.

doi : 10.7227/BJRL.78.3.3 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2023-03-06 . Retrieved 2020-11-07 .

Brock, Sebastian P.

(1999). "The Christology of the Church of the East in the Synods of the Fifth to Early Seventh Centuries: Preliminary Considerations and Materials".

Doctrinal Diversity: Varieties of Early Christianity . New York & London: Garland Publishing . pp.

281– 298.

ISBN 9780815330714 – via Google Books .

Brock, Sebastian P.

(2006).

Fire from Heaven: Studies in Syriac Theology and Liturgy . Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing .

ISBN 9780754659082 – via Google Books .

Burgess, Stanley M. (1989).

The Holy Spirit: Eastern Christian Traditions . Peabody, Mass.: Hendrickson Publishers.

ISBN 9780913573815 – via Google Books .

Chabot, Jean-Baptiste (1902).

Synodicon orientale ou recueil de synodes nestoriens [ Eastern Synodicon or Compendium of Nestorian Synods ] (PDF) (in French). Paris: Imprimerie Nationale.

Chesnut, Roberta C. (1978).

"The Two Prosopa in Nestorius' Bazaar of Heracleides" .

The Journal of Theological Studies .

29 (29): 392– 409.

doi : 10.1093/jts/XXIX.2.392 .

JSTOR 23958267 .

Hill, Henry, ed. (1988).

Light from the East: A Symposium on the Oriental Orthodox and Assyrian Churches . Toronto: Anglican Book Centre.

ISBN 9780919891906 – via Google Books .

Hodgson, Leonard ; Driver, Godfrey R.

, eds. (1925).

Nestorius: The Bazaar of Heracleides . Oxford: Clarendon Press .

ISBN 9781725202399 – via Google Books .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Jugie, Martin (1935).

"L'ecclésiologie des Nestoriens" [The ecclesiology of the Nestorians] (PDF) .

Échos d'Orient (in French).

34 (177): 5– 25.

doi : 10.3406/rebyz.1935.2817 .

[ permanent dead link ] Kuhn, Michael F. (2019).

God is One: A Christian Defence of Divine Unity in the Muslim Golden Age . Carlisle: Langham Publishing.

ISBN 9781783685776 – via Google Books .

Meyendorff, John (1989).

Imperial unity and Christian divisions: The Church 450–680 A.D.

Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press.

ISBN 9780881410563 – via Google Books .

Reinink, Gerrit J. (2009).

"Tradition and the Formation of the 'Nestorian' Identity in Sixth- to Seventh-Century Iraq" .

Church History and Religious Culture .

89 ( 1– 3): 217– 250.

doi : 10.1163/187124109X407916 .

JSTOR 23932289 .

Rossabi, Morris (1992).

Voyager from Xanadu: Rabban Sauma and the first journey from China to the West .

Kodansha International Ltd.

ISBN 4770016506 .

Seleznyov, Nikolai N. (2010).

"Nestorius of Constantinople: Condemnation, Suppression, Veneration: With special reference to the role of his name in East-Syriac Christianity" .

Journal of Eastern Christian Studies .

62 ( 3– 4): 165– 190.

Stewart, John (1928).

Nestorian missionary enterprise, the story of a church on fire . Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark.

Wigram, William Ainger (1910).

An Introduction to the History of the Assyrian Church or The Church of the Sassanid Persian Empire 100–640 A.D.

London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.

ISBN 9780837080789 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Wilmshurst, David (2000).

The Ecclesiastical Organisation of the Church of the East, 1318–1913 . Louvain: Peeters Publishers.

ISBN 9789042908765 .

Wilmshurst, David (2011).

The martyred Church: A History of the Church of the East . London: East & West Publishing Limited.

ISBN 9781907318047 .

Luise Abramowski, "Der Bischof von Seleukia-Ktesiphon als Katholikos und Patriarch der Kirche des Ostens," in Dmitrij Bumazhnov u. Hans R. Seeliger (hg), Syrien im 1.–7. Jahrhundert nach Christus. Akten der 1. Tübinger Tagung zum Christlichen Orient (15.–16. Juni 2007).

(Tübingen, Mohr Siebeck , 2011) (Studien und Texte zu Antike und Christentum / Studies and Texts in Antiquity and Christianity, 62) Leonard, Pinto (2013).

"A Brief History of Christianity In Sri Lanka" .

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has several original texts related to Nestorianism .

"Unofficial Web Site of the 'Church of the East' " . Nestorian.org.

Lieu, Sam; Parry, Ken.

"Manichaean and (Nestorian) Christian Remains in Zayton (Quanzhou, South China)" .

Macquarie University . Archived from the original on July 19, 2008 . Retrieved January 24, 2010 .

Dickens, Mark (1999).

"The Church of the East" . Oxus Communications. Archived from the original on May 14, 2011 . Retrieved February 6, 2010 .

"Nestorius and Nestorianism" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia .

v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal v t e Beliefs condemned as heretical by the Catholic Church ( list ) Antiquity Adoptionism Apollinarism Arianism Anomoeanism Semi-Arianism Antidicomarianites Audianism Docetism Donatism Circumcellions Collyridianism Dualism Ebionites Euchites Gnosticism Manichaeism Paulicianism Priscillianism Naassenes Ophites Sethianism Valentinianism Iconoclasm Luciferianism Macedonianism Marcionism Melchisedechians Modalism Monarchianism Athinganoi Modalistic Monophysitism Monothelitism Montanism Nestorianism Novatianism Patripassianism Pelagianism Semipelagianism Pneumatomachians Psilanthropism Sabellianism Subordinationism Valentinianism Middle Ages Arnoldism Bogomilism Bosnian Church Catharism Conciliarism Dulcinians Fraticelli Free Spirits Henricians Humiliati Hussites Impanation Josephines Lollardy Migetians Pasagians Spanish Adoptionism Taborites Waldensians Early modernity Antinomianism Consubstantiation Febronianism Gallicanism Jansenism Josephinism Pantheism Protestantism Anabaptism Arminianism Calvinism Lutheranism Quietism Modernity Americanism Community of the Lady of All Nations Feeneyism Indifferentism Jehovah's Witnesses Modernism Mormonism Narco-saints Maximón Santa Muerte Positive Christianity Reincarnationism Catholic Church portal v t e History of Christianity Spread History of theology Historicity of the Bible List of martyrs Timeline Centuries 1st 2nd and 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st Early Christianity Origins and Apostolic Age Background Chronology of Jesus birth baptism ministry crucifixion resurrection Great Commission ascension historical Jesus Holy Spirit Apostles in the New Testament Jewish Christianity Split Paul the Apostle Council of Jerusalem Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period Diversity Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Donatism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Canon development Persecution Apostolic / Church Fathers Clement of Rome Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Tertullian Origen Great Church Early African Late antiquity Constantine Constantinian shift Roman state religion Monasticism Councils Nicaea I Creed Christianity Athanasius Jerome Augustine Constantinople I Ephesus I Chalcedon Chalcedonian / Non-Chalcedonian Biblical canon Catholicism ( Timeline ) Papacy Development of primacy Eastern Orthodox opposition Peace and Truce of God Crusading movement Lateran IV Art patronage of Julius II Leo X Counter-Reformation Trent Art Catholic Reformation Jesuits Xavier Thomas More Monastery dissolution Wars Mass rocks and priest holes Guadalupe Jansenists Molinists Neo-Scholasticism Teresa Modernism Independent Catholics Vatican I and Vatican II Ecclesial community Eastern Christianity Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Church of the East Chrysostom Nestorianism Icons Iconodulism Iconoclasm Great Schism Fall of Constantinople Armenia Georgia Greece Egypt Syriac Ethiopia Ottoman Empire Bulgaria Russia Serbia North America Middle Ages Pelagianism Gregory I Celtic Germanic Anglo-Saxon Franks Gothic Scandinavian Iceland Slavs Bohemia Bulgaria Kievan Rus' Moravia Poland Pomerania Investiture Anselm Abelard Bernard Bogomils Bosnian Cathars Apostolic Brethren Dulcinian Crusades Waldensians Inquisition Early Scholasticism Christian mysticism Dominic Francis Bonaventure Aquinas Five Ways Wycliffe Avignon Papal Schism Bohemian Reformation Hus Conciliarism Synods Reformation and Protestantism Erasmus Eucharist Calvinist–Arminian debate Arminianism Wars Resistance theories Separation of church and state Nicodemites Hymnody of continental Europe Formal and material principles Law and Gospel Literature Protestant work ethic Lutheranism Luther Ninety-five Theses Diet of Worms Theology Bible Melanchthon Book of Concord Orthodoxy Eucharist Art Calvinism Zwingli Calvin Huguenots Presbyterianism Scotland Knox TULIP Baptism Dort Three Forms of Unity Westminster Orthodoxy Metrical psalters Anglicanism ( Timeline ) Henry VIII Cranmer Elizabethan 39 Articles Puritans Civil War Church music Book of Common Prayer King James Version Anabaptism Theology Radical Reformation Grebel Swiss Brethren Müntzer Martyrs' Synod Menno Simons Smyth Martyrs Mirror Ausbund 1640–1789 Revivalism Missionaries timeline Baptists Separation of church and state Edicts of toleration Congregationalism First Great Awakening Methodism Millerism Pietism Fostering of early experimental science Neo- and Old Lutherans 1789–present Camp meeting Holiness movement Second Great Awakening Restorationists Jehovah's Witnesses Mormonism Seventh-day Adventist Adventism Oxford Movement Laestadianism Finnish Awakening Christian existentialism Third Great Awakening Azusa Revival Gospel music Fundamentalist – Modernist controversy Pacifism Ecumenism Five solae Jesus movement Pentecostalism Charismatics Liberation theology Reformed epistemology Fourth Great Awakening Evangelical and Mainline Protestants Christian right and left Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Demographics of Turkey Topics Turkish people Ethnic Kurds Minorities Languages Turkish language Religion Islam Christianity Judaism Irreligion Education Health Immigration Poverty Demographics of Istanbul Census in Turkey 1927 1935 1965 1990 2000 2010 2020 Lists Provinces by population Cities and towns by population Provinces by life expectancy Authority control databases National Germany France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nestorianism&oldid=1305427060 " Categories : Nestorianism Church of the East Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Classical Syriac-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with unsourced statements from August 2014 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from October 2019 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 French-language sources (fr) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 00:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nestorianism 62 languages Add topic

