Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types by finder of fact 2 Types by dispute Toggle Types by dispute subsection 2.1 Criminal 2.2 Civil 2.3 Administrative 2.4 Labor 3 Systems Toggle Systems subsection 3.1 Adversarial 3.2 Inquisitorial 4 Mistrials 5 Other types 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Trial 41 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Íslenska Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kiswahili Lietuvių Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Coming together of parties to a dispute, to present information in a tribunal For other uses, see Trial (disambiguation) .

Criminal procedure Criminal trials and convictions Rights of the accused Appeal Bail Double jeopardy 2 Exclusionary rule 1 Fair trial Jury trial Trial as an adult Presumption of innocence Pre-trial Counsel Self-incrimination Rights of the victim Clearance rate Criminal justice Right to an effective remedy Speedy trial Victims' rights Verdict Acquittal Conviction Conviction rate Guilt Not proven 3 Directed verdict Sentencing Custodial Disparity Discharge Guidelines Totality 5, 6 Mandatory Periodic Dangerous offender 4, 5 Capital punishment Execution warrant Cruel and unusual punishment Imprisonment Life Indefinite Legal remedy Loss of rights Reparation Restitution Reform Suspended Three-strikes law Zero tolerance Post-sentencing Criminal justice Exoneration Parole Probation Habitual offender Life licence 6 Miscarriage of justice Pardon Recidivism Rehabilitation Restorative justice Sex offender registry Sexually violent predator laws 1 Tariff 6 Related areas of law Civil procedure Criminal defenses Criminal law Evidence Portals Law portal 1 US courts 2 Not in English/Welsh courts 3 Scottish courts 4 English/Welsh courts 5 Canadian courts 6 UK courts v t e Trial of Jean II, Duke of Alençon , October 1458 In law , a trial is a coming together of parties to a dispute , to present information (in the form of evidence ) in a tribunal , a formal setting with the authority to adjudicate claims or disputes. One form of tribunal is a court . The tribunal, which may occur before a judge , jury , or other designated trier of fact , aims to achieve a resolution to their dispute.

[ 1 ] Types by finder of fact [ edit ] Where the trial is held before a group of members of the community, it is called a jury trial . Where the trial is held solely before a judge, it is called a bench trial .

[ 2 ] Hearings before administrative bodies may have many of the features of a trial before a court, but are typically not referred to as trials. An appeal (appellate proceeding) is also generally not deemed a trial, because such proceedings are usually restricted to a review of the evidence presented before the trial court , and do not permit the introduction of new evidence.

Types by dispute [ edit ] Criminal [ edit ] The Old Bailey in London , 1808 A criminal trial is designed to resolve accusations brought (usually by a government ) against a person accused of a crime . In common law systems, most criminal defendants are entitled to a trial held before a jury. Because the state is attempting to use its power to deprive the accused of life, liberty, or property, the rights of the accused afforded to criminal defendants are typically broad. The rules of criminal procedure provide rules for criminal trials.

Civil [ edit ] A civil trial is generally held to settle lawsuits or civil claims—non-criminal disputes. In some countries, the government can both sue and be sued in a civil capacity. The rules of civil procedure provide rules for civil trials.

Administrative [ edit ] Although administrative hearings are not ordinarily considered trials, they retain many elements found in more "formal" trial settings. When the dispute goes to a judicial setting, it is called an administrative trial, to revise the administrative hearing, depending on the jurisdiction. The types of disputes handled in these hearings are governed by administrative law and auxiliarily by civil trial law.

Labor [ edit ] Main article: Labor and employment law Labor law (also known as employment law) is the body of laws, administrative rulings, and precedents which address the legal rights of, and restrictions on, working people and their organizations. Collective labour law relates to the tripartite relationship between employee, employer, and union. Individual labour law concerns employees' rights at work also through the contract for work.

Employment standards are social norms (in some cases also technical standards) for the minimum socially acceptable conditions under which employees or contractors are allowed to work.

Government agencies (such as the former US Employment Standards Administration) enforce labour law (legislature, regulatory, or judicial).

Systems [ edit ] Adversarial [ edit ] Main article: Adversarial system In common law systems, an adversarial or accusatory approach is used to adjudicate guilt or innocence . The assumption is that the truth is more likely to emerge from the open contest between the prosecution and the defense in presenting the evidence and opposing legal arguments, with a judge acting as a neutral referee and as the arbiter of the law. In several jurisdictions in more serious cases, there is a jury to determine the facts, although some common law jurisdictions have abolished the jury trial. This polarizes the issues, with each competitor acting in its own self-interest, and so presenting the facts and interpretations of the law in a deliberately biased way.

The intention is that through a process of argument and counter-argument, examination-in-chief and cross-examination , each side will test the truthfulness, relevancy, and sufficiency of the opponent's evidence and arguments. To maintain fairness, there is a presumption of innocence , and the burden of proof lies on the prosecution. Critics of the system argue that the desire to win is more important than the search for truth. Further, the results are likely to be affected by structural inequalities . Those defendants with resources can afford to hire the best lawyers .  Some trials are—or were—of a more summary nature, as certain questions of evidence were taken as resolved (see handhabend and backberend ).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Inquisitorial [ edit ] Main article: Inquisitorial system In civil law legal systems, the responsibility for supervising the investigation by the police into whether a crime has been committed falls on an examining magistrate or judge who then conducts the trial. The assumption is that the truth is more likely to emerge from an impartial and exhaustive investigation, both before and during the trial itself. The examining magistrate or judge acts as an inquisitor who directs the fact-gathering process by questioning witnesses , interrogating the suspect, and collecting other evidence.

The lawyers who represent the interests of the state and the accused have a limited role to offer legal arguments and alternative interpretations to the facts that emerge during the process. All the interested parties are expected to cooperate in the investigation by answering the magistrate or judge's questions and, when asked, supplying all relevant evidence. The trial only takes place after all the evidence has been collected and the investigation is completed. Thus, most of the factual uncertainties will already be resolved, and the examining magistrate or judge will already have resolved that there is prima facie of guilt.

Critics argue that the examining magistrate or judge has too much power with the responsibilities of both investigating and adjudicating on the merits of the case. Although lay assessors do sit as a form of jury to offer advice to the magistrate or judge at the conclusion of the trial, their role is subordinate. Further, because a professional has been in charge of all aspects of the case to the conclusion of the trial, there are fewer opportunities to appeal the conviction alleging some procedural error.

[ 6 ] Mistrials [ edit ] "Mistrial" redirects here. For other uses, see Mistrial (disambiguation) .

A judge may cancel a trial prior to the return of a verdict; legal parlance designates this as a " mistrial ". A judge may declare a mistrial due to: The court determining that it lacks jurisdiction over a case.

Evidence being admitted improperly, or new evidence that might seriously affect the outcome of the trial being discovered.

Misconduct by a party, juror , [ 7 ] or an outside actor, if it prevents due process .

A hung jury which cannot reach a verdict with the required degree of unanimity. In a criminal trial, if the jury is able to reach a verdict on some charges but not others, the defendant may be retried on the charges that led to the deadlock, at the discretion of the prosecution.

Disqualification of a juror after the jury is empaneled, if no alternative juror is available and the litigants do not agree to proceed with the remaining jurors, or the remaining jurors not meeting the required number for a trial.

The illness or death of a juror or attorney.

Either side may submit a motion for a mistrial; on occasion, the presiding judge may declare one on a motion of their own. If a mistrial is declared, the case at hand may be retried at the discretion of the plaintiff or prosecution, as long as double jeopardy does not bar that party from doing so.

Other types [ edit ] Some other kinds of processes for resolving conflicts are also expressed as trials. For example, the United States Constitution requires that, following the impeachment of the president, a judge, or another federal officer by the House of Representatives , the subject of the impeachment may only be removed from office by an impeachment trial in the Senate , a practice which evolved from the British parliament's powers of impeachment , wherein the House of Lords would also try public officials. In earlier times, disputes were often settled through a trial by ordeal , where parties would have to endure physical suffering in order to prove their righteousness; or through a trial by combat , in which the winner of a physical fight was deemed righteous in their cause.

See also [ edit ] Brought to trial Legal process Trial graphics Trial of the century References [ edit ] ^ Schultz, Norman.

Fact-Finding . Accessed 17 November 2008 ^ Black, Henry Campbell (1990).

Black's Law Dictionary, 6th ed . St. Paul, MN: West Publishing . pp.

156 .

ISBN 0-314-76271-X .

^ Hale, Sandra Beatriz (July 2004).

The Discourse of Court Interpreting: Discourse Practices of the Law, the Witness and the Interpreter . John Benjamins. p. 31.

ISBN 978-1-58811-517-1 .

^ Richards, Edward P.; Katharine C. Rathbun (1999-08-15).

Medical Care Law . Jones & Bartlett. p. 6.

ISBN 978-0-8342-1603-7 .

^ Care, Jennifer Corrin (2004-01-12).

Civil Procedure and Courts in the South Pacific . Routledge Cavendish. p. 3.

ISBN 978-1-85941-719-5 .

^ See: (in Italian) Antonia Fiori, " Quasi denunciante fama : note sull’introduzione del processo tra rito accusatorio e inquisitorio ", in Der Einfluss der Kanonistik auf die europäische Rechtskultur , 3.

Strafrecht und Strafprozeß , ed. O. Condorelli, Fr. Roumy, M. Schmoeckel; Cologne, Weimar, Vienna, 2012, p. 351–367 Richard M. Fraher, "IV Lateran's Revolution in Criminal Procedure: the Birth of inquisitio , the End of Ordeals and Innocent III's Vision of Ecclesiastical Politics", in Studia in honorem eminentissimi cardinalis Alphonsi M. Stickler , ed. Rosalius Josephus Castillo Lara. Rome: Salesian Pontifical University ( Pontificia studiorum universitas salesiana, Facilitas juris canonici, Studia et textus historie juris canonici , 7), 1992, p. 97–111 (in German) Lotte Kéry, " Inquisitio-denunciatio-exceptio : Möglichkeiten der Verfahrenseinleitung im Dekretalenrecht , Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte, Kanonistische Abteilung , 87, 2001, p. 226–268.

(in French) Julien Théry , " fama : L’opinion publique comme preuve. Aperçu sur la révolution médiévale de l'inquisitoire (XII e –XIV e s.) ", in La preuve en justice de l'Antiquité à nos jours , ed. Br. Lemesle. Rennes: Presses Universitaires de Rennes , 2003, p. 119–147, online].

Julien Théry , " Judicial Inquiry as an Instrument of Centralized Government: The Papacy’s Criminal Proceedings against Prelates in the Age of Theocracy (mid-12th to mid-14th century) ", in Proceedings of the 14th International Congress of Medieval Canon Law , Vatican City, 2016, p. 875–889.

(in German) Winfried Trusen, " Der Inquisitionsprozess : seine historischen Grundlagen und frühen Formen ", Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte, Kanonistische Abteilung , 74, 1988, p. 171–215 ^ St. Eve, Amy J.; Zuckerman, Michael A. (2012).

"Ensuring an Impartial Jury in the Age of Social Media" (PDF) .

Duke Law & Technology Review .

11 . Archived from the original (PDF) on Aug 9, 2017.

External links [ edit ] Look up trial in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Famous trials by the University of Missouri–Kansas City Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐74bd6df994‐rjzrg
Cached time: 20250815101137
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.512 seconds
Real time usage: 0.657 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1918/1000000
Revision size: 14699/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 48539/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3129/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 62709/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.352/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21746585/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  586.926      1 -total
 44.04%  258.470      1 Template:Reflist
 19.35%  113.570      1 Template:Criminal_procedure_(trial)
 19.03%  111.674      1 Template:Sidebar
 16.89%   99.136      4 Template:In_lang
 15.75%   92.418      4 Template:Cite_book
 13.07%   76.720      1 Template:Authority_control
 10.37%   60.836      1 Template:Short_description
  7.25%   42.556     15 Template:Lang
  6.25%   36.663      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3276812:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815101137 and revision id 1280183931. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trial&oldid=1280183931 " Categories : Legal procedure Trials Hidden categories: Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles containing French-language text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 March 2025, at 01:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trial 41 languages Add topic

