Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of phases 2 Phase equilibrium 3 Number of phases 4 Interfacial phenomena 5 Crystal phases 6 Phase transitions 7 Phases out of equilibrium 8 Notes 9 References Toggle the table of contents Phase (matter) 61 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Plattdüütsch Polski Português Ripoarisch Română Русиньскый Русский Scots Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Region of uniform physical properties Not to be confused with State of matter .

"Phases of Matter" redirects here. For the documentary, see Phases of Matter (film) .

For other uses, see Phase (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Phase" matter – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Chemistry Index Outline Glossary History ( timeline ) Key components Matter Phase Bond Chemical reaction Ion Acid–base reaction Redox Chemical equilibrium Chemical law Branches Analytical chemistry Biochemistry Organic chemistry Inorganic chemistry Physical chemistry Research Chemist ( list ) List of chemistry awards List of journals List of unsolved problems Chemistry portal Category v t e In the physical sciences , a phase is a region of material that is chemically uniform, physically distinct, and (often) mechanically separable. In a system consisting of ice and water in a glass jar, the ice cubes are one phase, the water is a second phase, and the humid air is a third phase over the ice and water. The glass of the jar is a different material, in its own separate phase. (See state of matter § Glass .) More precisely, a phase is a region of space (a thermodynamic system ), throughout which all physical properties of a material are essentially uniform.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] : 86 [ 3 ] : 3 Examples of physical properties include density , index of refraction , magnetization and chemical composition.

The term phase is sometimes used as a synonym for state of matter , but there can be several immiscible phases of the same state of matter (as where oil and water separate into distinct phases, both in the liquid state).

A small piece of rapidly melting argon ice shows the transition from solid to liquid.

Types of phases [ edit ] Iron-carbon phase diagram , showing the conditions necessary to form different phases Distinct phases may be described as different states of matter such as gas , liquid , solid , plasma or Bose–Einstein condensate . Useful mesophases between solid and liquid form other states of matter.

Distinct phases may also exist within a given state of matter. As shown in the diagram for iron alloys, several phases exist for both the solid and liquid states. Phases may also be differentiated based on solubility as in polar (hydrophilic) or non-polar (hydrophobic). A mixture of water (a polar liquid) and oil (a non-polar liquid) will spontaneously separate into two phases. Water has a very low solubility (is insoluble) in oil, and oil has a low solubility in water. Solubility is the maximum amount of a solute that can dissolve in a solvent before the solute ceases to dissolve and remains in a separate phase. A mixture can separate into more than two liquid phases and the concept of phase separation extends to solids, i.e., solids can form solid solutions or crystallize into distinct crystal phases. Metal pairs that are mutually soluble can form alloys , whereas metal pairs that are mutually insoluble cannot.

As many as eight immiscible liquid phases have been observed.

[ a ] Mutually immiscible liquid phases are formed from water (aqueous phase), hydrophobic organic solvents, perfluorocarbons ( fluorous phase ), silicones, several different metals, and also from molten phosphorus. Not all organic solvents are completely miscible, e.g. a mixture of ethylene glycol and toluene may separate into two distinct organic phases.

[ b ] Phases do not need to macroscopically separate spontaneously.

Emulsions and colloids are examples of immiscible phase pair combinations that do not physically separate.

Phase equilibrium [ edit ] Left to equilibration, many compositions will form a uniform single phase, but depending on the temperature and pressure even a single substance may separate into two or more distinct phases. Within each phase, the properties are uniform but between the two phases properties differ.

Water in a closed jar with an air space over it forms a two-phase system. Most of the water is in the liquid phase, where it is held by the mutual attraction of water molecules. Even at equilibrium molecules are constantly in motion and, once in a while, a molecule in the liquid phase gains enough kinetic energy to break away from the liquid phase and enter the gas phase. Likewise, every once in a while a vapor molecule collides with the liquid surface and condenses into the liquid. At equilibrium, evaporation and condensation processes exactly balance and there is no net change in the volume of either phase.

At room temperature and pressure, the water jar reaches equilibrium when the air over the water has a humidity of about 3%. This percentage increases as the temperature goes up. At 100 °C and atmospheric pressure, equilibrium is not reached until the air is 100% water. If the liquid is heated a little over 100 °C, the transition from liquid to gas will occur not only at the surface but throughout the liquid volume: the water boils.

Number of phases [ edit ] See also: Multiphasic liquid A typical phase diagram for a single-component material, exhibiting solid, liquid and gaseous phases. The solid green line shows the usual shape of the liquid–solid phase line. The dotted green line shows the anomalous behavior of water when the pressure increases. The triple point and the critical point are shown as red dots.

For a given composition, only certain phases are possible at a given temperature and pressure. The number and type of phases that will form is hard to predict and is usually determined by experiment. The results of such experiments can be plotted in phase diagrams .

The phase diagram shown here is for a single component system. In this simple system, phases that are possible, depend only on pressure and temperature . The markings show points where two or more phases can co-exist in equilibrium. At temperatures and pressures away from the markings, there will be only one phase at equilibrium.

In the diagram, the blue line marking the boundary between liquid and gas does not continue indefinitely, but terminates at a point called the critical point . As the temperature and pressure approach the critical point, the properties of the liquid and gas become progressively more similar. At the critical point, the liquid and gas become indistinguishable. Above the critical point, there are no longer separate liquid and gas phases: there is only a generic fluid phase referred to as a supercritical fluid . In water, the critical point occurs at around 647 K (374 °C or 705 °F) and 22.064 MPa .

An unusual feature of the water phase diagram is that the solid–liquid phase line (illustrated by the dotted green line) has a negative slope. For most substances, the slope is positive as exemplified by the dark green line. This unusual feature of water is related to ice having a lower density than liquid water. Increasing the pressure drives the water into the higher density phase, which causes melting.

Another interesting though not unusual feature of the phase diagram is the point where the solid–liquid phase line meets the liquid–gas phase line. The intersection is referred to as the triple point . At the triple point, all three phases can coexist.

Experimentally, phase lines are relatively easy to map due to the interdependence of temperature and pressure that develops when multiple phases form.

Gibbs' phase rule suggests that different phases are completely determined by these variables. Consider a test apparatus consisting of a closed and well-insulated cylinder equipped with a piston. By controlling the temperature and the pressure, the system can be brought to any point on the phase diagram. From a point in the solid stability region (left side of the diagram), increasing the temperature of the system would bring it into the region where a liquid or a gas is the equilibrium phase (depending on the pressure). If the piston is slowly lowered, the system will trace a curve of increasing temperature and pressure within the gas region of the phase diagram. At the point where gas begins to condense to liquid, the direction of the temperature and pressure curve will abruptly change to trace along the phase line until all of the water has condensed.

Interfacial phenomena [ edit ] Further information: Surface science Between two phases in equilibrium there is a narrow region where the properties are not that of either phase. Although this region may be very thin, it can have significant and easily observable effects, such as causing a liquid to exhibit surface tension . In mixtures, some components may preferentially move toward the interface . In terms of modeling, describing, or understanding the behavior of a particular system, it may be efficacious to treat the interfacial region as a separate phase.

Crystal phases [ edit ] A single material may have several distinct solid states capable of forming separate phases. Water is a well-known example of such a material. For example, water ice is ordinarily found in the hexagonal form ice I h , but can also exist as the cubic ice I c , the rhombohedral ice II , and many other forms.

Polymorphism is the ability of a solid to exist in more than one crystal form. For pure chemical elements, polymorphism is known as allotropy . For example, diamond , graphite , and fullerenes are different allotropes of carbon .

Phase transitions [ edit ] Main article: Phase transition When a substance undergoes a phase transition (changes from one state of matter to another) it usually either takes up or releases energy. For example, when water evaporates, the increase in kinetic energy as the evaporating molecules escape the attractive forces of the liquid is reflected in a decrease in temperature. The energy required to induce the phase transition is taken from the internal thermal energy of the water, which cools the liquid to a lower temperature; hence evaporation is useful for cooling. See Enthalpy of vaporization . The reverse process, condensation, releases heat. The heat energy, or enthalpy, associated with a solid to liquid transition is the enthalpy of fusion and that associated with a solid to gas transition is the enthalpy of sublimation .

Phases out of equilibrium [ edit ] While phases of matter are traditionally defined for systems in thermal equilibrium, work on quantum many-body localized (MBL) systems has provided a framework for defining phases out of equilibrium. MBL phases never reach thermal equilibrium, and can allow for new forms of order disallowed in equilibrium via a phenomenon known as localization protected quantum order.

The transitions between different MBL phases and between MBL and thermalizing phases are novel dynamical phase transitions whose properties are active areas of research.

[ citation needed ] Notes [ edit ] ^ One such system is, from the top: mineral oil , silicone oil , water , aniline , perfluoro(dimethylcyclohexane) , white phosphorus , gallium , and mercury . The system remains indefinitely separated at 45 °C , where gallium and phosphorus are in the molten state. From Reichardt, C. (2006).

Solvents and Solvent Effects in Organic Chemistry .

Wiley-VCH . pp.

9– 10.

ISBN 978-3-527-60567-5 .

^ This phenomenon can be used to help with catalyst recycling in Heck vinylation . See Bhanage, B.M.; et al. (1998). "Comparison of activity and selectivity of various metal-TPPTS complex catalysts in ethylene glycol — toluene biphasic Heck vinylation reactions of iodobenzene".

Tetrahedron Letters .

39 (51): 9509– 9512.

doi : 10.1016/S0040-4039(98)02225-4 .

References [ edit ] ^ Modell, Michael; Robert C. Reid (1974).

Thermodynamics and Its Applications . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-914861-3 .

^ Enrico Fermi (2012).

Thermodynamics . Courier Corporation.

ISBN 978-0-486-13485-7 .

^ Clement John Adkins (1983).

Equilibrium Thermodynamics . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-27456-2 .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Phase (matter) .

v t e States of matter ( list , timeline ) State Solid Liquid Gas / Vapor Supercritical fluid Plasma Low energy Bose–Einstein condensate Fermionic condensate Degenerate matter Quantum Hall Rydberg matter Strange matter Superfluid Supersolid Photonic molecule High energy QCD matter Quark–gluon plasma Color-glass condensate Other states Colloid Crystal Liquid crystal Time crystal Quantum spin liquid Exotic matter Programmable matter Dark matter Antimatter Magnetically ordered Antiferromagnet Ferrimagnet Ferromagnet String-net liquid Superglass Phase transitions Boiling Boiling point Condensation Critical line Critical point Crystallization Deposition Evaporation Flash evaporation Freezing Chemical ionization Ionization Lambda point Melting Melting point Recombination Regelation Saturated fluid Sublimation Supercooling Triple point Vaporization Vitrification Quantities Enthalpy of fusion Enthalpy of sublimation Enthalpy of vaporization Latent heat Latent internal energy Trouton's rule Volatility Concepts Baryonic matter Binodal Compressed fluid Cooling curve Equation of state Leidenfrost effect Macroscopic quantum phenomena Mpemba effect Order and disorder (physics) Spinodal Superconductivity Superheated vapor Superheating Thermo-dielectric effect NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐kspwm
Cached time: 20250812014435
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.439 seconds
Real time usage: 0.576 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1898/1000000
Revision size: 12911/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 52649/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4272/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 47724/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.266/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9873293/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  501.040      1 -total
 22.00%  110.251      2 Template:Efn
 20.52%  102.796      1 Template:TopicTOC-Chemistry
 20.20%  101.198      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.14%   90.884      4 Template:Cite_book
 11.07%   55.474      1 Template:Short_description
  8.79%   44.061      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.28%   41.489      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.03%   40.233      1 Template:Ambox
  7.73%   38.733      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23637:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014435 and revision id 1298319496. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phase_(matter)&oldid=1298319496 " Categories : Engineering thermodynamics Condensed matter physics Concepts in physics Phases of matter Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 19:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Phase (matter) 61 languages Add topic

