Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Influences 2 Notable authors 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 Footnotes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Christian science fiction 4 languages Español 日本語 Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subgenre of both Christian literature and science fiction A depiction of a rocket ship church.

Christian science fiction is a subgenre of both Christian literature and science fiction , in which there are strong Christian themes, or which are written from a Christian point of view.

[ 1 ] These themes may be subtle, expressed by way of analogy , or more explicit.

[ 2 ] Major influences include early science fiction authors such as C. S. Lewis , while more recent figures include Stephen Lawhead .

The term is not usually applied to works simply because most or all of the characters are Christian, or simply because the author is Christian.

Influences [ edit ] While earlier works such as Victor Rousseau 's The Messiah of the Cylinder (1917) are regarded as part of the Christian science fiction subgenre, [ 3 ] John Mort argues that the most influential Christian science fiction author was C. S. Lewis, [ 4 ] a "prolific writer who wrote works of Christian science fiction and theology for the average person." [ 5 ] In When World Views Collide: A Study in Imagination and Evolution , John J. Pierce presents the argument that Lewis was partially writing in response to what Lewis saw as "Wellsianity" - an "anthropocentric evolutionary mythology" [ 6 ] - which he came to view as both false and blasphemous, condemning H. G. Wells ' world view through works such as Out of the Silent Planet .

[ 7 ] While the extent to which Lewis' influence varies, Mort points in particular to Madeleine L'Engle 's A Wrinkle in Time as a Christian science fiction work which, as he puts it, cannot be read "without being reminded of Lewis' Narnia stories." [ 8 ] (Of course, Narnia was fantasy rather than science fiction, but Mort is noting the similarities in style and execution of the story.) Other early authors identified by Mort as being influences upon the development of Christian science fiction include J. R. R. Tolkien , George MacDonald and Charles Williams .

[ 8 ] (Although, again, these writers worked in fantasy, their influence on Christian science fiction is clear, Mort argues.) Notable authors [ edit ] C. S. Lewis , whose The Space Trilogy is regarded as one of the most influential works in the subgenre.

[ 8 ] Stephen Lawhead , although he is better known for his fantasy novels than his science fiction works.

[ 8 ] Madeleine L'Engle , especially in regard to her novel A Wrinkle in Time and its sequels, first published in 1962.

[ 9 ] Walker Percy with his Christian science fiction work Love in the Ruins .

[ 10 ] Kathy Tyers , author of the Firebird series.

Gene Wolfe , author of e.g.

The Book of the New Sun , who is noted for the strong influence of his Catholic faith, to which he converted after marrying a Catholic.

Chris Walley and his "Lamb Among the Stars" trilogy.

Walter M. Miller Jr.

, the author of A Canticle for Leibowitz Robert Hugh Benson , the author of Lord of the World Tim LaHaye and Jerry B. Jenkins with their Left Behind series.

Connie Willis , who explores free will and predestination especially in her time travel novels.

Zenna Henderson and her stories about "The People." Criticism [ edit ] Mort argues that one of the difficulties facing Christian science fiction authors who endorse Creationism - especially those writing " hard " science fiction - is reconciling the limits placed on the author in exploring science within a Creationist framework. This is made even more problematic when one considers that the notion of "the future as divinely ordered" limits the author's ability to speculate on what that future may be.

[ 11 ] For example, the first of these difficulties has been identified by Pierce as a problem with some of R. A. Lafferty 's work, who "is uncomfortable with the idea of even biological evolution"; [ 3 ] while Tom Doyle notes the predictability of the Christian apocalyptic novel, due, he argues, to the genre following "a particular interpretation of biblical prophecy".

[ 12 ] These difficulties raise concerns regarding genre boundaries: while Christian science fiction has been identified as a specific market into which stories can be sold, [ 13 ] Doyle has questioned whether or not books that are, at times, classified in this subgenre truly fit. In examining Christian apocalyptic fiction , Doyle notes that it is often classified as Christian science fiction, but argues that this classification is inappropriate. While both may employ scientific themes, Christian apocalyptic fiction is not, as he describes it, "scientifically minded", arguing that the authors tend to respond to scientific problems "with biblical authority, prophetic interpretation, and fundamentalist ideas of human identity instead of rational argument, scientific method, and humanistic thought".

[ 12 ] Doyle sees Brian Caldwell 's We All Fall Down as an exception to his argument, suggesting that (despite being a work of Christian apocalyptic fiction) it is the sort of work that he would like to see classified as science fiction.

[ 12 ] It should however be noted that not all Christian science fiction authors have the same theology.

See also [ edit ] List of Catholic Science Fiction and Fantasy authors List of Protestant Science Fiction and Fantasy authors List of science fiction literature with Messiah figures Theological fiction Biblical speculative fiction Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Mort (2002) ^ Sammons (1988) p. 21.

^ a b Pierce (1989), p. 43.

^ Mort (2002), p. 159. After raising Stephen Lawhead and Orson Scott Card as exceptions, Mort states, "Both are major voices, so much so that neither owes much of a debt to C. S. Lewis, except possibly Lawhead early in his career, which is a long way of saying that everyone else does." ^ Bramlett (1996), p. 3.

^ Pierce (1989) p. 38.

^ Pierce (1989) p. 40.

^ a b c d Mort (2002), p. 159.

^ Garrison (2004), p. 243. "In 1962, Christian science fiction writer Madeline L'Engle introduced millions of readers to the concept of wrinkling time".

^ Theroux (1971), p. 280.

^ Mort (2002), p. 175.

^ a b c Doyle (2002) ^ Bowling (2007), p. 294.

References [ edit ] Bowling, Anne; Schweer, Michael; Lyman, Vanessa (2007).

Novel & Short Story Writer's Market: 2,000+ Places to Get Your Fiction Into Print . Writer's Digest. p.

294 .

ISBN 978-1-58297-193-3 .

Bramlett, Perry C. (1996).

C.S. Lewis: Life at the Center . Smyth & Helwys Publishing, Inc. p. 3.

ISBN 1-57312-054-5 .

Doyle, Tom (April 8, 2002).

"Christian Apocalyptic Fiction" .

Strange Horizons . Archived from the original on June 19, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-07-02 .

Garrison, David (2004).

Church Planting Movements: How God is Redeeming a Lost World . WIGTake Resources.

ISBN 0-9747562-0-2 .

Mort, John (2002).

Christian Fiction: a Guide to the genre . Libraries Unlimited.

ISBN 1-56308-871-1 .

Pierce, John J. (1989).

When World Views Collide: A Study in Imagination and Evolution . New York: Greenwood Press .

ISBN 0-313-25457-5 .

Sammons, Martha C. (1988).

"A Better Country": The Worlds of Religious Fantasy and Science Fiction .

Greenwood Press .

ISBN 0-313-25746-9 .

Theroux, Paul (May 16, 1971). "Christian science-fiction".

The Washington Post . p. 280.

Unger, Craig (December 2005).

"American Rapture" .

Vanity Fair . Retrieved 2008-08-03 .

Wallace, Diana (October 31, 2001). "Like there is no tomorrow 'Left Behind' books gaining new following".

Daily Herald .

Hadnot, Victor Darnell (1996).

"Eontimeoc" .

SFFWorld, SFBookCase, SciFan .

ISBN 1-58500-697-1 . Archived from the original on 2008-07-05 . Retrieved 2011-11-27 .

External links [ edit ] Christian Fandom Home Page —Nondenominational (albeit fundamentalist in tendency) fellowship of fans interested in fair, accurate representation of orthodox Christian viewpoints with an emphasis on science fiction and fantasy (includes horror and western genres as well).

Where the Map Ends — site for all genres of Christian speculative fiction; includes booklist, interviews, and writer's helps.

v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_science_fiction&oldid=1295740878 " Categories : Christian science fiction Christian literary genres Science fiction genres Religion in science fiction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 15:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christian science fiction 4 languages Add topic

