Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early work 2 Work by Caldirola 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Chronon 13 languages Български Deutsch Français 한국어 Italiano Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Polski Română Русский Suomi Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothetical quantum of time A chronon is a proposed quantum of time , that is, a discrete and indivisible "unit" of time as part of a hypothesis that proposes that time is not continuous . In simple language, a chronon is the smallest, discrete, non-decomposable unit of time.

In a one-dimensional model, a chronon is a time interval or period , while in an n -dimensional model it is a non-decomposable region in n -dimensional time . It is not easy to see how it could possibly be recast so as to postulate only a discrete spacetime (or even a merely dense one). For a set of instants to be dense, every instant not in the set must have a sequence of instants in the set that converge (get arbitrarily close) to it. For it to be a continuum , however, something more is required— that every set of instants earlier (later) than any given one should have a tight upper (lower) bound that is also an instant (see least upper bound property ). It is continuity that enables modern mathematics to surmount the paradox of extension framed by the pre-Socratic eleatic Zeno —a paradox comprising the question of how a finite interval can be made up of dimensionless points or instants.

[ citation needed ] Early work [ edit ] While time is a continuous quantity in both standard quantum mechanics and general relativity , some physicists have suggested that a discrete model of time might work, especially when considering the combination of quantum mechanics with general relativity to produce a theory of quantum gravity .

The term was introduced in this sense by Robert Lévi in 1927.

[ 1 ] A quantum theory in which time is a quantum variable with a discrete spectrum, and which is nevertheless consistent with special relativity , was proposed by Chen Ning Yang in 1947.

[ 2 ] Henry Margenau in 1950 suggested that the chronon might be the time for light to travel the classical radius of an electron .

[ 3 ] Work by Caldirola [ edit ] A prominent model was introduced by Piero Caldirola in 1980. In Caldirola's model, one chronon corresponds to about 6.27 × 10 −24 seconds for an electron .

[ 4 ] This is much longer than the Planck time , which is only about 5.39 × 10 −44 seconds.  The Planck time may be postulated as a lower bound on the length of time that could exist between two connected events [ citation needed ] , but it is not a quantization of time itself since there is no requirement that the time between two events be separated by a discrete number of Planck times.  For example, ordered pairs of events (A, B) and (B, C) could each be separated by slightly more than 1 Planck time: this would produce a measurement limit of 1 Planck time between A and B or B and C, but a limit of 3 Planck times between A and C.

[ citation needed ] The chronon is a quantization of the evolution in a system along its world line .  Consequently, the value of the chronon, like other quantized observables in quantum mechanics, is a function of the system under consideration, particularly its boundary conditions.

[ 5 ] The value for the chronon, θ 0 , is calculated as [ 6 ] θ θ 0 = 1 6 π π ϵ ϵ 0 e 2 m 0 c 3 .

{\displaystyle \theta _{0}={\frac {1}{6\pi \epsilon _{0}}}{\frac {e^{2}}{m_{0}c^{3}}}.} From this formula, it can be seen that the nature of the moving particle being considered must be specified, since the value of the chronon depends on the particle's charge and mass.

Caldirola claims that the chronon has important implications for quantum mechanics, in particular that it allows for a clear answer to the question of whether a free-falling charged particle does or does not emit radiation.

[ clarification needed ] This model supposedly avoids the difficulties met by Abraham– Lorentz 's [ which?

] and Dirac 's approaches [ which?

] to the problem and provides a natural explication of quantum decoherence .

See also [ edit ] Elementary particle Gravastar Tachyon List of particles Particle physics Theoretical physics Notes [ edit ] ^ Lévi 1927 ^ Yang 1947 ^ Margenau 1950 ^ Farias & Recami, p. 11.

^ Farias & Recami, p. 18.

^ Farias & Recami, p. 11. Caldirola's original article has a different formula due to not working in standard units.

References [ edit ] Lévi, Robert (1927). "Théorie de l'action universelle et discontinue".

Journal de Physique et le Radium .

8 (4): 182– 198.

doi : 10.1051/jphysrad:0192700804018200 .

S2CID 96677036 .

Margenau, Henry (1950).

The Nature of Physical Reality . McGraw-Hill.

Yang, C N (1947). "On quantized space-time".

Physical Review .

72 (9): 874.

Bibcode : 1947PhRv...72..874Y .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRev.72.874 .

Caldirola, P. (1980). "The introduction of the chronon in the electron theory and a charged lepton mass formula".

Lettere al Nuovo Cimento .

27 (8): 225– 228.

doi : 10.1007/BF02750348 .

S2CID 122099991 .

Farias, Ruy A. H.; Recami, Erasmo (1997-06-27). "Introduction of a Quantum of Time ("chronon"), and its Consequences for Quantum Mechanics".

arXiv : quant-ph/9706059 .

Albanese, Claudio; Lawi, Stephan (2004).

"Time Quantization and q-deformations" (PDF) .

Journal of Physics A .

37 (8): 2983– 2987.

arXiv : hep-th/0308190 .

Bibcode : 2004JPhA...37.2983A .

doi : 10.1088/0305-4470/37/8/009 .

S2CID 18286926 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-10-10 . Retrieved 2006-07-31 .

External links [ edit ] https://www.britannica.com/technology/chronon v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chronon&oldid=1289746613 " Categories : Quantum gravity Units of time Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2014 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2014 This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 15:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chronon 13 languages Add topic

