Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical analysis Toggle Historical analysis subsection 1.1 Propaganda 1.2 Psychological warfare 1.3 Authority 1.4 Delivery 1.4.1 Churchill 1.4.2 Hitler 2 Applications 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Crowd manipulation 9 languages العربية 한국어 Հայերեն עברית Polski Русский Српски / srpski Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Application of crowd psychology For other uses, see Manipulation .

Crowd manipulation is the intentional or unwitting use of techniques based on the principles of crowd psychology to engage, control, or influence the desires of a crowd in order to direct its behavior toward a specific action.

[ 1 ] Historical analysis [ edit ] Soldiers of the California National Guard patrol the streets of Los Angeles in response to street rioting.

History suggests that the socioeconomic and political context and location influence dramatically the potential for crowd manipulation.  Such time periods in America included: Prelude to the American Revolution (1763–1775) , when Britain imposed heavy taxes and various restrictions upon its thirteen North American colonies; [ 2 ] Roaring Twenties (1920–1929) , when the advent of mass production made it possible for everyday citizens to purchase previously considered luxury items at affordable prices.  Businesses that utilized assembly-line manufacturing were challenged to sell large numbers of identical products; [ 3 ] The Great Depression (1929–1939) , when a devastating stock market crash disrupted the American economy, caused widespread unemployment; and The Cold War (1945–1989) , when Americans faced the threat of nuclear war and participated in the Korean War , the greatly unpopular Vietnam War , the Civil Rights Movement , the Cuban Missile Crisis .

Internationally, time periods conducive to crowd manipulation included the Interwar Period (i.e. following the collapse of the Austria-Hungarian, Russian, Ottoman, and German empires) and Post-World War II (i.e. decolonization and collapse of the British, German, French, and Japanese empires).

[ 4 ] The prelude to the collapse of the Soviet Union provided ample opportunity for messages of encouragement.  The Solidarity Movement began in the 1970s thanks in part to leaders like Lech Walesa and U.S. Information Agency programming.

[ 5 ] In 1987, U.S. President Ronald Reagan capitalized on the sentiments of the West Berliners as well as the freedom-starved East Berliners to demand that General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Mikhail Gorbachev "tear down" the Berlin Wall .

[ 6 ] During the 2008 presidential elections, candidate Barack Obama capitalized on the sentiments of many American voters frustrated predominantly by the recent economic downturn and the continuing wars in Iraq and Afghanistan .  His simple messages of "Hope", "Change", and "Yes We Can" were adopted quickly and chanted by his supporters during his political rallies.

[ 7 ] Historical context and events may also encourage unruly behavior.  Such examples include the: 1968 Columbia, SC Civil Rights Protest; 1992 London Poll Tax Protest ; and 1992 L.A. Riots (sparked by the acquittal of police officers involved in the assault of Rodney King ).

[ 8 ] In order to capitalize fully upon historical context, it is essential to conduct a thorough audience analysis to understand the desires, fears, concerns, and biases of the target crowd.  This may be done through scientific studies, focus groups, and polls.

[ 3 ] It is also imperative to differentiate between a crowd and a mob to gauge the magnitude crowd manipulation should be used to. A United Nations training guide on crowd control states that "a crowd is a lawful gathering of people, who are organized disciplined and have an objective. A mob is a crowd who have gone out of control because of various and powerful influences, such as racial tension or revenge." [ 9 ] Propaganda [ edit ] Main articles: Media manipulation and Propaganda The crowd manipulator and the propagandist may work together to achieve greater results than they would individually.  According to Edward Bernays, the propagandist must prepare his target group to think about and anticipate a message before it is delivered.  Messages themselves must be tested in advance since a message that is ineffective is worse than no message at all.

[ 10 ] Social scientist Jacques Ellul called this sort of activity "pre-propaganda", and it is essential if the main message is to be effective.  Ellul wrote in Propaganda:  The Formation of Men's Attitudes : Direct propaganda, aimed at modifying opinions and attitudes, must be preceded by propaganda that is sociological in character, slow, general, seeking to create a climate, an atmosphere of favorable preliminary attitudes.  No direct propaganda can be effective without pre-propaganda, which, without direct or noticeable aggression, is limited to creating ambiguities, reducing prejudices, and spreading images, apparently without purpose. … In Jacques Ellul 's book, Propaganda: The Formation of Men's Attitudes , it states that sociological propaganda can be compared to plowing, direct propaganda to sowing; you cannot do the one without doing the other first.

[ 11 ] Sociological propaganda is a phenomenon where a society seeks to integrate the maximum number of individuals into itself by unifying its members' behavior according to a pattern, spreading its style of life abroad, and thus imposing itself on other groups.  Essentially sociological propaganda aims to increase conformity with the environment that is of a collective nature by developing compliance with or defense of the established order through long term penetration and progressive adaptation by using all social currents.  The propaganda element is the way of life with which the individual is permeated and then the individual begins to express it in film, writing, or art without realizing it. This involuntary behavior creates an expansion of society through advertising, the movies, education, and magazines. "The entire group, consciously or not, expresses itself in this fashion; and to indicate, secondly that its influence aims much more at an entire style of life." [ 12 ] This type of propaganda is not deliberate but springs up spontaneously or unwittingly within a culture or nation. This propaganda reinforces the individual's way of life and represents this way of life as best.   Sociological propaganda creates an indisputable criterion for the individual to make judgments of good and evil according to the order of the individual's way of life. Sociological propaganda does not result in action, however, it can prepare the ground for direct propaganda .  From then on, the individual in the clutches of such sociological propaganda believes that those who live this way are on the side of the angels, and those who don't are bad.

[ 13 ] Bernays expedited this process by identifying and contracting those who most influence public opinion (key experts, celebrities, existing supporters, interlacing groups, etc.).

After the mind of the crowd is plowed and the seeds of propaganda are sown, a crowd manipulator may prepare to harvest his crop.

[ 10 ] Psychological warfare [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Psychological warfare .

[ edit ] An example of a World War II era leaflet meant to be dropped from an American B-17 over a German city (see the file description page for a translation) Part of a series on War ( outline ) History Prehistoric Ancient Thermal Gunpowder Timeline Post-classical Castles Early modern Military revolution Pike and shot Napoleonic warfare Late modern Industrial warfare Fourth-gen warfare AI warfare Military Organization Command and control Defense ministry Reserves Ranks Branches: Army Navy Air force Marines Coast guard Border guard Special forces Cyber force Space force Specialties: Staff Engineers Intel Recon Medical Police Diving Pilot Land units: Infantry Armor Cavalry Artillery Special forces Signal corps Naval units: Warships Submarines Aircraft carriers Landing craft Auxiliary ships Air units: Fighters Bombers Command Close air support Electronic-warfare Reconnaissance Combat systems: Fire-control system Fire-control radar Director (military) Combat information center Sonar Radar Historical: Ship gun fire-control Gun data computer Torpedo data computer Development: Basic training Military manoeuvrers Combat training Battlespace Aerospace Aerial Airborne Space Land Cold-region Desert Fortification Jungle Mountain Urban Subterranean Tunnel Sea Amphibious Blue Brown Green Surface Underwater Seabed Cyber Information Weapons Air defence Armor Artillery Barrage Biological Camouflage Cavalry Horses Air cavalry Chemical Combined arms Conventional Cyber Denial Disinformation Drone / Robot Electromagnetic Firearms Infantry Loitering Missile Music Nuclear Psychological Radiological Submarine Unconventional Tactics List of military tactics Aerial Airlift Air assault Airbridge Airdrop Anti-aircraft Anti-sub Anti-tank Battle Cavalry Charge CQC Counterattack Counterinsurgency Convoy Defeat in detail Foxhole Drone Envelopment Formation Guerrilla Naval Rapid dominance Encirclement Investment Siege Swarm Screen Tactical objective Target saturation Trench Withdrawal Operational Military operation Special Operations research Blitzkrieg Expeditionary Deep operation Maneuver Operational manoeuvre group Raid Covert Stay-behind Strategy List of military strategies and concepts Military campaign Anti-access Attrition Commerce raiding Counter-offensive Culminating Defence in depth Fabian Empty fort Mosaic Deception Defensive Depth Goal Nuclear Naval Offensive Scorched earth Grand strategy Asymmetric Blockade Broken-backed Class Cold war Colonial Conquest Containment Divide and conquer Economic Endemic Fleet in being Irregular Liberation Limited Network-centric New generation Perpetual Political Princely Proxy Religious Resource Strategic Succession Technology Theater Total war World war Administrative Branch Policy Staff Training Service Sociology Organization Area of responsibility Chain of command Command and control Doctrine Order of battle Principles of war Economy of force Medicine Engineers Intelligence Ranks Technology and equipment Personnel Recruitment Conscription Draft evasion Mobilization Training Specialism Soldier Morale Volunteer Women Children Transgender Harassment Conscientious objector Conscription and sexism Counter-recruitment Logistics History War economy Arms industry Materiel Supply-chain management Military–industrial complex Base MOB FOB Outpost Science Power projection Loss-of-strength gradient Lanchester's laws Force multiplication Morale Law Belligerent Occupation Armistice Ceasefire Court-martial Desertion Geneva Conventions Geneva Protocol Islamic rules Justice Lawful / Unlawful combatant Perfidy Regular / Irregular Jewish laws on war Right of conquest Right of self-defence Rules of engagement Self-determination Martial law War crime War and genocide War treason Theory Air supremacy Appeasement Command of the sea Deterrence theory Full-spectrum dominance Overmatch Just war theory Principles of war Philosophy of war Security dilemma Tripwire force Wargaming Simulation Exercises Combat effectiveness Center of gravity Non-warfare Arms control Counter-insurgency Deterrence Disaster response Grey-zone Gunboat diplomacy Humanitarian aid Law enforcement Low-intensity conflict Military engineering Peacekeeping Peacebuilding Peace through strength Show of force Culture Awards and decorations Battle cry Warrior War film Military science fiction War novel Anti-war movement Foot drill War song Uniform Wargame Militarization / Militarism Antimilitarism Camp follower Books Seven Military Classics The Art of War De re militari Strategemata Related Women in war War resister War studies Horses in warfare Wartime sexual violence Fifth column Mercenary Pacifism Privateer Private military company Soldiers are murderers Lists Battles Military occupations Military terms Operations Sieges War crimes Wars Weapons Writers v t e Psychological warfare (PSYWAR), or the basic aspects of modern psychological operations (PsyOp), has been known by many other names or terms, including Military Information Support Operations ( MISO ), Psy Ops, political warfare , "Hearts and Minds", and propaganda .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] The term is used "to denote any action which is practiced mainly by psychological methods with the aim of evoking a planned psychological reaction in other people".

[ 16 ] Various techniques are used, and are aimed at influencing a target audience's value system, belief system, emotions , motives , reasoning , or behavior . It is used to induce confessions or reinforce attitudes and behaviors favorable to the originator's objectives, and are sometimes combined with black operations or false flag tactics. It is also used to destroy the morale of enemies through tactics that aim to depress troops' psychological states.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Target audiences can be governments , organizations , groups , and individuals , and is not just limited to soldiers. Civilians of foreign territories can also be targeted by technology and media so as to cause an effect on the government of their country.

[ 19 ] Stories are said to be a key factor in a successful operation.

[ 20 ] Mass communication such as radio allows for direct communication with an enemy populace, and therefore has been used in many efforts. Social media channels and the internet allow for campaigns of disinformation and misinformation performed by agents anywhere in the world.

[ 21 ] Authority [ edit ] Prestige is a form of "domination exercised on our mind by an individual, a work, or an idea."  The manipulator with great prestige paralyses the critical faculty of his crowd and commands respect and awe.  Authority flows from prestige, which can be generated by "acquired prestige" (e.g. job title, uniform, judge's robe) and "personal prestige" (i.e. inner strength).  Personal prestige is like that of the "tamer of a wild beast" who could easily devour him.  Success is the most important factor affecting personal prestige.  Le Bon wrote, "From the minute prestige is called into question, it ceases to be prestige."  Thus, it would behoove the manipulator to prevent this discussion and to maintain a distance from the crowd lest his faults undermine his prestige.

[ 22 ] Delivery [ edit ] Winston Churchill delivering a speech after escaping from a South African prisoner-of-war camp in Durban in the British Cape Colony in 1899.

Churchill [ edit ] At 22, Winston Churchill documented his conclusions about speaking to crowds.  He titled it "The Scaffolding of Rhetoric" and it outlined what he believed to be the essentials of any effective speech.  Among these essentials are: "Correctness of diction", or proper word choice to convey the exact meaning of the orator; "Rhythm", or a speech's sound appeal through "long, rolling and sonorous" sentences; "Accumulation of argument", or the orator's "rapid succession of waves of sound and vivid pictures" to bring the crowd to a thundering ascent; "Analogy", or the linking of the unknown to the familiar; and "Wild extravagance", or the use of expressions, however extreme, which embody the feelings of the orator and his audience.

[ 23 ] Hitler [ edit ] Still frames of Adolf Hitler during a speech show his use of emotion and body language to convey his message.

Adolf Hitler believed he could apply the lessons of propaganda he learned in his early World War I experiences and apply those lessons to benefit Germany thereafter. His comments were as follows: "[Propaganda] must be addressed always and exclusively to the masses", rather than the "scientifically trained intelligentsia." "[Propaganda] must be aimed at the emotions and only to a very limited degree at the so-called intellect." "It is a mistake to make propaganda many-sided…The receptivity of the great masses is very limited, their intelligence is small, but their power of forgetting is enormous." "[Prepare] the individual soldier for the terrors of war, and thus [help] to preserve him from disappointments. After this, the most terrible weapon that was used against him seemed only to confirm what his propagandists had told him; it likewise reinforced his faith in the truth of his government's assertions, while on the other hand it increased his rage and hatred against the vile enemy." "…emphasize the one right which it has set out to argue for. Its task is not to make an objective study of the truth, in so far as it favors the enemy, and then set it before the masses with academic fairness; its task is to serve our own right, always and unflinchingly." "[Propagandist technique] must confine itself to a few points and repeat them over and over.  Here, as so often in this world, persistence is the first and most important requirement for success." [ 24 ] [ 25 ] The Nazi Party in Germany used propaganda to develop a cult of personality around Hitler. Historians such as Ian Kershaw emphasise the psychological impact of Hitler's skill as an orator.

[ 26 ] Neil Kressel reports,  "Overwhelmingly ... Germans speak with mystification of Hitler's 'hypnotic' appeal".

[ 27 ] Roger Gill states: "His moving speeches captured the minds and hearts of a vast number of the German people: he virtually hypnotized his audiences".

[ 28 ] Hitler was especially effective when he could absorb the feedback from a live audience, and listeners would also be caught up in the mounting enthusiasm.

[ 29 ] He looked for signs of fanatic devotion, stating that his ideas would then remain "like words received under an hypnotic influence." [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Applications [ edit ] Ever since the advent of mass production, businesses and corporations have used crowd manipulation to sell their products.

Advertising serves as propaganda to prepare a future crowd to absorb and accept a particular message.

Edward Bernays believed that particular advertisements are more effective if they create an environment which encourages the purchase of certain products.  Instead of marketing the features of a piano, sell prospective customers the idea of a music room.

[ 32 ] See also [ edit ] Public orator Persuasion Rhetoric References [ edit ] ^ Adam Curtis (2002).

The Century of the Self .

British Broadcasting Cooperation (documentary). United Kingdom: BBC4. Archived from the original on 2010-03-19 . Retrieved 2019-12-20 .

^ Waller, 1–4.

^ a b Curtis.

^ Paul Johnson, Modern Times: The World from the Twenties to the Nineties (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, Inc., 2001): 11–44, 231–232, 435, 489, 495–543, 582, 614, 632, 685, 757, 768.

^ Wilson P. Dizard, Jr., Inventing Public Diplomacy: The Story of the U.S. Information Agency (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2004): 204.

^ Smith-Davies Publishing, Speeches that Changed the World (London:  Smith-Davies Publishing Ltd, 2005): 197–201.

^ David E. Campbell, "Public Opinion and the 2008 Presidential Election" in Janet M. Box-Steffensmeier and Steven E. Schier, The American Elections of 2008 (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2009): 99–116.

^ Kenny, et al.

^ "Public Order Management: Crowd Dynamics in Public Order Operations" (PDF) . United Nations. 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-05-06.

^ a b Bernays, 52.

^ Ellul, 15.

^ Ellul, Jacques (1973).

Propaganda: The Formation of Men's Attitudes , p. 62. Trans. Konrad Kellen & Jean Lerner. Vintage Books, New York.

ISBN 978-0-394-71874-3 .

^ Ellul, Jacques (1973).

Propaganda: The Formation of Men's Attitudes , p. 65. Trans. Konrad Kellen & Jean Lerner. Vintage Books, New York.

ISBN 978-0-394-71874-3 .

^ "Forces.gc.ca" . Journal.forces.gc.ca . Retrieved 18 May 2011 .

^ Cowan, David; Cook, Chaveso (March 2018).

"What's in a Name? Psychological Operations versus Military Information Support Operations and an Analysis of Organizational Change" (PDF) .

Military Review .

^ Szunyogh, Béla (1955).

Psychological warfare; an introduction to ideological propaganda and the techniques of psychological warfare . United States: William-Frederick Press. p. 13 . Retrieved 11 February 2015 .

^ Chekinov, S. C.; Bogdanov, S. A.

"The Nature and Content of a New-Generation War" (PDF) .

Military Theory Monthly = Voennaya Mysl . United States: Military Thought: 16.

ISSN 0869-5636 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 February 2015 . Retrieved 11 February 2015 .

^ Doob, Leonard W. "The Strategies Of Psychological Warfare." Public Opinion Quarterly 13.4 (1949): 635–644. SocINDEX with Full Text. Web. 20 February 2015.

^ Wall, Tyler (September 2010).

U.S Psychological Warfare and Civilian Targeting . United States: Vanderbilt University. p. 289 . Retrieved 11 February 2015 .

^ Newitz, Annalee (2024).

Stories are Weapons: Psychological Warfare the American Mind . W.W. Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-88151-6 .

^ Kirdemir, Baris (2019).

Hostile Influence and Emerging Cognitive Threats in Cyberspace (Report). Centre for Economics and Foreign Policy Studies.

JSTOR resrep21052 .

^ Le Bon, Book II, Chapter 3.

^ Winston S. Churchill, "The Scaffolding of Rhetoric", in Randolph S. Churchill, Companion Volume 1, pt. 2, to Youth:  1874–1900, vol. 1 of the Official Biography of Winston Spencer Churchill (London:  Heinmann, 1967):  816–821.

^ Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf , trans. Ralph Manheim (Mariner Books, 1998):  176–186.

^ John Poreba (2010).

"Tongue of Fury, Tongue of Fire: Oratory in the Rise of Hitler and Churchill" .

StrategicDefense.net . Archived from the original on 2016-08-21 . Retrieved 2010-09-02 .

^ Ian Kershaw, Hitler: A Biography (2008) p. 105.

^ Neil Jeffrey Kressel (2013).

Mass Hate: The Global Rise of Genocide and Terror . Springer. p. 141.

ISBN 978-1489960849 .

^ Roger Gill (2006).

Theory and Practice of Leadership . Sage. p. 259.

ISBN 978-1446228777 .

^ Carl J. Couch (2017).

Information Technologies and Social Orders . Taylor & Francis. p. 213.

ISBN 978-1351295185 .

^ F.W. Lambertson, "Hitler, the orator: A study in mob psychology." Quarterly Journal of Speech 28#2 (1942): 123–131.

online ^ Yaniv Levyatan,  "Harold D. Lasswell's analysis of Hitler's speeches." Media History 15#1 (2009): 55–69.

^ Bernays, 19–20.

v t e Disinformation and misinformation Core content Disinformation Misinformation Malinformation Propaganda Disinformation attack Disinformation research Publications about disinformation Mechanisms Psychological Cognitive bias List Denialism Manipulation Misinformation effect Political polarization Psychology of climate change denial Computational Algorithmic radicalization Content moderation Community notes Internet manipulation Social bot Social networking service List User-generated content Economic Fake news websites Surveillance capitalism Programmatic advertising Media and Politics Audience fragmentation Echo chamber (media) Fake news Media bias Media culture Media manipulation Tactics Astroturfing Big Lie Circular reporting Clickbait Conspiracy theory List Culture war Deception Deepfake Disinformation playbook Dog whistle (politics) Doublespeak Doxxing Fake news Fake news website List of fake news websites List of satirical fake news websites False accusation False attribution False balance Fear, uncertainty, and doubt Firehose of falsehood Forgery as covert operation Gaslighting Greenwashing Historical negationism Information warfare Logic and reasoning Cherry picking False dilemma Gish gallop Half-truth Fallacy Formal fallacy Informal fallacy List of fallacies Quote mining Red herring Whataboutism Memetic warfare Pink-slime journalism Psychological warfare Propaganda Black propaganda Counterpropaganda State-sponsored Internet propaganda Perception management Rumors Spin (propaganda) Smear campaign Scientific fabrication Strategy of tension Yellow journalism Related terms Alternative facts Factoid Hoax Infodemic Malinformation Post-truth politics Potemkin village Pseudoscience Tabloid journalism Truthiness Targets and campaigns International Politics Disinformation in the Russian invasion of Ukraine Misinformation in the Gaza war New World Order conspiracy theory Russian disinformation Genocide denial Politics by country List of disinformation attacks by country List of political disinformation website campaigns Antisemitism Holocaust denial International Jewish conspiracy Environmental science Climate change denial Fossil fuel industry ExxonMobil climate change denial Fossil fuels lobby Leaded gasoline Ethyl Corporation Robert A. Kehoe Clair Cameron Patterson Pesticide industry Rachel Carson Silent Spring Red mercury Medicine and Public health 5G misinformation Anti-vaccine activism Lancet MMR autism fraud Vaccines and autism Vaccine misinformation COVID-19 misinformation COVID-19 misinformation by governments COVID-19 vaccine misinformation and hesitancy Birth control misinformation Ebola misinformation GMO conspiracy theories HIV/AIDS denialism Mental illness denial Misinformation related to abortion Tobacco industry playbook Transgender health care misinformation Opposition to water fluoridation Journalism and journalists Safety of journalists Maria Ressa Daily Maverick Rappler The Quint Countering disinformation Academic research Critical thinking Digital literacy Health literacy Information literacy Media literacy Science communication Scientific consensus Scientific literacy List of climate change video games Scientific skepticism Skepticism Truth sandwich Verificado 2018 Watchdog journalism Fact-checking and research Fact-checking Websites List of fact-checking websites Non-profits and charities Africa Check FactCheck.org Full Fact PolitiFact USAFacts Private companies Logically (company) NewsGuard StopFake Other Bellingcat International Fact-Checking Network Media Bias/Fact Check Snopes Quackwatch Projeto Comprova Research Canada Citizen Lab EU East StratCom Task Force Finland Faktabaari New Zealand The Disinformation Project UK Counter disinformation unit Ukraine Center for Countering Disinformation USA Active Measures Working Group Counter Misinformation Team Disinformation Governance Board Countering Foreign Propaganda and Disinformation Act United States Information Agency WikiProjects WikiCred Climate change COVID-19 Medicine Skepticism Vaccine safety v t e Media manipulation Context Bias Crowd psychology Deception Dumbing down False balance Half-truths Media Obfuscation Persuasion Manipulation (psychology) Activism Advocacy group Alternative media Boycott Call-out culture Cancel culture Civil disobedience Culture jamming Demonstrations Deplatforming Grassroots Guerrilla communication Hacktivism Internet Media Occupations Petitions Protests Youth Advertising Advertorial / Native advertising Billboards False Infomercials Mobiles Modeling Radio Sex Slogans Testimonials TV Criticism of advertising Annoyance factor Censorship and mass media regulation Books Broadcast law Burying of scholars Catch and kill Corporate Cover-ups Euphemism Films Historical negationism Internet Political Religious Self Hoaxing Alternative facts April Fools' Deepfake audio Fake news websites Fakelore Fictitious entries Firehose of falsehood Forgery Gaslighting List Literary Lying press Photograph manipulation Racial Urban legend Virus Video manipulation Marketing Branding Loyalty Product Product placement Publicity Research Word of mouth News media Agenda-setting Broadcasting Circus Cycle Emotive conjugation False balance Infotainment Managing Narcotizing dysfunction Newspeak Pseudo-event Scrum Sensationalism Tabloid journalism Political campaigning Advertising Astroturfing Attack ad Canvassing Character assassination Dog whistle Election promises Lawn signs Party platforms (or manifestos) Name recognition Negative Push polling Smear campaign Wedge issue Propaganda Bandwagon Big lie Crowd manipulation Disinformation Fearmongering Framing Indoctrination Loaded language National mythology Rally 'round the flag effect Techniques Psychological warfare Airborne leaflets False flag Fifth column Information (IT) Lawfare Political Public diplomacy Sedition Subversion Public relations Cult of personality Doublespeak Non-apology apology Reputation management Slogans Sound bites Spin Transfer Understatement Weasel words Corporate propaganda Sales Cold calling Door-to-door Pricing Product demonstrations Promotion Spaving Promotional merchandise Telemarketing Related Influence-for-hire Media bias United States Media concentration Media democracy Media ecology Media ethics Media franchise Media influence Media proprietor NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5f4c8b576f‐zfp69
Cached time: 20250814084946
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.582 seconds
Real time usage: 0.724 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1913/1000000
Revision size: 16215/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 174310/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1235/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87435/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.352/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6878636/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  535.713      1 -total
 33.81%  181.111      1 Template:Reflist
 32.97%  176.612      1 Template:Excerpt
 18.49%   99.064      1 Template:War
 17.97%   96.258      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.20%   76.090      1 Template:Cite_AV_media
 13.26%   71.020      1 Template:Short_description
 10.17%   54.467      1 Template:Disinformation
  7.51%   40.241      6 Template:Cite_book
  7.02%   37.625      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26661855:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814084946 and revision id 1284805825. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Crowd_manipulation&oldid=1284805825 " Categories : Crowd psychology Social influence Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 9 April 2025, at 20:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Crowd manipulation 9 languages Add topic

