Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Attachment, immunoevasion, and immunosuppression 2 Destructive enzymes 3 GTPases 4 Toxins Toggle Toxins subsection 4.1 Endotoxins 4.2 Exotoxins 5 Examples 6 Inhibition and control 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Virulence factor 11 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español Français Galego 한국어 Nederlands 日本語 Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of molecules produced by a pathogen that might cause potential harmful effects "Immunoevasion" redirects here. For the antigenic escape mechanism, see Immune evasion .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Virulence factor" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Virulence factors (preferably known as pathogenicity factors or effectors in botany ) are cellular structures, molecules and regulatory systems that enable microbial pathogens ( bacteria , viruses , fungi , and protozoa ) to achieve the following: [ 1 ] [ 2 ] colonization of a niche in the host (this includes movement towards and attachment to host cells) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] immunoevasion, evasion of the host's immune response [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] immunosuppression , inhibition of the host's immune response (this includes leukocidin -mediated cell death) [ 1 ] entry into and exit out of cells (if the pathogen is an intracellular one) [ 4 ] obtain nutrition from the host [ 1 ] Specific pathogens possess a wide array of virulence factors. Some are chromosomally encoded and intrinsic to the bacteria (e.g. capsules and endotoxin ), whereas others are obtained from mobile genetic elements like plasmids and bacteriophages (e.g. some exotoxins).  Virulence factors encoded on mobile genetic elements spread through horizontal gene transfer , and can convert harmless bacteria into dangerous pathogens.  Bacteria like Escherichia coli O157:H7 gain the majority of their virulence from mobile genetic elements.

Gram-negative bacteria secrete a variety of virulence factors at host–pathogen interface , via membrane vesicle trafficking as bacterial outer membrane vesicles for invasion, nutrition and other cell-cell communications.  It has been found that many pathogens have converged on similar virulence factors to battle against eukaryotic host defenses. These obtained bacterial virulence factors have two different routes used to help them survive and grow: The factors are used to assist and promote colonization of the host.  These factors include adhesins , invasins , and antiphagocytic factors.

Bacterial flagella that give motility are included in these virulence factors.

[ 5 ] The factors, including toxins , hemolysins and proteases , bring damage to the host.

Attachment, immunoevasion, and immunosuppression [ edit ] Bacteria produce various adhesins including lipoteichoic acid , trimeric autotransporter adhesins and a wide variety of other surface proteins to attach to host tissue.

Capsules, made of carbohydrate, form part of the outer structure of many bacterial cells including Neisseria meningitidis . Capsules play important roles in immune evasion, as they inhibit phagocytosis , as well as protecting the bacteria while outside the host.

Another group of virulence factors possessed by bacteria are immunoglobulin (Ig) proteases . Immunoglobulins are antibodies expressed and secreted by hosts in response to an infection. These immunoglobulins play a major role in destruction of the pathogen through mechanisms such as opsonization . Some bacteria, such as Streptococcus pyogenes , are able to break down the host's immunoglobulins using proteases.

Viruses also have notable virulence factors. Experimental research, for example, often focuses on creating environments that isolate and identify the role of " niche -specific virulence genes".

These are genes that perform specific tasks within specific tissues/places at specific times; the sum total of niche-specific genes is the virus' virulence . Genes characteristic of this concept are those that control latency in some viruses like herpes.

Murine gamma herpesvirus 68 (γHV68) and human herpesviruses depend on a subset of genes that allow them to maintain a chronic infection by reactivating when specific environmental conditions are met. Even though they are not essential for lytic phases of the virus, these latency genes are important for promoting chronic infection and continued replication within infected individuals.

[ 6 ] Destructive enzymes [ edit ] Some bacteria, such as Streptococcus pyogenes , Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa , produce a variety of enzymes which cause damage to host tissues. Enzymes include hyaluronidase , which breaks down the connective tissue component hyaluronic acid ; a range of proteases and lipases ; DNases , which break down DNA; and hemolysins , which break down a variety of host cells, including red blood cells.

GTPases [ edit ] A major group of virulence factors are proteins that can control the activation levels of GTPases .  There are two ways in which they act.  One is by acting as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) or GTPase-activating protein (GAP) , and proceeding to look like a normally eukaryotic cellular protein.  The other is covalently modifying the GTPase itself.  The first way is reversible; many bacteria like Salmonella have two proteins to turn the GTPases on and off.  The other process is irreversible, using toxins to completely change the target GTPase and shut down or override gene expression.

One example of a bacterial virulence factor acting like a eukaryotic protein is Salmonella protein SopE it acts as a GEF, turning the GTPase on to create more GTP.  It does not modify anything, but overdrives normal cellular internalization process, making it easier for the Bacteria to be colonized within a host cell.

YopT ( Yersinia outer protein T) from Yersinia is an example of modification of the host.  It modifies the proteolytic cleavage of carboxyl terminus of RhoA, releasing RhoA from the membrane.  The mislocalization of RhoA causes downstream effectors to not work.

Toxins [ edit ] A major category of virulence factors are bacterial toxins. These are divided into two groups: endotoxins and exotoxins .

[ 4 ] Endotoxins [ edit ] Endotoxin is a component ( lipopolysaccharide (LPS) ) of the cell wall of gram-negative bacteria. It is the lipid A part of this LPS which is toxic.

[ 4 ] Lipid A is an endotoxin. Endotoxins trigger intense inflammation. They bind to receptors on monocytes causing the release of inflammatory mediators which induce degranulation . As part of this immune response cytokines are released; these can cause the fever and other symptoms seen during disease. If a high amount of LPS is present then septic shock (or endotoxic shock) may result which, in severe cases, can lead to death. As glycolipids (as opposed to peptides), endotoxins are not bound by B or T-cell receptors and do not elicit an adaptive immune response.

Exotoxins [ edit ] Some bacteria secrete exotoxins, which have a wide range of effects, including inhibiting certain biochemical pathways in the host. The two most potent known exotoxins [ 4 ] are the tetanus toxin ( tetanospasmin ) secreted by Clostridium tetani and the botulinum toxin secreted by Clostridium botulinum . Exotoxins are also produced by a range of other bacteria including Escherichia coli ; Vibrio cholerae (causative agent of cholera ); Clostridium perfringens (common causative agent of food poisoning as well as gas gangrene ) and Clostridioides difficile (causative agent of pseudomembranous colitis ). A potent three-protein virulence factor produced by Bacillus anthracis , called anthrax toxin , plays a key role in anthrax pathogenesis. Exotoxins are extremely immunogenic and trigger the humoral response (antibodies target the toxin).

Exotoxins are also produced by some fungi as a competitive resource. The toxins, named mycotoxins , deter other organisms from consuming the food the fungi colonise. As with bacterial toxins, there is a wide array of fungal toxins. Arguably one of the more dangerous mycotoxins is aflatoxin produced by certain species of the genus Aspergillus (notably A. flavus ). If ingested repeatedly, this toxin can cause serious liver damage.

Examples [ edit ] Examples of virulence factors for Staphylococcus aureus are hyaluronidase , protease , coagulase , lipases , deoxyribonucleases and enterotoxins .  Examples for Streptococcus pyogenes are M protein , lipoteichoic acid , hyaluronic acid capsule, destructive enzymes (including streptokinase , streptodornase , and hyaluronidase ), and exotoxins (including streptolysin ).  Examples for Listeria monocytogenes include internalin A, internalin B, listeriolysin O , and actA, all of which are used to help colonize the host.  Examples for Yersinia pestis are an altered form of lipopolysaccharide, type three secretion system, and YopE and YopJ pathogenicity.  The cytolytic peptide Candidalysin is produced during hyphal formation by Candida albicans ; it is an example of a virulence factor from a fungus. Other virulence factors include factors required for biofilm formation (e.g.

sortases ) and integrins (e.g. beta-1 and 3).

[ 7 ] In enteric pathogens such as Salmonella and E. coli, the membrane protein IgaA regulates the Rcs phosphorelay system, which modulates virulence factors including capsule synthesis, biofilm formation, and motility.

Inhibition and control [ edit ] Strategies to target virulence factors and the genes encoding them have been proposed.

[ 8 ] Small molecules being investigated for their ability to inhibit virulence factors and virulence factor expression include alkaloids , [ 9 ] flavonoids , [ 10 ] and peptides .

[ 11 ] Experimental studies are done to characterize specific bacterial pathogens and to identify their specific virulence factors.  Scientists are trying to better understand these virulence factors through identification and analysis to better understand the infectious process in hopes that new diagnostic techniques, specific antimicrobial compounds, and effective vaccines or toxoids may be eventually produced to treat and prevent infection.
There are three general experimental ways for the virulence factors to be identified: biochemically, immunologically, and genetically.  For the most part, the genetic approach is the most extensive way in identifying the bacterial virulence factors.  Bacterial DNA can be altered from pathogenic to non-pathogenic, random mutations may be introduced to their genome, specific genes encoding for membrane or secretory products may be identified and mutated, and genes that regulate virulence genes maybe identified.

Experiments involving Yersinia pseudotuberculosis have been used to change the virulence phenotype of non-pathogenic bacteria to pathogenic.  Because of horizontal gene transfer, it is possible to transfer the a clone of the DNA from Yersinia to a non-pathogenic E. coli and have them express the pathogenic virulence factor.

Transposon , a DNA element inserted at random, mutagenesis of bacteria DNA is also a highly used experimental technique done by scientists.  These transposons carry a marker that can be identified within the DNA.  When placed at random, the transposon may be placed next to a virulence factor or placed in the middle of a virulence factor gene, which stops the expression of the virulence factor.  By doing so, scientists can make a library of the genes using these markers and easily find the genes that cause the virulence factor.

See also [ edit ] Resistance-Nodulation-Cell Division Superfamily (RND) Filamentation References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Casadevall A, Pirofski LA (2009). "Virulence factors and their mechanisms of action: the view from a damage –response framework".

Journal of Water and Health .

7 (Supplement 1): S2 – S18 .

doi : 10.2166/wh.2009.036 .

PMID 19717929 .

^ a b c Ryding S (2021).

"What are Virulence Factors?" . News-Medical.Net . Retrieved 3 June 2021 .

^ Cross, Alan S (2008).

"What is a virulence factor?" .

Critical Care .

12 (6): 197.

doi : 10.1186/cc7127 .

PMC 2646308 .

PMID 19090973 .

^ a b c d Levinson, W. (2010).

Review of Medical Microbiology and Immunology (11th ed.). McGraw-Hill.

^ Duan, Q; Zhou, M; Zhu, L; Zhu, G (January 2013). "Flagella and bacterial pathogenicity".

Journal of Basic Microbiology .

53 (1): 1– 8.

doi : 10.1002/jobm.201100335 .

PMID 22359233 .

S2CID 22002199 .

^ Knipe, Howley, David, Peter (2013).

Fields Virology, 6th Edition . Philadelphia, PA, USA: LIPPINCOTT WILLIAMS & WILKINS. p. 254.

ISBN 978-1-4511-0563-6 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Bien, Justyna; Sokolova, Olga; Bozko, Przemyslaw (21 May 2018).

"Characterization of Virulence Factors of Staphylococcus aureus : Novel Function of Known Virulence Factors That Are Implicated in Activation of Airway Epithelial Proinflammatory Response" .

Journal of Pathogens .

2011 : 601905.

doi : 10.4061/2011/601905 .

PMC 3335658 .

PMID 22567334 .

^ Keen, E. C. (December 2012).

"Paradigms of pathogenesis: Targeting the mobile genetic elements of disease" .

Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology .

2 : 161.

doi : 10.3389/fcimb.2012.00161 .

PMC 3522046 .

PMID 23248780 .

^ Deborah T. Hung; Elizabeth A. Shakhnovich; Emily Pierson; John J. Mekalanos (2005).

"Small-molecule inhibitor of Vibrio cholerae virulence and intestinal colonization" .

Science .

310 (5748): 670– 674.

Bibcode : 2005Sci...310..670H .

doi : 10.1126/science.1116739 .

PMID 16223984 .

S2CID 30557147 .

^ T.P. Tim Cushnie; Andrew J. Lamb (2011).

"Recent advances in understanding the antibacterial properties of flavonoids" .

International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents .

38 (2): 99– 107.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2011.02.014 .

PMID 21514796 .

^ Oscar Cirioni; Roberto Ghiselli; Daniele Minardi; Fiorenza Orlando; Federico Mocchegiani; Carmela Silvestri; Giovanni Muzzonigro; Vittorio Saba; Giorgio Scalise; Naomi Balaban & Andrea Giacometti (2007).

"RNAIII-inhibiting peptide affects biofilm formation in a rat model of staphylococcal ureteral stent infection" .

Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy .

51 (12): 4518– 4520.

doi : 10.1128/AAC.00808-07 .

PMC 2167994 .

PMID 17875996 .

v t e Toxins cardiotoxin cytotoxin enterotoxin hemotoxin hepatotoxin neurotoxin phototoxin Bacterial toxins Exotoxin Gram positive Bacilli Clostridium : tetani Tetanospasmin Tetanolysin perfringens Alpha toxin Enterotoxin difficile A B botulinum Botox Other: Anthrax toxin Listeriolysin O Cocci Streptolysin Leukocidin Panton–Valentine leukocidin Staphylococcus Staphylococcus aureus alpha / beta / delta Exfoliatin Toxic shock syndrome toxin Staphylococcal Enterotoxin B (SEB) Actinomycetota Cord factor Diphtheria toxin Gram negative Shiga toxin /Verotoxin E. coli heat-stable enterotoxin Cholera toxin / Heat-labile enterotoxin Pertussis toxin Pseudomonas exotoxin Extracellular adenylate cyclase Mechanisms type I Superantigen type II Pore-forming toxin type III AB toxin / AB5 Endotoxin Lipopolysaccharide Lipid A Bacillus thuringiensis delta endotoxin Cry1Ac Cry3Bb1 Other B. thuringiensis toxins Cry6Aa Cry34Ab1 Virulence factor Clumping factor A Fibronectin binding protein A Mycotoxins Aflatoxin Amatoxin ( alpha-amanitin , beta-amanitin , gamma-amanitin , epsilon-amanitin , Amanullin , Amanullinic acid , Amaninamide , Amanin , Proamanullin ) beta-Nitropropionic acid Citrinin Cytochalasin Ergotamine Fumonisin ( Fumonisin B1 , Fumonisin B2 , Fumonisin B3, Fumonisin B4 ) Gliotoxin Ibotenic acid Lolitrem B Muscarine Muscimol Orellanine Ochratoxin Patulin Phallotoxin ( Phalloidin ) Satratoxin-H Sterigmatocystin T-2 mycotoxin Trichothecene Vomitoxin Zeranol Zearalenone Plant toxins Amygdalin Anisatin Antiarin Brucine Chaconine Cicutoxin Coniine Daphnin Delphinine Divicine Djenkolic acid Falcarinol Gossypol Helenalin Ledol Linamarin Lotaustralin Mimosine Oenanthotoxin Oleandrin Persin Protoanemonin Pseudaconitine Retronecine Resiniferatoxin Scopolamine Solamargine Solanidine Solanine Solasodamine Solasodine Solasonine Solauricidine Solauricine Strychnine Swainsonine Tagetitoxin Tinyatoxin Tomatine Toxalbumin Abrin Ricin Tutin Invertebrate toxins Scorpion : Androctonus australis hector insect toxin Charybdotoxin Maurotoxin Agitoxin Margatoxin Slotoxin Scyllatoxin Hefutoxin HgeTx1 HsTx1 Kaliotoxin Lq2 Birtoxin Bestoxin BmKAEP Phaiodotoxin Imperatoxin Pi3 Spider : Latrotoxin Alpha-latrotoxin CSTX Cupiennins PhTx3 Stromatoxin Vanillotoxin Huwentoxin Mollusca : Conotoxin Eledoisin Onchidal Saxitoxin Tetrodotoxin Vertebrate toxins Fish : Ciguatoxin Tetrodotoxin Amphibian : (+)-Allopumiliotoxin 267A Batrachotoxin Bufotoxins Arenobufagin Bufotalin Bufotenin Cinobufagin Marinobufagin Epibatidine Histrionicotoxin Pumiliotoxin 251D Samandarin Samandaridine Tarichatoxin Zetekitoxin AB Reptile / Snake venom : Bungarotoxin α-Bungarotoxin β-Bungarotoxin Calciseptine Taicatoxin Calcicludine Cardiotoxin III note: some toxins are produced by lower species and pass through intermediate species Category v t e Self-replicating organic structures Cellular life Bacteria Archaea Eukaryota Animalia Fungi Plantae Protista Incertae sedis Parakaryon Biological dark matter Virus dsDNA virus Giant virus ssDNA virus dsRNA virus (+)ssRNA virus (−)ssRNA virus ssRNA-RT virus dsDNA-RT virus Subviral agents Viroid Pospiviroidae Avsunviroidae Helper-virus dependent Satellite ssRNA satellite virus dsDNA satellite virus ( Virophage ) ssDNA satellite virus ssDNA satellite dsRNA satellite ssRNA satellite ( Virusoid ) Satellite-like nucleic acids RNA DNA Other Defective interfering particle RNA DNA Prion Mammalian prion Fungal prion Nucleic acid self-replication Mobile genetic elements Mobilome Horizontal gene transfer Genomic island Transposable element Class I or retrotransposon Class II or DNA transposon Plasmid Fertility Resistance Col Degradative Virulence / Ti Cryptic Cosmid Fosmid Phagemid Group I intron Group II intron Retrozyme Other aspects DNA replication RNA replication Chromosome Linear Circular Extrachromosomal DNA Secondary chromosome Genome Gene Gene duplication Non-coding DNA Origin of replication Replicon Endogenous viral element Provirus Prophage Endogenous retrovirus Transpoviron Repeated sequences in DNA Tandem repeat Interspersed repeat Endosymbiosis Mitochondrion Mitosome Hydrogenosome Plastid Chloroplast Chromoplast Gerontoplast Leucoplast Apicoplast Kappa organism Organs Bacteriome Trophosome Nitroplast Abiogenesis Last universal common ancestor Earliest known life forms ?

RNA life Ribozyme † Protocell Coacervate Proteinoid Sulphobe Research Model lipid bilayer Jeewanu See also Organism Cell Cell division Artificial cell Non-cellular life Synthetic virus Viral vector Helper dependent virus ?

Nanobacterium ?

Nanobe Cancer cell HeLa Clonally transmissible cancer Virome Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Virulence_factor&oldid=1299980270 " Category : Virulence factors Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2014 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 15:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Virulence factor 11 languages Add topic

