Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Citing the Decretum 1.1.1 Modern form 1.1.2 Obsolescent form 1.1.3 Obsolete form 2 Author 3 Textual history 4 Criticism 5 Sources 6 Influence Toggle Influence subsection 6.1 Importance in Western law 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Decretum Gratiani 21 languages Asturianu Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 12th century anthology of canon law Page from medieval manuscript of the Decretum Gratiani .

Part of a series on the Canon law of the Catholic Church Ius vigens (current law) 1983 Code of Canon Law Omnium in mentem Magnum principium Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Ad tuendam fidem Ex corde Ecclesiae Indulgentiarum Doctrina Praedicate evangelium Veritatis gaudium Custom Matrimonial nullity trial reforms of Pope Francis Documents of the Second Vatican Council Christus Dominus Lumen gentium Optatam totius Orientalium ecclesiarum Presbyterorum ordinis Sacrosanctum concilium Precepts of the Church Legal history Jus antiquum ( c.

33 –1140) Ancient Church Orders Didache The Apostolic Constitutions Canons of the Apostles Collections of ancient canons Collectiones canonum Dionysianae Collectio canonum quadripartita Collectio canonum Quesnelliana Collectio canonum Wigorniensis Gelasian Decree Symmachian forgeries Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals Donation of Constantine Gregorian Reform Lay investiture controversy Dictatus papae Libertas ecclesiae Plenitudo potestatis Jus novum ( c.

1140 –1563) Corpus Juris Canonici Decretum Gratiani Decretist Canon Episcopi Margaritae Jus commune Decretals of Gregory IX Decretalist Regulæ Juris Extravagantes Liber Septimus Jus novissimum ( c.

1563 –1918) Council of Trent Benedictus Deus Tametsi Apostolicae Sedis moderationi Jus codicis (1918-present) 1917 Code of Canon Law Ecclesiae Sanctae 1983 Code of Canon Law Other Contractum trinius Papal judge-delegate Right of option Eastern law Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII Nomocanon Eparchy Exarchate Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Protosyncellus Liturgical law Latin Church General Roman Calendar Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite General Instruction of the Roman Missal Code of Rubrics Sacrosanctum Concilium Mysterii Paschalis Musicam sacram Scripturarum thesaurus Liturgiam authenticam Quattuor abhinc annos Ecclesia Dei Summorum Pontificum Magnum principium Traditionis custodes Red Mass Holy day of obligation Sacramental law Communicatio in sacris Ex opere operato Omnium in mentem Validity and liceity Sacraments Holy Orders Impediment (Catholic canon law) Abstemius Defect of birth Obligation of celibacy Nullity of Sacred Ordination Apostolicae curae Dimissorial letters Episcopal consecrators Approbation (Catholic canon law) Confession Penitential canons Paenitentiale Theodori Seal of the Confessional Internal and external forum Note on the importance of the internal forum and the inviolability of the Sacramental Seal Apostolic Penitentiary Canon penitentiary Complicit absolution Sacramentum Poenitentiae Eucharist Eucharistic discipline Canon 915 Celebret Mass stipend Sacramentals Indulgence Indulgentiarum doctrina Sacred places Altars Major basilica Minor basilica Oratory (chapel) Sacred times Feast days Fast days and abstinence Paenitemini Holy day of obligation Matrimonial law Canonical form (Latin Church) Tametsi Ne Temere Banns of marriage Declaration of Nullity Dignitas connubii Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis Vetitum Defender of the Bond Impediments to Marriage Affinity Clandestinity Impediment of crime Disparity of cult Ligamen Public propriety Matrimonial dispensation Ratum sed non consummatum Sanatio in radice Natural marriage Pauline privilege Petrine privilege Supreme authority, particular churches , and canonical structures Supreme authority of the Church Roman Pontiff Papal conclave College of Bishops Supra-diocesan/eparchal structures College of Cardinals Conference of bishops Synod of Bishops Particular churches Churches sui juris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Local particular churches Appointment of bishops Abbacy nullius Apostolic vicariate Apostolic vicar Apostolic administration Apostolic administrator Diocese/Archdiocese Aeque principaliter Cathedraticum In persona episcopi Diocesan Curia Moderator of the Curia Chancery Deanery Vicar forane Eparchy Eparchal curia Military ordinariate Mission sui juris Personal ordinariate Anglicanorum Coetibus Juridic persons Parish Team of priests in solidum Collegiate church Parish register Lay trusteeism Roman Curia Dicastery Congregation Pontifical council Personal prelature Types of membership of Opus Dei Association of the Christian faithful Vicar general Quinquennial visit ad limina Jurisprudence Canonical coronation Canonically crowned images Computation of time Custom Delegata potestas non potest delegari Derogation Dispensation Taxa Innocentiana Faculty Indult Impediment Donation Interpretation Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts Jurisdiction Peritus Obreption & subreption Obrogation Promulgation Resignation of the Roman Pontiff Sede vacante Simony Vacatio legis Validity and liceity Visitation Apostolic visitor Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Theology Ecclesiology Treatise on Law Determinatio Temporal goods (property) Benefice Cathedraticum Contract law Mass stipend Stole fee Temporalities Law of persons Person (Catholic canon law) Formal act of defection from the Catholic Church Canonical age Emancipation Exemption Heresy Clerics Secular clergy Regular clergy Obligation of celibacy Clerics and public office Incardination and excardination Laicization (dispensation) Canonical faculties Office Canonical provision Canonical election Juridic and physical persons Jus patronatus Associations of the faithful Consecrated life Canonical documents Acta Apostolicae Sedis Acta Sanctae Sedis Censor librorum Imprimatur Imprimi potest Notary Protonotary apostolic Apostolic constitution Canon Concordat Decree Decretal Encyclical Motu proprio Ordinance Papal brief Papal bull Penitential Positive law Rescript Parish register Ecclesiastical Latin Penal law Canon 1324 Canon 1397 §2 Censure (Catholic canon law) De delictis gravioribus Complicit absolution Crimen sollicitationis Excommunication List of excommunicable offences in the Catholic Church List of people excommunicated by the Catholic Church List of cardinals excommunicated by the Catholic Church Interdict Laicization (penal) Latae sententiae and ferendae sententiae Lifetime of prayer and penance Canonical admonitions Ecclesiastical prison Procedural law Pars statica (tribunals & ministers/parties) Tribunals Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura Tribunal of the Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Ministers of Justice Judicial Vicar / Officialis Auditor Parties Defender of the Bond Procurator Pars dynamica (trial procedure) Dignitas connubii (matrimonial causes) Appeal as from an abuse Presumption Penal procedure Vos estis lux mundi Canonization Congregation for the Causes of Saints Maiorem hac dilectionem Advocatus Diaboli Oblatio vitae Positio Beatification and canonization process in 1914 Election of the Roman Pontiff Current law Universi Dominici gregis Papal renunciation Reforms of Pope Benedict XVI Historical Cum proxime Jus exclusivae Papal appointment Aeterni Patris Filius Romano Pontifici eligendo Ingravescentem aetatem Ubi periculum Quia propter Legal practice and scholarship List of legal abbreviations Academic degrees Licentiate of Canon Law Doctor of Canon Law Doctor of both laws Journals and Professional Societies Canon Law Society of America The Jurist Faculties of canon law Catholic University of America School of Canon Law Canonists Medieval Gratian Hostiensis Jean Lemoine Raymond of Penyafort Rufinus Johannes Teutonicus Geoffrey of Trani Burchard of Worms Brocard Modern & Contemporary Eugenio Corecco John D. Faris Pietro Gasparri Ladislas Orsy Edward N. Peters Law of consecrated life Solemn vow Exclaustration Manifestation of Conscience Canonical erection of a house of religious Pontifical right Diocesan right Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Institute of consecrated life Religious institute Congregation Order Monasticism Canons regular Mendicant orders Clerics regular Secular institute Cum Sanctissimus Primo Feliciter Provida Mater Ecclesia Society of apostolic life Decretum laudis Catholicism portal v t e The Decretum Gratiani , also known as the Concordia discordantium canonum or Concordantia discordantium canonum or simply as the Decretum , is a collection of Catholic canon law compiled and written in the 12th century as a legal textbook by the jurist known as Gratian. It forms the first part of the collection of six legal texts, which together became known as the Corpus Juris Canonici . It was used as the main source of law by canonists of the Catholic Church until the Decretals , promulgated by Pope Gregory IX in 1234, obtained legal force, after which it was the cornerstone of the Corpus Juris Canonici , in force until 1917.

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] In the first half of the 12th century Gratian , clusinus episcopus , [ 2 ] probably a jurist of the ecclesiastical forum and a teacher, rubricator at the monastery of Saints Nabor and Felix (according to the Bolognese Odofredus Denariis [13th century]) and starting from the 18th century believed to have been a Camaldolese monk, [ 3 ] composed the work he called Concordia discordantium canonum , and others titled Nova collectio, Decreta, Corpus juris canonici , or the more commonly accepted name, Decretum Gratiani , a living text, characterized by multiple editorial stages. He did this to obviate the difficulties which beset the study and the forensic application of practical, external theology ( theologia practica externa ), i.e., the study and the forensic use of canon law. In spite of its great reputation and wide diffusion, the Decretum has never been recognized by the Church as an official collection.

[ 4 ] The so-called vulgata or vulgate version (an advanced editorial stage) of the Decretum is divided into three parts ( ministeria , negotia , sacramenta ).

The first part is divided into 101 distinctions ( distinctiones ), the first 20 of which form an introduction to the general principles of canon law ( tractatus decretalium ); the remainder constitutes a tractatus ordinandorum , relative to ecclesiastical persons and function.

The second part contains 36 causes ( causæ ), divided into questions ( quæstiones ), and treat of ecclesiastical administration, procedural issues and marriage.

Quaestio 3 of Causa 33 on penance ( De penitentia ) is treated separately and subdivided into 7 distinctions.

The third part De consecratione deals with sacramental and liturgical law and contains 5 distinctions.

Each distinction or question contains dicta Gratiani , or maxims of Gratian, and canones . Gratian himself raises questions and brings forward difficulties, which he answers by quoting auctoritates , i. e. canons of councils, decretals of the popes, texts of the Scripture or of the Fathers. These are the canones ; the entire remaining portion, even the summaries of the canons and the chronological indications, are called the maxims or dicta Gratiani .

Many auctoritates have been inserted in the Decretum by authors of a later date. These are the Paleae , so called from Paucapalea , the name of the principal commentator on the Decretum . The Roman revisers of the 16th century (1566–1582) corrected the text of the "Decree" and added many critical notes designated by the words Correctores Romani .

Citing the Decretum [ edit ] The Decretum is cited by referring to the larger units of the distinction or the cause and question, and then the specific canon or dictum. For clarity, the distinctions of Causa 33, quaestio 3 of the second part are referred to as De penitentia (or De pen.

), while the distinctions of the third part are referred to as De consecratione (or De cons.

). The Part is usually not included, as the citation form is different for each.

Citation styles for the Decretum have changed over time and can generally be categorised under the modern, obsolescent, and obsolete forms.

[ 5 ] Modern form [ edit ] This form, common since the twentieth century, cites all units in Arabic numerals, from largest unit to smallest unit.

Distinctions are referenced by an uppercase "D.", Causes by an uppercase "C.", questions by a lowercase "q.", and canons by a lowercase "c.". Gratian's dicta are referred to with a lowercase "d. a. c." ( dictum ante canonem , for commentary preceding the canon) or "d. p. c." ( dictum post canonem , for commentary following the canon).

Examples: [Part I] D. 23 c.7 [Part II] C. 15 q. 2 c. 4 [Part II] C. 23 q. 8 d. p. c. 25 [Part II, De penitentia ] D. 3 de pen. c. 24 [Part III] D. 2 de cons. c. 82 Obsolescent form [ edit ] Commonly used between the seventeenth and early twentieth centuries, this form generally begins with a reference to the smallest unit in Arabic numerals, followed by the Distinction or Cause in Roman numerals and (if required) the question in Arabic numerals, e.g. "c. 5, C.3 q.1".

Obsolete form [ edit ] This is the form used by medieval and early modern writers, falling out of use after the eighteenth century. Major divisions ( Distinctio, Causa, quaestio ) were cited with (usually Roman) numerals. Since the numbering of the Decretum 's capitula only became standard in the sixteenth century, canons were cited by their opening word(s). Two or more canons beginning with the same word/phrase might be distinguished with numbers, e.g.

In Christo ii .

Examples (using the same references as above): xxiii dist. episcopus xv q. ii felix xxiii q. viii § hinc datur iii de pen[itentia] totam ii de cons. In Christo ii Early commentators might also refer to the first few canons by number (e.g.

cap. iij for the third canon of a distinction), or to the last few canons as cap. antepenult.

( "capitulum antepenultimum" , that is, third to last), cap. penult.

(or pen.

or pe.

, second to last), and cap. fin.

( "capitulum finale" ) or cap. ult.

(last).

Author [ edit ] Gratian Gratian ( Medieval Latin : Gratianus ) was a canon lawyer from Etruria , probably operating in the former feudal state of Matilda of Tuscany (mainly in Tuscany and Emilia region ) as well as in Reims (1131), Rome , Bologna , Venice (1143) and Chiusi . He flourished in the second quarter of the twelfth century. He died on 10 August around the middle of the 12th century as bishop of Chiusi in Tuscany . Little else is known about him.

[ 6 ] He is sometimes incorrectly referred to as Franciscus Gratianus, [ 7 ] Johannes Gratian, [ 3 ] or Giovanni Graziano. For a long time he was believed to have been born around 1100, at Ficulle in Umbria , based on a chronicle of illustrious men of the 14th century attributed to an exponent of the powerful Colonna family , who had possessions in Ficulle . He was said to have become a monk at Camaldoli and then taught at the monastery of St. Felix in Bologna and devoted his life to studying theology and canon law, [ 8 ] but contemporary scholars do not attach credibility to these traditions.

Since the 11th century, some cities of central-northern Italy such as Arezzo , Pisa , Bologna had been the centre of the study of Roman law , after the Corpus Juris Civilis was rediscovered in western Europe. In the second half of the 11th century and at the beginning of the 12th century Roman law was generally studied and applied only in the cities (seat of the diocese) in which there was an imperial Prefecture, where imperial and ecclesiastical jurists (and courts) coexisted (such as Pisa and Bologna ), with mutual interference. However, from the first editorial stages of the Decretum it is clear that Gratian had little knowledge of Roman law and that he had a great sense of depth in the disputes dealt with in the ecclesiastical seats, especially in the appeal judgments dealt with in the Roman curia. Therefore, some scholars today exclude that he was trained in Justinian Roman law and that (at the beginning of his career) he worked mainly in certain cities (such as Arezzo , Pisa or Bologna ) where Roman law was known and applied for years, it being plausible that he came from an episcopal city in which all jurisdiction, both civil and ecclesiastical, was dealt with by the only court present: the ecclesiastical one. Perhaps also for this reason he feels the need to create a legal work to be applied only in ecclesial courts and only for cases relating to canon law, putting an end to the mixture between civil and ecclesiastical jurisdictions. It is no coincidence that Dante Alighieri writes that he helped "one and the other forum", that is, he separated the canonical jurisdiction from the civil one.

[ 9 ] Gratian's work was an attempt, using early scholastic method, to reconcile seemingly contradictory canons from previous centuries. Gratian quoted a great number of authorities, including the Bible , papal and conciliar legislation, church fathers such as Augustine of Hippo , and secular law in his efforts to reconcile the canons. Gratian found a place in Dante 's Paradise among the doctors of the Church: [ 10 ] This next flamelet issues from Gratian's smile, he who gave such help to the ecclesiastical and civil spheres as is acceptable in Paradise.

[ 11 ] He has long been acclaimed as Pater Juris Canonici ( Latin : "Father of Canon Law"), a title he shares with his successor St. Raymond of Penyafort . Gratian was the father and the first teacher of the scientia nova which he himself coined: the new canon law or ius novum . Many of his disciples have become highly renowned canonists.

Textual history [ edit ] The vulgate version of Gratian's collection was completed at some point after the Second Council of the Lateran of 1139, which it quotes. Research by Anders Winroth established that some manuscripts of an early version of Gratian's text, which differs considerably from the mainstream textual tradition, have survived.

[ 12 ] With later commentaries and supplements, the work was incorporated into the Corpus Juris Canonici . The Decretum quickly became the standard textbook for students of canon law throughout Europe, but it never received any formal, official recognition by the papacy. Only the Codex Juris Canonici of 1917 put it out of use.

[ 13 ] As late as 1997, scholars commonly set the date of completion at 1140, but this accuracy in dating is not possible after Anders Winroth 's groundbreaking scholarship.

[ 14 ] Winroth's research shows that the Decretum existed in two published recensions .

[ 15 ] The first dates to sometime after 1139, while the second dates to 1150 at the latest. There are several major differences between the two recensions: The first recension is a more coherent and analytical work.

The second recension places a much greater emphasis on papal primacy and power.

The second recension includes Roman law extracts taken directly from the Corpus Juris Civilis , whereas the first recension does not demonstrate substantial familiarity with Roman jurisprudence.

These differences led Winroth to conclude that Roman law was not as far developed by 1140 as scholars had previously thought. He has also argued that the second recension was due not to the original author of the first recension (whom he calls Gratian 1), but rather another jurist versed in Roman law.

[ 16 ] However, Winroth's thesis of two Gratians remains controversial.

[ 17 ] An illustration from a 13th-century manuscript of the work, illustrating the kinds of blood relatives and common ancestry which made marriage impossible and contracted marriages null. It has since then been changed so third cousins can now marry.

This field of inquiry is hampered by ignorance of the compiler's identity and the existence of manuscripts with abbreviated versions of the text or variant versions not represented by Winroth's two recensions. One of these is the manuscript St. Gall, Stiftsbibliothek , 673 (=Sg), [ further explanation needed ] which some have argued contains the earliest known draft (Larrainzar's borrador ) of the Decretum , [ 18 ] but which other scholars have argued contains an abbreviation of the first recension expanded with texts taken from the second recension.

[ 19 ] Criticism [ edit ] During the Reformation , individuals such as Martin Luther strongly criticized the claims of papal primacy within the Decretum .

[ 20 ] One of Luther's chief concerns surrounded Distinctio 40 (Chapter " Si papa ") which reads: If the pope fails, and neglects fraternal salvation, if he is found useless, and remiss in his works, and moreover silent from good, which offends him more, and nevertheless leads countless peoples with him as the first slave of hell, with himself to be scourged with many plagues for eternity. No mortal may presume to rebuke the sins of this man, because he himself is to judge all.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Additional concerns [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] about papal primacy in the context of 2 Thessalonians 2:4 were raised regarding Distinctio 96 chapter 7 which reads: It is quite clearly shown that the pontiff cannot be bound by the secular power, which is evidently called a god by the pious prince Constantine, since it is clear that even God cannot be judged by men.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Sources [ edit ] Gratian's sources were Roman law, the Bible , the writings of (or attributed to) the Church Fathers , papal decretals , the acts of church councils and synods . In most cases, Gratian obtained the material not from a direct reading of the sources but rather through intermediate collections. Thanks to the research of modern scholars (in particular Charles Munier, Titus Lenherr, and Peter Landau) it is now known that Gratian made use of a relatively-small number of collections in the composition of most of the Decretum : Anselm (II) of Lucca 's canonical collection, originally compiled around 1083 and existing in four main recensions: A, B, Bb, and C. Peter Landau suggests that Gratian probably employed a manuscript containing an expanded form of recension A which he calls recension A’; the Collectio tripartita attributed to Ivo of Chartres , usually thought to date to 1095; the Panormia of Ivo of Chartres , also usually dated to 1095, although several scholars have argued for a later date and some even question Ivo's authorship; Gregory of St. Grisogono 's Polycarpus , completed some time after 1111; the Collectio canonum trium librorum (Collection in Three Books), inspired by the doctrines of Paschal II and the reform of the Church, composed in Italy (probably in Pistoia , Tuscany , by an anonymous Roman canonist) between 1111 and 1123 [ 30 ] or 1124; [ 31 ] the Lex Romana Visigothorum ; secular texts such as Plato ; the Glossa ordinaria to the Bible.

Other sources are known to have been used in the composition of particular sections of the Decretum : Isidore of Seville 's Etymologies for DD. 1-9 (the so-called Treatise on Laws ); Alger of Liège 's Liber de misericordia et iustitia for C. 1; the Sententiae magistri A.

for the De penitentia and some other sections.

Influence [ edit ] Thirteenth-century modest copy of the famous manuscript Decretum Gratiani . Preserved in the Ghent University Library .

[ 32 ] Gratian himself named his work Concordia Discordantium Canonum – "Concord of Discordant Canons". The name is fitting: Gratian tried to harmonize apparently contradictory canons with each other, by discussing different interpretations and deciding on a solution, as a judge in a case. This dialectical approach allowed for other law professors to work with the Decretum and to develop their own solutions and commentaries. These legists are known as the decretists .

... the Concordance of Discordant Canons or Decretum served the function of giving the canonists a text like that of the Corpus Iuris Civilis for the civilians or the bible for the theologians.

[ 33 ] These commentaries were called glosses . Editions printed in the 15th, 16th or 17th century frequently included the glosses along with the text. Collections of glosses were called "gloss apparatus" or Lectura in Decretum (see also glossator ). Systematic commentaries were called Summae . Some of these Summae were soon in circulation as well and obtained the same level of fame as the Decretum itself. Early commentators included Paucapalea and Magister Rolandus . The most important commentators were probably Rufin of Bologna (died before 1192) and Huguccio (died 1210). Less well-known was the commentary of Simon of Bisignano , which consisted of the Glosses on the Decretum and the Summa Simonis .

Peter Lombard borrowed and adapted from the Decretum when discussing penance in his Sentences (c. 1150).

[ 34 ] Importance in Western law [ edit ] Because of its influence as a source of canon law, the Decretum served as an influence for 12th-century jurists in the development of Western legal systems and their rules of evidence, which in canon law (including in the Decretum) did not include trial by ordeal and by battle.

[ 35 ] The same author, Woods, called the Decretum "the first comprehensive and systematic legal treatise in the history of the West, and perhaps in the history of mankind – if by 'comprehensive' is meant the attempt to embrace virtually the entire law of a given polity, and if by 'systematic' is meant the express effort to codify that law as a single body, in which all parts are viewed as interacting to form a whole." The Decretum made a direct contribution to the development of Western law in areas that it dealt with such as marriage, property and inheritance. Specific concepts preferred included consent for marriage, and wrongful intent in determining whether a certain act constituted a crime.

[ 35 ] The Corpus Juris Civilis and Digesta were 'comprehensive' and preceded it, and so did the 'systematic' Institutes but covered only ' private law '.

References [ edit ] ^ "Decretals of Gregory IX" . Code of Canon Law - IntraText . Retrieved 24 May 2020 .

^ Reali, Francesco (ed.), Graziano da Chiusi e la sua opera , 2009, pp. 63-73 and p. 244 has found and re-evaluated a Kalendarium of the Sienese Church owned by the Library of the Intronati of Siena (Ms FI2, f. 5v) in which, in Carolina minuscule writing with a date that at most can be placed in the mid-12th century, reads the following (after Augusti IIII idus Obiit ...

): et gratianus clusinus episcopus ; Reali observes that the text conforms to another reliable source of the 12th century, in which the author of the Decretum (who drafted the work in 1130) is referred to as "Gratianus clusinus episcopus" (Robertus de Monte, Cronica, Bethman [ed.], MGH Scriptores VI, Hanover 1844, p. 490) and that other sources of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries also speak of Gratian as bishop or as bishop of Chiusi.

^ a b Van Hove, Alphonse (1909).

"Johannes Gratian" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 6. New York: Robert Appleton Co . Retrieved 19 September 2014 .

^ Kuttner, Stephan (23–27 July 1984). "Research on Gratian: Acta and Agenda". In Linehan, Peter (ed.).

Proceedings of the Seventh International Congress of Medieval Canon Law, Cambridge . Monumenta Iuris Canonici. Series C: Subsidia. Vatican City: Vatican Library (published 1988). pp.

3– 26.

ISBN 8821005704 .

^ Brundage, James (2014).

Medieval Canon Law . London and New York: Taylor & Francis. pp.

192– 3.

^ "Gratianus, Franciscus" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). 1911. pp.

378– 379.

^ "Franciscus Gratianus" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. XI (9th ed.). 1880. p. 60.

^ Noonan, John T. (1979). "Gratian Slept Here: The Changing Identity of the Father of the Systematic Study of Canon Law".

Traditio .

35 : 145– 172.

doi : 10.1017/S0362152900015038 .

S2CID 148787058 .

^ Reali, Francesco, "Alle origini del diritto civile europeo" , in Studia Gratiana 30 (2020), 27–114 ^ "4. Sun" .

Dante's Paradiso (lecture notes). University of Texas at Austin . Retrieved 3 February 2023 .

^ Dante , Paradiso , Canto X , accessed 25 June 2013 ^ Winroth (Cambridge 2004), 138 ^ Crompton (2006):174 ^ Hartmann & Pennington, History of Medieval Canon Law in the Classical Period , pg. 7.

^ Winroth, (Cambridge, 2004), 3 ^ Winroth, (Cambridge, 2004), 146–174 ^ See most recently Atria Larson, Master of Penance: Gratian and the Development of Penitential Thought and Law, ca. 1120-1215 , Washington, DC: Catholic University Press, 2013, arguing for even greater complexity in the addition and adaptation of the text of the Decretum .

^ Larrainzar, Carlos (1999). "El borrador de la 'Concordia' de Graciano: Sankt Gallen, Stiftsbibliothek MS 673 (=Sg)".

Ius Ecclesiae: Rivista internazionale di diritto canonico (in Spanish) (11): 593– 666.

^ Lehnherr, Titus, Titus "Ist die Handschrift 673 der St. Galler Stiftsbibliothek (Sg) der Entwurf zu Gratians Dekret?: Versuch einer Antwort aus Beobachtungen an D.31 und D.32" (unpublished paper) Archived 2012-04-02 at the Wayback Machine ; Anders Winroth, "Recent Work on the Making of Gratian's Decretum ", Bulletin of Medieval Canon Law , n.s. 26 (2004–2006): 1–29; John Wei, "A Reconsideration of St. Gall, Stiftsbibliothek 673 (Sg) in light of the Sources of Distinctions 5–7 of the De penitentia ", Bulletin of Medieval Canon Law , n.s. 27 (2007): 141–180.

^ Luther, Martin (1659). Lauterbach, Antonius; Aurifaber, John (eds.).

Dris Martini Lutheri Colloquia Mensalia . Translated by Bell, Henrie. William Du-Gard. p. 409.

^ Gratien (1582).

Decretum Gratiani emendatum et notationibus illustratum, unà cum glossis, Gregorii XIII, pont. max. jussu editum (in Latin). In aedibus populi romani. p. 259.

^ Gratian (1512).

"Digitale Bibliothek - Münchener Digitalisierungszentrum" .

daten.digitale-sammlungen.de (in Latin). Basil. p. Folio 41 . Retrieved 2023-02-03 .

^ Gratian.

Decretum Gratiani cum Glossa ordinaria Bartholomaei Brixiensis et glossulis . Vatican. p. 33v.

^ Davenant, John; Allport, Josiah (1831).

An Exposition of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians . Hamilton, Adams and Company. p. 285.

^ The Gospel and the great Apostasy; or, Popery contrasted with pure Christianity, in the light of history and scripture . Religious Tract Society. 1799. p. 111.

^ The Workes of the Right Reverend Father in God Gervase Babington, Late Bishop of Worcester . 1615. p. 237.

^ Clarke, T. (1621).

The Popes Deadly Wound: Tending to Resolue All Men, in the Chiefe and Principall Points Now in Controuersie Betweene the Papists and Vs . Thomas Snodham. p. 3.

^ "Digitale Bibliothek - Münchener Digitalisierungszentrum" .

daten.digitale-sammlungen.de . Retrieved 2022-12-04 .

^ Gratien (1582).

Decretum Gratiani emendatum et notationibus illustratum, unà cum glossis , Gregorii XIII, pont. max. jussu editum (in Latin). in aedibus populi romani. p. 619.

^ Wei, John C. (2016).

Gratian the Theologian . Washington D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press. p. 22.

ISBN 978-0-8132-2803-7 .

^ Jaser, Christian (2013).

Ecclesia maledicens . Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck. p. 279.

ISBN 978-3-16-151927-7 .

^ "Decretum Gratiani" .

lib.ugent.be . Retrieved 2020-08-26 .

^ Donahue, Jr., A Crisis of Law?

, pg. 16.

^ See Appendix B in Larson, Master of Penance .

^ a b Woods, Thomas E. (2005).

How the Catholic Church Built Western Civilization . Washington, DC: Regency.

ISBN 0-89526-038-7 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Brundage, James.

Law, Sex, and Christian Society in Medieval Europe.

University of Chicago Press, 1990.

Brundage, James.

The Medieval Origins of the Legal Profession.

University of Chicago Press, 2008.

Donahue, Charles, Jr.

A Crisis of Law? Reflections on the Church and the Law Over the Centuries in The Jurist 65 (2005) I-30.

Hartmann, Wilfried, and Kenneth Pennington, edited.

The History of Medieval Canon Law in the Classical Period, 1140-1234: From Gratian to the Decretals of Pope Gregory IX (Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press, 2008).

Kuttner, Stephan.

Research on Gratian: Acta and Agenda , in Proceedings of the Seventh International Congress of Medieval Canon Law, Cambridge, 23–27 July 1984 , Linehan, Peter edited (Monumenta Iuris Canonici. Series C: Subsidia), Vatican City 1988, 3-26.

Landau, Peter. "Gratians Arbeitsplan." In Iuri canonico promovendo: Festschrift für Heribert Schmitz zum 65. Geburtstag . Regensburg: F. Pustet, 1994. pp. 691–707.

Landau, Peter. "Neue Forschungen zu vorgratianischen Kanonessammlungen und den Quellen des gratianischen Dekrets." Ius Commune 11 (1984): 1-29. Reprinted in idem.

Kanones und Dekretalen . pp. 177*-205* Landau, Peter. "Quellen und Bedeutung des gratianischen Dekrets," Studia et Documenta Historiae et Juris 52 (1986): 218–235. Reprinted in idem.

Kanones und Dekretalen . pp. 207*-224*.

Larsen, Atria A.

Master of Penance: Gratian and the Development of Penitential Thought and Law in the Twelfth Century, Washington D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press 2014.

Larson, Atria A.

Gratian's Tractatus de penitentia: A New Latin Edition with English Translation Washington D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press , 2016.

Lenherr, Titus.

Die Exkommunikations- und Depositionsgewalt der Häretiker bei Gratian und den Dekretisten bis zur Glossa ordinaria des Johannes Teutonicus . St. Ottilien: EOS Verlag, 1987.

Munier, Charles.

Les sources patristiques du droit de l’église du VIIIe au XIIIe siècle . Mulhouse 1957.

Noonan, John T. "Gratian slept here: the changing identity of the father of the systematic study of canon law." Traditio 35 (1979), 145–172.

Wei, John C.

Gratian the Theologian . Washington D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press , 2016.

Werckmeister, Jean.

Le mariage. Décret de Gratien (causes 27 à 36) . Paris: Cerf, 2011.

Winroth, Anders.

The Making of Gratian's Decretum . New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004.

Winroth, Anders. "Recent Work on the Making of Gratian's Decretum," Bulletin of Medieval Canon Law 26 (2008).

External links [ edit ] Media related to Decretum Gratiani at Wikimedia Commons Quaglioni, Diego (2002).

"GRAZIANO" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 59: Graziano–Grossi Gondi (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

ISBN 978-88-12-00032-6 .

Full Latin text from the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek Decretum magistri Gratiani. Editio Lipsiensis secunda, post Aemilii Ludovici Richteri curas, ad librorum manu scriptorum et editionis Romanae fidem recognovit et adnotatione critica instruxit Aemilius Friedberg.

Leipzig, B. Tauchnitz, 1879. (Corpus iuris canonici ; 1) Critical edition in progress Archived 2014-01-31 at the Wayback Machine , currently only of parts of the shorter first recension of the Decretum, edited by Anders Winroth Domus Gratiani The Stephan Kuttner Institute of Medieval Canon Law in Munich v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Poland Vatican Israel Other IdRef NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐8kjz8
Cached time: 20250814221041
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.798 seconds
Real time usage: 0.928 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5044/1000000
Revision size: 33649/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 201430/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5906/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 120004/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.466/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24807569/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  716.032      1 -total
 29.93%  214.297      1 Template:Reflist
 27.94%  200.092    121 Template:Lang
 12.82%   91.798      1 Template:Canon_Law
 12.47%   89.258      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.78%   77.199      5 Template:Cite_web
  8.60%   61.570     13 Template:Cite_book
  8.12%   58.135      1 Template:Short_description
  4.55%   32.559      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.23%   30.322      1 Template:History_of_Catholic_theology Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1791605:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221041 and revision id 1298834546. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Decretum_Gratiani&oldid=1298834546 " Categories : Canon law codifications Texts in Latin Medieval law 12th-century books in Latin 12th-century jurists Law textbooks Hidden categories: Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Medieval Latin-language text Articles containing German-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2023 Articles containing Spanish-language text Commons category link from Wikidata CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 01:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Decretum Gratiani 21 languages Add topic

