Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 1.1 Categories 1.2 Terminology 2 Development 3 Function Toggle Function subsection 3.1 Nervous system 4 Clinical significance 5 Other animals 6 History 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Nerve 112 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ অসমীয়া Asturianu Atikamekw Авар Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Лакку ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский संस्कृतम् Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taclḥit తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Võro 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cable-like bundle of axons This article is about anatomical nerve fiber bundle. For other uses, see Nerve (disambiguation) .

Nerve Cross-section of a nerve Details System Nervous system Identifiers Latin nervus TA98 A14.2.00.013 TA2 6154 FMA 65132 Anatomical terms of neuroanatomy [ edit on Wikidata ] A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers (called axons ). Nerves have historically been considered the basic units of the peripheral nervous system. A nerve provides a common pathway for the electrochemical nerve impulses called action potentials that are transmitted along each of the axons to peripheral organs or, in the case of sensory nerves , from the periphery back to the central nervous system . Each axon is an extension of an individual neuron , along with other supportive cells such as some Schwann cells that coat the axons in myelin .

Each axon is surrounded by a layer of connective tissue called the endoneurium . The axons are bundled together into groups called fascicles , and each fascicle is wrapped in a layer of connective tissue called the perineurium . The entire nerve is wrapped in a layer of connective tissue called the epineurium . Nerve cells (often called neurons) are further classified as either sensory or motor .

In the central nervous system , the analogous structures are known as nerve tracts .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Structure [ edit ] Each nerve is covered on the outside by a dense sheath of connective tissue , the epineurium . Beneath this is a layer of fat cells, the perineurium , which forms a complete sleeve around a bundle of axons . Perineurial septa extend into the nerve and subdivide it into several bundles of fibres. Surrounding each such fibre is the endoneurium . This forms an unbroken tube from the surface of the spinal cord to the level where the axon synapses with its muscle fibres, or ends in sensory receptors . The endoneurium consists of an inner sleeve of material called the glycocalyx and an outer delicate meshwork of collagen fibres.

[ 2 ] Nerves are bundled and often travel along with blood vessels , since the neurons of a nerve have fairly high energy requirements.

Within the endoneurium, the individual nerve fibres are surrounded by a low-protein liquid called endoneurial fluid . This acts in a similar way to the cerebrospinal fluid in the central nervous system and constitutes a blood-nerve barrier similar to the blood–brain barrier .

[ 3 ] Molecules are thereby prevented from crossing the blood into the endoneurial fluid. During the development of nerve edema from nerve irritation (or injury), the amount of endoneurial fluid may increase at the site of irritation. This increase in fluid can be visualized using magnetic resonance (MR) neurography , and thus MR neurography can identify nerve irritation and/or injury.

Categories [ edit ] Nerves are categorized into three groups based on the direction that signals are conducted: Afferent nerves conduct sensory information from sensory neurons to the central nervous system , for example from the mechanoreceptors in skin . Bundles of afferent fibers are known as sensory nerves .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Efferent nerves conduct signals from the central nervous system along motor neurons to their target muscles and glands . Bundles of these fibres are known as efferent nerves.

Mixed nerves contain both afferent and efferent axons, and thus conduct both incoming sensory information and outgoing muscle commands in the same bundle. All spinal nerves are mixed nerves, and some of the cranial nerves are also mixed nerves.

Nerves can be categorized into two groups based on where they connect to the central nervous system: Spinal nerves innervate (distribute to/stimulate) much of the body, and connect through the vertebral column to the spinal cord and thus to the central nervous system . They are given letter-number designations according to the vertebra through which they connect to the spinal column.

Cranial nerves innervate parts of the head, and connect directly to the brain (especially to the brainstem ). They are typically assigned Roman numerals from 1 to 12, although cranial nerve zero is sometimes included. In addition, cranial nerves have descriptive names.

Terminology [ edit ] Main article: Anatomical terms of neuroanatomy Specific terms are used to describe nerves and their actions. A nerve that supplies information to the brain from an area of the body, or controls an action of the body is said to innervate that section of the body or organ. Other terms relate to whether the nerve affects the same side ("ipsilateral") or opposite side ("contralateral") of the body, to the part of the brain that supplies it.

Development [ edit ] Nerve growth normally ends in adolescence but can be re-stimulated with a molecular mechanism known as " notch signaling ".

[ 4 ] If the axons of a neuron are damaged, as long as the cell body of the neuron is not damaged, the axons can regenerate and remake the synaptic connections with neurons with the help of guidepost cells . This is also referred to as neuroregeneration .

[ 5 ] The nerve begins the process by destroying the nerve distal to the site of injury allowing Schwann cells, basal lamina, and the neurilemma near the injury to begin producing a regeneration tube. Nerve growth factors are produced causing many nerve sprouts to bud.  When one of the growth processes finds the regeneration tube, it begins to grow rapidly towards its original destination guided the entire time by the regeneration tube. Nerve regeneration is very slow and can take up to several months to complete. While this process does repair some nerves, there will still be some functional deficit as the repairs are not perfect.

[ 6 ] Function [ edit ] A nerve conveys information in the form of electrochemical impulses (as nerve impulses known as action potentials ) carried by the individual neurons that make up the nerve. These impulses are extremely fast, with some myelinated neurons conducting at speeds up to 120 m/s. The impulses travel from one neuron to another by crossing a synapse , where the message is converted from electrical to chemical and then back to electrical.

[ 2 ] [ 1 ] Nervous system [ edit ] Main article: Nervous system The nervous system is the part of an animal that coordinates its actions by transmitting signals to and from different parts of its body.

[ 7 ] In vertebrates it consists of two main parts, the central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS). The CNS consists of the brain and spinal cord . The PNS consists mainly of nerves, which are enclosed bundles of the long fibers or axons , that connect the CNS to all remaining body parts. Nerves that exit from the cranium are called cranial nerves while those exiting from the spinal cord are called spinal nerves .

Clinical significance [ edit ] Micrograph demonstrating perineural invasion of prostate cancer .

H&E stain .

Neurologists usually diagnose disorders of nerves by a physical examination , including the testing of reflexes , walking and other directed movements, muscle weakness , proprioception , and the sense of touch . This initial exam can be followed with tests such as nerve conduction study , electromyography (EMG), and computed tomography (CT).

[ 8 ] Nerves can be damaged by physical injury as well as conditions like carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) and repetitive strain injury .

Autoimmune diseases such as Guillain–Barré syndrome , neurodegenerative diseases , polyneuropathy , infection, neuritis , diabetes , or failure of the blood vessels surrounding the nerve all cause nerve damage , which can vary in severity. A pinched nerve occurs when pressure is placed on a nerve, usually from swelling due to an injury, or pregnancy and can result in pain , weakness, numbness or paralysis, an example being CTS. Symptoms can be felt in areas far from the actual site of damage, a phenomenon called referred pain . Referred pain can happen when the damage causes altered signalling to other areas.

Cancer can spread by invading the spaces around nerves. This is particularly common in head and neck cancer , prostate cancer and colorectal cancer .

Multiple sclerosis is a disease associated with extensive nerve damage. It occurs when the macrophages of an individual's own immune system damage the myelin sheaths that insulate the axon of the nerve.

Other animals [ edit ] This section may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards , as "neuron" does not coincide with "nerve".

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( April 2025 ) A neuron is called identified if it has properties that distinguish it from every other neuron in the same animal—properties such as location, neurotransmitter, gene expression pattern, and connectivity—and if every individual organism belonging to the same species has exactly one neuron with the same set of properties.

[ 9 ] In vertebrate nervous systems, very few neurons are "identified" in this sense. Researchers believe humans have none—but in simpler nervous systems, some or all neurons may be thus unique.

[ 10 ] In vertebrates, the best known identified neurons are the gigantic Mauthner cells of fish.

[ 11 ] : 38–44 Every fish has two Mauthner cells, located in the bottom part of the brainstem, one on the left side and one on the right. Each Mauthner cell has an axon that crosses over, innervating (stimulating) neurons at the same brain level and then travelling down through the spinal cord, making numerous connections as it goes. The synapses generated by a Mauthner cell are so powerful that a single action potential gives rise to a major behavioral response: within milliseconds the fish curves its body into a C-shape , then straightens, thereby propelling itself rapidly forward. Functionally of this is a fast escape response, triggered most easily by a strong sound wave or pressure wave impinging on the lateral line organ of the fish. Mauthner cells are not the only identified neurons in fish—there are about 20 more types, including pairs of "Mauthner cell analogs" in each spinal segmental nucleus. Although a Mauthner cell is capable of bringing about an escape response all by itself, in the context of ordinary behavior other types of cells usually contribute to shaping the amplitude and direction of the response.

Mauthner cells have been described as command neurons . A command neuron is a special type of identified neuron, defined as a neuron that is capable of driving a specific behavior all by itself.

[ 11 ] : 112 Such neurons appear most commonly in the fast escape systems of various species—the squid giant axon and squid giant synapse , used for pioneering experiments in neurophysiology because of their enormous size, both participate in the fast escape circuit of the squid. The concept of a command neuron has, however, become controversial, because of studies showing that some neurons that initially appeared to fit the description were really only capable of evoking a response in a limited set of circumstances.

[ 12 ] In organisms of radial symmetry , nerve nets serve for the nervous system. There is no brain or centralised head region, and instead there are interconnected neurons spread out in nerve nets. These are found in Cnidaria , Ctenophora and Echinodermata .

History [ edit ] Further information: History of neurology and neurosurgery Herophilos (335–280 BC) described the functions of the optic nerve in sight and the oculomotor nerve in eye movement. Analysis of the nerves in the cranium enabled him to differentiate between blood vessels and nerves ( Ancient Greek : νεῦρον (neûron) "string, plant fiber, nerve").

Modern research has not confirmed William Cullen 's 1785 hypothesis associating mental states with physical nerves, [ 13 ] although popular or lay medicine may still invoke "nerves" in diagnosing or blaming any sort of psychological worry or hesitancy, as in the common traditional phrases "my poor nerves", [ 14 ] " high-strung ", and " nervous breakdown ".

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Biology portal Connective tissue in the peripheral nervous system Dermatome (anatomy) List of nerves of the human body Nerve injury Neuropathy Nerve injury classification References [ edit ] ^ a b c Purves, Dale; Augustine, George J.; Fitzpatrick, David; Hall, William C.; LaMantia, Anthony-Samuel; McNamara, James O.; White, Leonard E. (2008).

Neuroscience (4 ed.). Sinauer Associates. pp.

11 –20.

ISBN 978-0-87893-697-7 .

^ a b c d Marieb EN, Hoehn K (2007).

Human Anatomy & Physiology (7th ed.). Pearson. pp.

388– 602.

ISBN 978-0-8053-5909-1 .

^ Kanda, T (Feb 2013). "Biology of the blood-nerve barrier and its alteration in immune mediated neuropathies".

Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry .

84 (2): 208– 212.

doi : 10.1136/jnnp-2012-302312 .

PMID 23243216 .

S2CID 207005110 .

^ Yale Study Shows Way To Re-Stimulate Brain Cell Growth ScienceDaily Archived 2017-07-07 at the Wayback Machine (Oct. 22, 1999) — Results Could Boost Understanding Of Alzheimer's, Other Brain Disorders ^ Kunik, D (2011).

"Laser-based single-axon transection for high-content axon injury and regeneration studies" .

PLOS ONE .

6 (11): e26832.

Bibcode : 2011PLoSO...626832K .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0026832 .

PMC 3206876 .

PMID 22073205 .

^ Burnett, Mark; Zager, Eric.

"Pathophysiology of Peripheral Nerve Injury: A Brief Review: Nerve Regeneration" .

Medscape Article . Medscape.

Archived from the original on 2011-10-31 . Retrieved 2011-10-26 .

^ Tortora, G.J., Derrickson, B. (2016).

Principles of Anatomy and Physiology (15th edition) . J. Wiley.

ISBN 978-1-119-34373-8 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Weinberg.

Normal computed tomography of the brain . p. 109.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Hoyle G, Wiersma CA (1977).

Identified neurons and behavior of arthropods . Plenum Press.

ISBN 978-0-306-31001-0 .

^ "Wormbook: Specification of the nervous system" .

Archived from the original on 2011-07-17.

^ a b Stein, PSG (1999).

Neurons, Networks, and Motor Behavior . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-69227-4 .

^ Simmons PJ, Young D (1999).

Nerve Cells and Animal Behaviour . Cambridge University Press. p.

43 .

ISBN 978-0-521-62726-9 .

^ Pickering, Neil (2006).

The Metaphor of Mental Illness . International perspectives in philosophy and psychiatry. Oxford University Press. p. 99.

ISBN 9780198530879 . Retrieved 27 May 2023 .

[...] William Cullen [...] as early as 1785 [...] postulated that certain mental disorders were the result of some unknown physical change in the nerves, for which he coined the term neurosis. This term has since quite altered its meaning, as it now refers not to a state of the nerves but to a nervous state.

^ For example: Austen, Jane (2010) [1813].

Spacks, Patricia Meyer (ed.).

Pride and Prejudice: An Annotated Edition . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. p. 32.

ISBN 9780674049161 . Retrieved 27 May 2023 .

'Mr. Bennet, how can you abuse your own children in such a way? You take delight in vexing me. You have no compassion on my poor nerves.' [...] 'You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. They are my old friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration these twenty years at least.' ^ Pickering, Neil (2006).

The Metaphor of Mental Illness . International perspectives in philosophy and psychiatry. Oxford University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 9780198530879 . Retrieved 27 May 2023 .

[...] in everyday English we find [...] lay terms such as 'nervous breakdown' that relate to mental illness as a whole [...] Further reading [ edit ] Nervous system William E. Skaggs, Scholarpedia Bear, M. F.; B. W. Connors; M. A. Paradiso (2006).

Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain (3rd ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott.

ISBN 0-7817-6003-8 .

Binder, Marc D.; Hirokawa, Nobutaka; Windhorst, Uwe, eds. (2009).

Encyclopedia of Neuroscience . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-540-23735-8 .

Kandel, ER ; Schwartz JH; Jessell TM (2012).

Principles of Neural Science (5th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-8385-7701-1 .

Squire, L.

et al.

(2012).

Fundamental Neuroscience, 4th edition .

Academic Press ; ISBN 0-12-660303-0 Andreasen, Nancy C.

(March 4, 2004).

Brave New Brain: Conquering Mental Illness in the Era of the Genome . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-514509-0 .

Damasio, A. R. (1994).

Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain.

New York, Avon Books .

ISBN 0-399-13894-3 (Hardcover) ISBN 0-380-72647-5 (Paperback) Gardner, H. (1976).

The Shattered Mind: The Person After Brain Damage.

New York, Vintage Books , 1976 ISBN 0-394-71946-8 Goldstein, K. (2000).

The Organism.

New York, Zone Books.

ISBN 0-942299-96-5 (Hardcover) ISBN 0-942299-97-3 (Paperback) Lauwereyns, Jan (February 2010).

The Anatomy of Bias: How Neural Circuits Weigh the Options . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-12310-5 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nerves .

Library resources about Nerve Resources in your library List of nerves The Nervous System at Wikibooks (human) Nervous System at Wikibooks (non-human) Parsons, Frederick Gymer (1911).

"Nerve" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 19 (11th ed.). pp.

394– 400.

v t e Human systems and organs Musculoskeletal system Skeletal system Bone Carpus Collar bone (clavicle) Thigh bone (femur) Fibula Humerus Mandible Metacarpus Metatarsus Ossicles Patella Phalanges Radius Skull Tarsus Tibia Ulna Rib Vertebra Pelvis Sternum Cartilage Joints Fibrous joint Cartilaginous joint Synovial joint Muscular system Muscle Tendon Diaphragm Circulatory system Cardiovascular system peripheral Artery Vein Lymphatic vessel Heart Lymphatic system primary Bone marrow Thymus secondary Spleen Lymph node CNS equivalent Glymphatic system Nervous system Brain Spinal cord Nerve Sensory system Ear Eye Somatic system Tissue Integumentary system Skin Subcutaneous tissue Breast Mammary gland Haematopoietic and immune systems Myeloid Myeloid immune system Lymphoid Lymphoid immune system Respiratory system Upper Nose Nasopharynx Larynx Lower Trachea Bronchus Lung Digestive system Mouth Salivary gland Tongue Lip Tooth upper GI Oropharynx Laryngopharynx Esophagus Stomach lower GI Small intestine Appendix Colon Rectum Anus accessory Liver Biliary tract Pancreas Urinary system Genitourinary system Kidney Ureter Bladder Urethra Reproductive system Male Scrotum Penis Prostate Testicle Seminal vesicle Female Uterus Vagina Vulva Ovary Placenta Endocrine system Pituitary Pineal Thyroid Parathyroid Adrenal Islets of Langerhans v t e Spinal nerves Cervical C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6 C7 C8 anterior Cervical plexus Brachial plexus posterior Posterior branches of cervical nerves Suboccipital – C1 Greater occipital – C2 Third occipital – C3 Thoracic T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 T7 T8 T9 T10 T11 T12 anterior Intercostal Intercostobrachial – T2 Thoraco-abdominal nerves – T7–T11 Subcostal – T12 posterior Posterior branches of thoracic nerves Lumbar L1 L2 L3 L4 L5 anterior Lumbar plexus Lumbosacral trunk posterior Posterior branches of the lumbar nerves Superior cluneal L1–L3 Sacral S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 anterior Sacral plexus posterior Posterior branches of sacral nerves Medial cluneal nerves Coccygeal anterior Coccygeal plexus posterior Posterior branch of coccygeal nerve v t e The cranial nerves Terminal (CN 0) Nuclei septal nuclei Course no significant branches Olfactory (CN I) Nuclei anterior olfactory nucleus Course olfactory bulb olfactory tract Optic (CN II) Nuclei lateral geniculate nucleus Course optic chiasm optic tract Oculomotor (CN III) Nuclei oculomotor nucleus Edinger–Westphal nucleus Branches superior parasympathetic root of ciliary ganglion inferior Trochlear (CN IV) Nucleus Branches no significant branches Trigeminal (CN V) Nuclei PSN spinal trigeminal nucleus MN TMN Course trigeminal ganglion Branches ophthalmic maxillary mandibular Abducens (CN VI) Nucleus Branches no significant branches Facial (CN VII) Near origin Intermediate nerve Geniculate Inside facial canal Greater petrosal pterygopalatine ganglion Nerve to the stapedius Chorda tympani lingual nerve submandibular ganglion At stylomastoid foramen Posterior auricular Suprahyoid digastric stylohyoid Parotid plexus temporal zygomatic buccal mandibular cervical Nuclei Facial motor nucleus Solitary nucleus Superior salivary nucleus Vestibulocochlear (CN VIII) Nuclei vestibular nuclei cochlear nuclei Cochlear nerve striae medullares lateral lemniscus Vestibular Scarpa's ganglion Glossopharyngeal (CN IX) Before jugular fossa Ganglia superior inferior After jugular fossa Tympanic tympanic plexus lesser petrosal otic ganglion Stylopharyngeal branch Pharyngeal branches Tonsillar branches Lingual branches Carotid sinus Nuclei Nucleus ambiguus Inferior salivatory nucleus Solitary nucleus Vagus (CN X) Before jugular fossa Ganglia superior inferior After jugular fossa Meningeal branch Auricular branch Neck Pharyngeal branch pharyngeal plexus Superior laryngeal external internal Recurrent laryngeal Superior cervical cardiac Thorax Inferior cardiac Pulmonary Vagal trunks anterior posterior Abdomen Celiac Renal Hepatic Anterior gastric Posterior gastric Nuclei Nucleus ambiguus Dorsal nucleus of vagus nerve Solitary nucleus Accessory (CN XI) Nuclei nucleus ambiguus spinal accessory nucleus Cranial Spinal Hypoglossal (CN XII) Nucleus Branches lingual v t e Nerves of the cervical plexus Superficial C2 Lesser occipital C2–C3 Greater auricular Transverse cervical C3–C4 Supraclavicular Deep C1–C3 Ansa cervicalis superior root inferior root C3–C5 Phrenic v t e Nerve supply of the human arm Supraclavicular root ( dorsal scapular , long thoracic ) upper trunk ( suprascapular , to the subclavius ) Infraclavicular lateral cord lateral pectoral ansa pectoralis musculocutaneous ( lateral cutaneous of forearm ) median / lateral root : anterior interosseous palmar recurrent common palmar digital ( proper palmar digital ) medial cord medial pectoral ansa pectoralis cutaneous: medial cutaneous of forearm medial cutaneous of arm ulnar : muscular palmar dorsal ( dorsal digital nerves ) superficial ( common palmar digital , proper palmar digital ) deep median / medial root : see above posterior cord subscapular ( upper , lower ) thoracodorsal axillary ( superior lateral cutaneous of arm ) radial : muscular cutaneous ( posterior of arm , inferior lateral of arm , posterior of forearm ) superficial ( dorsal digital nerves ) deep ( posterior interosseous ) Other Brachial plexus v t e Anatomy of the autonomic nervous system Head Sympathetic Cervical ganglia : roots long ciliary Deep petrosal Parasympathetic Ciliary ganglion Roots Short ciliary Pterygopalatine ganglion deep petrosal nerve of pterygoid canal branches of distribution: greater palatine inferior posterior nasal branches lesser palatine nasopalatine medial superior posterior nasal branches pharyngeal Submandibular ganglion Otic ganglion Neck Sympathetic paravertebral ganglia : Cervical ganglia Superior Middle Inferior Stellate ganglion prevertebral plexus : Cavernous plexus Internal carotid Thorax Sympathetic paravertebral ganglia : Thoracic ganglia prevertebral plexus : Cardiac plexus Esophageal plexus Pulmonary plexus Thoracic aortic plexus splanchnic nerves : cardiopulmonary thoracic cardiac nerves: Superior Middle Inferior Abdomen Sympathetic paravertebral ganglia : Lumbar ganglia prevertebral ganglia : Celiac ganglia Aorticorenal Superior mesenteric ganglion Inferior mesenteric ganglion prevertebral plexus : Celiac plexus Hepatic Splenic Pancreatic aorticorenal Abdominal aortic plexus Renal / Suprarenal Iliac plexus Superior mesenteric Gastric Inferior mesenteric Spermatic Ovarian Superior hypogastric hypogastric nerve Superior rectal Inferior hypogastric Vesical Prostatic / Cavernous nerves of penis Uterovaginal Middle rectal splanchnic nerves : Lumbar splanchnic nerves Enteric Submucous plexus Myenteric plexus Pelvis Sympathetic paravertebral ganglia : Sacral ganglia Ganglion impar splanchnic nerves : Sacral splanchnic nerves Parasympathetic splanchnic nerves : Pelvic splanchnic nerves Category Commons v t e Nerves of the lumbosacral plexus Lumbar plexus iliohypogastric lateral cutaneous branch anterior cutaneous branch ilioinguinal anterior scrotal ♂ / labial ♀ genitofemoral femoral branch genital branch Lateral cutaneous patellar obturator anterior cutaneous posterior accessory femoral anterior cutaneous branches saphenous infrapatellar medial crural cutaneous sacral plexus sciatic common fibular lateral sural cutaneous communicating branch deep fibular lateral terminal branch medial terminal branch dorsal digital superficial fibular medial dorsal cutaneous intermediate dorsal cutaneous dorsal digital tibial medial sural cutaneous medial calcaneal medial plantar ( common plantar digital nerves proper plantar digital ) lateral plantar ( deep branch superficial branch common plantar digital proper plantar digital ) sural lateral dorsal cutaneous lateral calcaneal other Muscular superior gluteal inferior gluteal lateral rotator group ( to quadratus femoris to obturator internus to the piriformis ) cutaneous : posterior cutaneous of thigh ( inferior cluneal perineal branches ) perforating cutaneous coccygeal plexus pudendal inferior anal perineal deep posterior scrotal♂ / labial♀ dorsal of the penis♂ / clitoris♀ anococcygeal Related Nerve supply of the human leg Authority control databases National Japan Other Terminologia Anatomica NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wdm6m
Cached time: 20250817043602
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.821 seconds
Real time usage: 1.024 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4505/1000000
Revision size: 22397/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 252005/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2448/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 152392/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.490/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17065808/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  848.561      1 -total
 22.81%  193.556      1 Template:Reflist
 17.77%  150.822     15 Template:Cite_book
 15.73%  133.438     21 Template:Navbox
 12.63%  107.206      1 Template:Langx
  9.82%   83.365      1 Template:Infobox_nerve
  9.52%   80.795      1 Template:Infobox_anatomy
  9.05%   76.796      1 Template:Infobox
  9.02%   76.516      1 Template:Organ_systems
  6.60%   56.022      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21435:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043602 and revision id 1304155610. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nerve&oldid=1304155610 " Categories : Nerves Peripheral nervous system Neuroanatomy Soft tissue Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from September 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from April 2025 All articles needing rewrite Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages using div col with small parameter Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 09:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nerve 112 languages Add topic

