Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Invention of tradition 3 In scholarly discourse Toggle In scholarly discourse subsection 3.1 Anthropology 3.2 Archaeology 3.3 Biology 3.4 Musicology and ethnomusicology 3.5 Sociology 3.6 Philosophy 4 In political and religious discourse 5 In artistic discourse 6 Relationship to other concepts 7 Preservation 8 Traditional cultural expressions 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Citations 10.2 Works cited 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Tradition 95 languages Afrikaans العربية Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски Malagasy Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray Wolof 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Traditions ) Long-existing custom or belief For other uses, see Tradition (disambiguation) .

"Traditional" redirects here. For Traditional music, see Folk music .

Traditions , an 1895 bronze tympanum by Olin Levi Warner over the main entrance of the Thomas Jefferson Building at the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C.

A tradition is a system of beliefs or behaviors ( folk custom ) passed down within a group of people or society with symbolic meaning or special significance with origins in the past.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] A component of cultural expressions and folklore , common examples include holidays or impractical but socially meaningful clothes (like lawyers' wigs or military officers' spurs ), but the idea has also been applied to social norms and behaviors such as greetings, etc. Traditions can persist and evolve for thousands of years— the word tradition itself derives from the Latin word tradere literally meaning to transmit, to hand over, to give for safekeeping. While it is reportedly assumed that traditions have an ancient history, many traditions have been invented on purpose, whether it be political or cultural, over short periods of time. Various academic disciplines also use the word in a variety of ways.

The phrase "according to tradition" or "by tradition" usually means that what follows is known only through oral tradition and is not supported (and might even be refuted) by solid evidence. Here, "tradition" describes the source or nature of the information. For example, "According to tradition, Homer was born on Chios , but many other places have historically claimed him as theirs." This tradition may never be proven or disproved. Another example is, " King Arthur , according to history, a true British king, has inspired many well loved stories." Whether the claims are supported by evidence or not does not reduce their value as cultural history and literature.

[ 3 ] Traditional dress and arts, such as in  this performance of Traditional Hindi Drama -- the performance of tradition through folklore , reinforces the stories and memory reinforces the concept of tradition, and its importance in local communities.

Traditions are subject of study in several academic fields of learning, especially in the humanities and social sciences, including anthropology , archaeology , history , and sociology .

The conceptualization of tradition, as the notion of holding on to a previous time, is also found in political and philosophical discourse. For example, it is the basis of the political concept of traditionalism , and also strands of many world religions including traditional Catholicism . In artistic contexts, tradition is used to decide the correct display of an art form . For example, in the performance of traditional genres (such as traditional dance), adherence to guidelines dictating how an art form should be composed are given greater importance than the performer's own preferences. A host of factors can exacerbate the loss of tradition , including industrialization , globalization , and the assimilation or marginalization of specific cultural groups. In response to this, tradition-preservation attempts and initiatives have now been started in many countries around the world, focusing on aspects such as traditional languages . Tradition is usually contrasted with the goal of modernity and should be differentiated from customs, conventions, laws , norms , routines, rules and similar concepts.

Definition [ edit ] Textual traditions of bound manuscripts of the Sefer Torah (Torah scroll) are passed down providing additional vowel points , pronunciation marks , and stress accents in the authentic Masoretic Text of the Jewish Bible , often the basis for translations of Christianity 's Old Testament .

The English word tradition comes from the Latin traditio via French , the noun from the verb tradere (to transmit, to hand over, to give for safekeeping); it was originally used in Roman law to refer to the concept of legal transfers and inheritance .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] According to Anthony Giddens and others, the modern meaning of tradition evolved during the Enlightenment period, in opposition to modernity and progress .

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] As with many other generic terms, there are many definitions of tradition.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 5 ] [ 8 ] The concept includes a number of interrelated ideas; the unifying one is that tradition refers to beliefs, objects or customs performed or believed in the past, originating in it, transmitted through time by being taught by one generation to the other, and are performed or believed in the present.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Tradition can also refer to beliefs or customs that are prehistoric , with lost or arcane origins, existing from time immemorial .

[ 9 ] Originally, traditions were passed orally, without the need for a writing system . Tools to aid this process include poetic devices such as rhyme , epic stories and alliteration . The stories thus preserved are also referred to as tradition, or as part of an oral tradition . Even such traditions, however, are presumed to have originated (been "invented" by humans) at some point.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Traditions are often presumed to be ancient , unalterable, and deeply important, though they may sometimes be much less "natural" than is presumed.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] It is presumed that at least two transmissions over three generations are required for a practice, belief or object to be seen as traditional.

[ 9 ] Some traditions were deliberately introduced for one reason or another, often to highlight or enhance the importance of a certain institution or truth.

[ 12 ] Traditions may also be adapted to suit the needs of the day, and the changes can become accepted as a part of the ancient tradition.

[ 10 ] [ 13 ] Tradition changes slowly, with changes from one generation to the other being seen as significant.

[ 14 ] Thus, those carrying out the traditions will not be consciously aware of the change, and even if a tradition undergoes major changes over many generations, it will be seen as unchanged.

[ 14 ] There are various origins and fields of tradition; they can refer to: the forms of artistic heritage of a particular culture.

[ 15 ] beliefs or customs instituted and maintained by societies and governments, such as national anthems and national holidays , such as Federal holidays in the United States .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] beliefs or customs maintained by religious denominations and Church bodies that share history, customs, culture, and, to some extent, body of teachings.

[ 16 ] [ 4 ] For example, one can speak of Islam's tradition or Christianity's tradition.

A slametan tradition of a ritual proceeding before Ramadan to honor ancestors and Ramadan in Banyumas, Central Java, Indonesia Many objects, beliefs and customs can be traditional.

[ 2 ] Rituals of social interaction can be traditional, with phrases and gestures such as saying "thank you", sending birth announcements , greeting cards , etc.

[ 2 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Tradition can also refer to larger concepts practiced by groups (family traditions at Christmas [ 18 ] ), organizations (company's picnic ) or societies, such as the practice of national and public holidays.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Some of the oldest traditions include monotheism (three millennia) and citizenship (two millennia).

[ 19 ] It can also include material objects, such as buildings, works of art or tools.

[ 2 ] Tradition is often used as an adjective , in contexts such as traditional music , traditional medicine , traditional values and others.

[ 1 ] In such constructions tradition refers to specific values and materials particular to the discussed context, passed through generations.

[ 4 ] Invention of tradition [ edit ] Main article: Invented tradition The term " invention of tradition ", introduced by E. J. Hobsbawm , refers to situations when a new practice or object is introduced in a manner that implies a connection with the past that is not necessarily present.

[ 20 ] A tradition may be deliberately created and promulgated for personal, commercial, political, or national self-interest , as was done in colonial Africa; or it may be adopted rapidly based on a single highly publicized event, rather than developing and spreading organically in a population, as in the case of the white wedding dress , which only became popular after Queen Victoria wore a white gown at her wedding to Albert of Saxe-Coburg .

[ 21 ] An example of an invention of tradition is the rebuilding of the Palace of Westminster (location of the British Parliament ) in the Gothic style .

[ 20 ] Similarly, most of the traditions associated with monarchy of the United Kingdom , seen as rooted deep in history, actually date to 19th century.

[ 13 ] Other examples include the invention of tradition in Africa and other colonial holdings by the occupying forces.

[ 22 ] Requiring legitimacy , the colonial power would often invent a "tradition" which they could use to legitimize their own position. For example, a certain succession to a chiefdom might be recognized by a colonial power as traditional in order to favour their own candidates for the job. Often these inventions were based in some form of tradition, but were exaggerated, distorted, or biased toward a particular interpretation.

Invented traditions are central components of modern national cultures, providing a commonality of experience and promoting the unified national identity espoused by nationalism .

[ 23 ] Common examples include public holidays (particularly those unique to a particular nation), the singing of national anthems, and traditional national cuisine (see national dish ).

Expatriate and immigrant communities may continue to practice the national traditions of their home nation.

In scholarly discourse [ edit ] In science, tradition is often used in the literature in order to define the relationship of an author's thoughts to that of his or her field.

[ 24 ] In 1948, philosopher of science Karl Popper suggested that there should be a "rational theory of tradition" applied to science which was fundamentally sociological. For Popper, each scientist who embarks on a certain research trend inherits the tradition of the scientists before them as he or she inherits their studies and any conclusions that superseded it.

[ 24 ] Unlike myth , which is a means of explaining the natural world through means other than logical criticism, scientific tradition was inherited from Socrates, who proposed critical discussion, according to Popper.

[ 25 ] For Thomas Kuhn , who presented his thoughts in a paper presented in 1977, a sense of such a critical inheritance of tradition is, historically, what sets apart the best scientists who change their fields is an embracement of tradition.

[ 25 ] Traditions are a subject of study in several academic fields in social sciences —chiefly anthropology, archaeology , and biology—with somewhat different meanings in different fields. It is also used in varying contexts in other fields, such as history, psychology and sociology . Social scientists and others have worked to refine the commonsense concept of tradition to make it into a useful concept for scholarly analysis. In the 1970s and 1980s, Edward Shils explored the concept in detail.

[ 18 ] Since then, a wide variety of social scientists have criticized traditional ideas about tradition; meanwhile, "tradition" has come into usage in biology as applied to nonhuman animals.

Tradition as a concept variously defined in different disciplines should not be confused with various traditions (perspectives, approaches) in those disciplines.

[ 26 ] Anthropology [ edit ] Tradition is one of the key concepts in anthropology; it can be said that anthropology is the study of "tradition in traditional societies".

[ 8 ] There is however no "theory of tradition", as for most anthropologists the need to discuss what tradition is seems unnecessary, as defining tradition is both unnecessary (everyone can be expected to know what it is) and unimportant (as small differences in definition would be just technical).

[ 8 ] There are however dissenting views; scholars such as Pascal Boyer argue that defining tradition and developing theories about it are important to the discipline.

[ 8 ] Archaeology [ edit ] In archaeology , the term tradition is a set of cultures or industries which appear to develop on from one another over a period of time. The term is especially common in the study of American archaeology .

[ 18 ] Biology [ edit ] Biologists, when examining groups of non-humans, have observed repeated behaviors which are taught within communities from one generation to the next. Tradition is defined in biology as "a behavioral practice that is relatively enduring (i.e., is performed repeatedly over a period of time), that is shared among two or more members of a group, that depends in part on socially aided learning for its generation in new practitioners", and has been called a precursor to "culture" in the anthropological sense.

[ 27 ] Behavioral traditions have been observed in groups of fish, birds, and mammals. Groups of orangutans and chimpanzees, in particular, may display large numbers of behavioral traditions, and in chimpanzees, transfer of traditional behavior from one group to another (not just within a group) has been observed. Such behavioral traditions may have evolutionary significance, allowing adaptation at a faster rate than genetic change.

[ 28 ] Musicology and ethnomusicology [ edit ] Amar Rabbi Elazar A traditional setting of the last passage of the first tractate, Berakhot of the Oral Torah , which describes how scholars of the Talmud create peace in the world. Performed by Cantor Meyer Kanewsky in 1919 for Edison Records .

Problems playing this file? See media help .

In the field of musicology and ethnomusicology tradition refers to the belief systems, repertoire, techniques, style and culture that is passed down through subsequent generations. Tradition in music suggests a historical context with which one can perceive distinguishable patterns. Along with a sense of history, traditions have a fluidity that cause them to evolve and adapt over time.
While both musicology and ethnomusicology are defined by being 'the scholarly study of music' [ 29 ] they differ in their methodology and subject of research. 'Tradition, or traditions, can be presented as a context in which to study the work of a specific composer or as a part of a wide-ranging historical perspective.' [ 30 ] Sociology [ edit ] The concept of tradition, in early sociological research (around the turn of the 19th and 20th century), referred to that of the traditional society , as contrasted by the more modern industrial society .

[ 13 ] This approach was most notably portrayed in Max Weber 's concepts of traditional authority and modern rational-legal authority .

[ 13 ] In more modern works, One hundred years later, sociology sees tradition as a social construct used to contrast past with the present and as a form of rationality used to justify certain course of action.

[ 13 ] Traditional society is characterized by lack of distinction between family and business, division of labor influenced primarily by age, gender, and status, high position of custom in the system of values, self-sufficiency, preference to saving and accumulation of capital instead of productive investment, relative autarky .

[ 13 ] Early theories positing the simple, unilineal evolution of societies from traditional to industrial model are now seen as too simplistic.

[ 13 ] In 1981, Edward Shils in his book Tradition put forward a definition of tradition that became universally accepted.

[ 13 ] According to Shils, tradition is anything which is transmitted or handed down from the past to the present.

[ 13 ] Another important sociological aspect of tradition is the one that relates to rationality. It is also related to the works of Max Weber (see theories of rationality ), and were popularized and redefined in 1992 by Raymond Boudon in his book Action .

[ 13 ] In this context tradition refers to the mode of thinking and action justified as "it has always been that way".

[ 13 ] This line of reasoning forms the basis of the logical flaw of the appeal to tradition (or argumentum ad antiquitatem ), [ 31 ] which takes the form "this is right because we've always done it this way." [ 32 ] In most cases such an appeal can be refuted on the grounds that the "tradition" being advocated may no longer be desirable, or, indeed, may never have been despite its previous popularity.

Philosophy [ edit ] Further information: Tradition (perennialism) The idea of tradition is important in philosophy. Twentieth century philosophy is often divided between an 'analytic' tradition, dominant in Anglophone and Scandinavian countries, and a 'continental' tradition, dominant in German and Romance speaking Europe. Increasingly central to continental philosophy is the project of deconstructing what its proponents, following Martin Heidegger , call 'the tradition', which began with Plato and Aristotle . In contrast, some continental philosophers - most notably, Hans-Georg Gadamer - have attempted to rehabilitate the tradition of Aristotelianism . This move has been replicated within analytic philosophy by Alasdair MacIntyre . However, MacIntyre has himself deconstructed the idea of 'the tradition', instead posing Aristotelianism as one philosophical tradition in rivalry with others.

In political and religious discourse [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism Variants Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Libertarian Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Balance of power Class collaboration Collective identity Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family as a state model Family values Fundamentalism Gender roles Complementarianism Essentialism Historism Honour Imperialism Law and order Loyalty Maternalism Monarchism Royalism Moral absolutism Natalism Nationalism Nativism Natural law Norms Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organised religion State Orthodoxy Patriarchy Patriarchalism Patriotism Peace through strength Property rights Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Sovereignty Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Johnson Hume Burke More Maistre Bonald Chateaubriand Czartoryski Coleridge Karamzin Savigny Carlyle Ranke Newman Tocqueville Dostoevsky Taine Le Bon Nordau Belloc Iorga Chesterton Spengler Jabotinsky Ilyin Savarkar Schmitt Eliot Mannheim Jünger Evola Strauss Röpke Gadamer Freyre Voegelin Oakeshott Burnham Lefebvre Qutb Kuehnelt-Leddihn Gómez Dávila Kirk Solzhenitsyn Koselleck Mishima Buckley Sowell Mansfield Scruton Hoppe Dugin Peterson Politicians Adams Pitt Canning Metternich Disraeli Bismarck Salisbury Dmowski Mannerheim Baldwin Maurras Horthy Metaxas Churchill Adenauer De Gasperi Chiang Salazar De Gaulle Dollfuss Franco Khomeini Reagan Powell Pinochet Marcos Park Smith Reza Shah Suharto Lee Zia Vajpayee Thatcher Kohl Fujimori Trump Bush Kaczyński Netanyahu Modi Putin Erdoğan Abe Sarkozy Bolsonaro Yoon Orbán Milei Meloni Bukele Religion Christian democracy Christian right Confucianism Clericalism Hindutva Islamism Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Theravada Buddhism Traditionalist Catholicism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Personal variants Berlusconism Bukelism Cameronism Chiangism Erdoğanism Francoism Fujimorism Gaullism Janismo Kaczyzm Maurrassisme Mellismo Metaxism Powellism Pinochetism Putinism Qutbism Khomeinism Reaganism Sarkozysm Thatcherism Trumpism Ziaism National variants Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Belize Brazil Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Cuba Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Guatemala Hungary Iceland India Iran Israel Italy Japan Luxembourg Malaysia Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Panama Peru Poland Russia Serbia Singapore Sweden Switzerland South Korea Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Toryism United States Related ideologies Agrarianism Black conservatism In US Conservative feminism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Conservative socialism Corporatism Hispanic conservatism In US LGBTQ conservatism Ordoliberalism Para-fascism Related topics Anti-communism White Terror Anti-gender movement Anti-immigration Catholic social teaching Conservative wave NatCon Radical right Europe US Right realism Right-wing politics Alt Authoritarianism Centre Dictatorship Far New Small-c conservative Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Main articles: Traditional values and Traditionalist conservatism See also: Tradition (disambiguation) § Religion The concepts of tradition and traditional values are frequently used in political and religious discourse to establish the legitimacy of a particular set of values. In the United States in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, the concept of tradition has been used to argue for the centrality and legitimacy of conservative religious values.

[ 33 ] Similarly, strands of orthodox theological thought from a number of world religions openly identify themselves as wanting a return to tradition, although "tradition" or its plural can also refer simply to the core teaching of religious group: thus Paul in 1 Corinthians 11 :2 refers to "the traditions, even as I delivered them to you".

[ 34 ] The term " traditionalist Catholic " refers to those, such as Archbishop Lefebvre , who want the worship and practices of the Church to be as they were before the Second Vatican Council of 1962–65.

[ 35 ] Likewise, Sunni Muslims are referred to as Ahl el-Sunnah wa Al-Jamā‘ah ( Arabic : أهل السنة والجماعة ), literally "people of the tradition [of Muhammad ] and the community", emphasizing their attachment to religious and cultural tradition.

More generally, tradition has been used as a way of determining the political spectrum , with right-wing parties having a stronger affinity to certain ways of the past than left-wing ones.

[ 36 ] Here, the concept of adherence tradition is embodied by the political philosophy of traditionalist conservatism (or simply traditionalism ), which emphasizes the need for the principles of natural law and transcendent moral order, hierarchy and organic unity , agrarianism , classicism and high culture , and the intersecting spheres of loyalty.

[ 37 ] Traditionalists would therefore reject the notions of individualism , liberalism, modernity, and social progress , but promote cultural and educational renewal, [ 38 ] and revive interest in the Church, the family, the State and local community. This view has been criticised for including in its notion of tradition practices which are no longer considered to be desirable, for example, stereotypical views of the place of women in domestic affairs .

[ 39 ] In other societies, especially ones experiencing rapid social change, the idea of what is "traditional" may be widely contested, with different groups striving to establish their own values as the legitimate traditional ones. Defining and enacting traditions in some cases can be the means of building unity between subgroups in a diverse society; in other cases, tradition is a means of othering and keeping groups distinct from one another.

[ 33 ] In artistic discourse [ edit ] Holiday celebrations may be passed down as traditions, as is the case with this distinctly Polish Christmas meal, decor with Christmas tree , a tradition since the late 18th and early 19th centuries.

In artistic contexts, in the performance of traditional genres (such as traditional dance ), adherence to traditional guidelines is of greater importance than performer's preferences.

[ 1 ] It is often the unchanging form of certain arts that leads to their perception as traditional.

[ 1 ] For artistic endeavors, tradition has been used as a contrast to creativity , with traditional and folk art associated with unoriginal imitation or repetition, in contrast to fine art , which is valued for being original and unique. More recent philosophy of art , however, considers interaction with tradition as integral to the development of new artistic expression.

[ 33 ] Relationship to other concepts [ edit ] In the social sciences, tradition is often contrasted with modernity , particularly in terms of whole societies. This dichotomy is generally associated with a linear model of social change, in which societies progress from being traditional to being modern.

[ 40 ] Tradition-oriented societies have been characterized as valuing filial piety , harmony and group welfare, stability, and interdependence , while a society exhibiting modernity would value "individualism (with free will and choice), mobility, and progress." [ 33 ] Another author discussing tradition in relationship to modernity, Anthony Giddens, sees tradition as something bound to ritual, where ritual guarantees the continuation of tradition.

[ 41 ] Gusfield and others, though, criticize this dichotomy as oversimplified, arguing that tradition is dynamic, heterogeneous, and coexists successfully with modernity even within individuals.

[ 40 ] Tradition should be differentiated from customs, conventions , laws, norms , routines, rules and similar concepts. Whereas tradition is supposed to be invariable, they are seen as more flexible and subject to innovation and change.

[ 1 ] [ 10 ] Whereas justification for tradition is ideological , the justification for other similar concepts is more practical or technical.

[ 11 ] Over time, customs, routines, conventions, rules and such can evolve into traditions, but that usually requires that they stop having (primarily) a practical purpose.

[ 11 ] For example, wigs worn by lawyers were at first common and fashionable; spurs worn by military officials were at first practical but now are both impractical and traditional.

[ 11 ] Preservation [ edit ] A woman welcoming the Shabbat , a tradition dating back over 3,300 years The legal protection of tradition includes a number of international agreements and national laws. In addition to the fundamental protection of cultural property, there is also cooperation between the United Nations , UNESCO and Blue Shield International in the protection or recording of traditions and customs. The protection of culture and traditions is becoming increasingly important nationally and internationally.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] In many countries, concerted attempts are being made to preserve traditions that are at risk of being lost. A number of factors can exacerbate the loss of tradition, including industrialization, globalization , and the assimilation or marginalization of specific cultural groups.

[ 47 ] Customary celebrations and lifestyles are among the traditions that are sought to be preserved.

[ 48 ] Likewise, the concept of tradition has been used to defend the preservation and reintroduction of minority languages such as Cornish under the auspices of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages .

[ 49 ] Specifically, the charter holds that these languages "contribute to the maintenance and development of Europe's cultural wealth and traditions". The Charter goes on to call for "the use or adoption... of traditional and correct forms of place-names in regional or minority languages".

[ 50 ] Similarly, UNESCO includes both "oral tradition" and "traditional manifestations" in its definition of a country's cultural properties and heritage. So therefore it works to preserve tradition in countries such as Brazil.

[ 51 ] In Japan , certain artworks, structures, craft techniques and performing arts are considered by the Japanese government to be a precious legacy of the Japanese people, and are protected under the Japanese Law for the Protection of Cultural Properties.

[ 52 ] This law also identifies people skilled at traditional arts as " National Living Treasures ", and encourages the preservation of their craft.

[ 53 ] For native peoples like the Māori in New Zealand, there is conflict between the fluid identity assumed as part of modern society and the traditional identity with the obligations that accompany it; the loss of language heightens the feeling of isolation and damages the ability to perpetuate tradition.

[ 47 ] Traditional cultural expressions [ edit ] The phrase " traditional cultural expressions " is used by the World Intellectual Property Organization to refer to "any form of artistic and literary expression in which traditional culture and knowledge are embodied. They are transmitted from one generation to the next, and include handmade textiles, paintings, stories, legends, ceremonies, music, songs, rhythms and dance." [ 54 ] See also [ edit ] Folklore Origin myth Perennial philosophy Sacred tradition References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Thomas A. Green (1997).

Folklore: an encyclopedia of beliefs, customs, tales, music, or art . ABC-CLIO. p. 800.

ISBN 978-0-87436-986-1 .

^ a b c d e f g Shils 12 ^ "Tradition Definition & Meaning | Britannica Dictionary" .

The Britannica Dictionary . Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.

According to tradition, the goddess lies sleeping beneath the mountain.

^ a b c d e Anthony Giddens (2003).

Runaway world: how globalization is reshaping our lives . Taylor & Francis. p. 39.

ISBN 978-0-415-94487-8 .

^ a b Yves Congar (2004).

The meaning of tradition . Ignatius Press. p. 9.

ISBN 978-1-58617-021-9 .

^ Shils 3–6 ^ Shils 18 ^ a b c d Pascal Boyer (1990).

Tradition as truth and communication: a cognitive description of traditional discourse . Cambridge University Press. p. 7.

ISBN 978-0-521-37417-0 .

^ a b Shils 15 ^ a b c d e Hobsbawm 2–3 ^ a b c d e f Hobsbawm 3–4 ^ Hobsbawm 1 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Langlois, S. (2001). "Traditions: Social".

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences . pp.

15829– 15833.

doi : 10.1016/B0-08-043076-7/02028-3 .

ISBN 978-0080430768 .

^ a b Shils 14 ^ Lilburn, Douglas (1984).

A Search for Tradition . Wellington: Alexander Turnbull Library Endowment Trust, assisted by the New Zealand Composers Foundation.

ISBN 0-908702-00-0 .

[ page needed ] ^ Michael A. Williams; Collett Cox; Martin S. Jaffee (1992).

Innovation in religious traditions: essays in the interpretation of religious change . Walter de Gruyter. p. 1.

ISBN 978-3-11-012780-5 .

^ Pascal Boyer (1990).

Tradition as truth and communication: a cognitive description of traditional discourse . Cambridge University Press. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-521-37417-0 .

^ a b c d Handler, Richard; Jocelyn Innekin (1984). "Tradition, Genuine or Spurious".

Journal of American Folklore .

29 .

^ Shils 16 ^ a b Hobsbawm 1–2 ^ Ingraham, Chrys (2008).

White Weddings: Romancing Heterosexuality in Popular Culture . New York: Taylor & Francis, Inc. pp.

60– 61.

ISBN 978-0-415-95194-4 .

^ Terence Ranger , The Invention of Tradition in Colonial Africa , in E. J. (Eric J.) Hobsbawm ; T. O. (Terence O.) Ranger (1992).

The Invention of tradition . Cambridge University Press. pp.

211– 263.

ISBN 978-0-521-43773-8 .

^ Hobsbawm 7 ^ a b Kurz-Milke and Martignon 129 ^ a b Kurz-Milke and Martignon 129–130 ^ Sujata Patel (2009).

The ISA Handbook of Diverse Sociological Traditions . SAGE Publications. p. 5.

ISBN 978-1-84787-402-3 .

^ Fragaszy and Perry 2, 12 ^ Whiten, Andrew; Antoine Spiteri; Victoria Horner; Kristin E. Bonnie; Susan P. Lambeth; Steven J. Schapiro; Frans B.M. de Waal (2007).

"Transmission of Multiple Traditions within and between Chimpanzee Groups" .

Current Biology .

17 (12): 1038– 1043.

Bibcode : 2007CBio...17.1038W .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2007.05.031 .

ISSN 0960-9822 .

PMID 17555968 .

S2CID 1236151 .

^ Duckles, Vincent.

"Musicology" .

Grove Music Online. Oxford Music Online . Retrieved 6 October 2011 .

^ Kenneth Gloag, David Beard (2005).

Musicology The Key Concepts . Routledge.

^ Texas University.

"Is-Ought fallacy" .

Fallacies Definitions . Texas State University Department of Philosophy. Archived from the original on 26 August 2006 . Retrieved 7 February 2008 .

^ Trufant, William (1917).

Argumentation and Debating . Houghton Mifflin company. Digitized 9 May 2007.

^ a b c d Bronner, Simon J. "Tradition" in International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences . Ed. William A. Darity, Jr.. Vol. 8. 2nd ed. Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2008. p420-422.

^ 1 Corinthians 11:2 : American Standard Version (1901), cf.

2 Thessalonians 2:15 ^ Marty, Martin E.; R. Scott Appleby (1994).

Fundamentalisms observed . University of Chicago Press. p. 92.

ISBN 978-0-226-50878-8 .

^ Farrell, Henry John; Lawrence, Eric; Sides, John (2008).

"Self-Segregation or Deliberation? Blog Readership, Participation and Polarization in American Politics" .

SSRN Working Paper Series .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.1151490 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

^ Frohnen, Bruce, Jeremy Beer, and Jeffrey O. Nelson, ed. (2006) American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia , Wilmington, DE: ISI Books, pp. 870–875.

^ Frohnen, Bruce, Jeremy Beer, and Jeffrey O. Nelson, ed. (2006) American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia Wilmington, DE: ISI Books, p. 870.

^ M. Dwayne Smith; George D. Self (1981). "Feminists and traditionalists: An attitudinal comparison".

Sex Roles .

7 (2): 183– 188.

doi : 10.1007/BF00287804 .

S2CID 143401247 .

^ a b Gusfield, Joseph R. (1 January 1967). "Tradition and Modernity: Misplaced Polarities in the Study of Social Change".

The American Journal of Sociology .

72 (4): 351– 362.

doi : 10.1086/224334 .

ISSN 0002-9602 .

JSTOR 2775860 .

PMID 6071952 .

S2CID 8013111 .

^ Giddens, "Living in a Post-Traditional Society" 64 ^ "UNESCO Legal Instruments: Second Protocol to the Hague Convention of 1954 for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict 1999" .

Archived from the original on 25 August 2021 . Retrieved 29 March 2020 .

^ Roger O’Keefe, Camille Péron, Tofig Musayev, Gianluca Ferrari "Protection of Cultural Property. Military Manual." UNESCO, 2016.

^ Gerold Keusch "Kulturschutz in der Ära der Identitätskriege" (German) in Truppendienst - Magazin des Österreichischen Bundesheeres, 24 October 2018.

^ Vgl. auch "Karl von Habsburg on a mission in Lebanon" (in German). 28 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 26 May 2020 . Retrieved 29 March 2020 .

^ Vgl. z. B. Corine Wegener, Marjan Otter: Cultural Property at War: Protecting Heritage during Armed Conflict.

In: The Getty Conservation Institute, Newsletter 23.1, Spring 2008; Eden Stiffman: Cultural Preservation in Disasters, War Zones. Presents Big Challenges.

In: The Chronicle of Philanthropy, 11 May 2015.

^ a b McIntosh, Tracey (2005). "Maori Identities: Fixed, Fluid, Forced". In James H. Liu (ed.).

New Zealand identities: departures and destinations . Wellington, N.Z.: Victoria University Press. p. 40.

ISBN 0-86473-517-0 .

^ "Bahrain seeks to preserve ancient pearling traditions" .

CNN . 11 March 2010 . Retrieved 5 February 2011 .

^ Richard Savill (12 November 2009).

"Cornish street signs to be translated" .

The Daily Telegraph . London . Retrieved 6 February 2010 .

^ "European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" .

Council of Europe . 5 November 1992.

Archived from the original on 26 February 2011 . Retrieved 6 February 2010 .

^ "World Heritage in Brazil" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 26 January 2011 . Retrieved 11 February 2011 .

^ "Cultural Properties for Future Generations" (PDF) .

Administration of Cultural Affairs in Japan ― Fiscal 2009 .

Agency for Cultural Affairs . June 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 March 2009.

^ "Treasures of Japan – Its Living Artists" .

San Francisco Chronicle . 30 May 1999.

Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 5 February 2011 .

^ Zuckermann, Ghil'ad ; et al. (2015), ENGAGING - A Guide to Interacting Respectfully and Reciprocally with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People, and their Arts Practices and Intellectual Property (PDF) , Australian Government: Indigenous Culture Support, p. 7, archived from the original (PDF) on 30 March 2016 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Works cited [ edit ] Fragaszy, Dorothy Munkenbeck; Perry, Susan (2003).

Towards a biology of traditions . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-81597-0 .

Giddens, Anthony (1994). "Living in a Post-Traditional Society".

Reflexive modernization: politics, tradition and aesthetics in the modern social order . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-2472-2 .

Hobsbawm, E. J.

, Introduction: Inventing Traditions , in E. J. (Eric J.) Hobsbawm ; T. O. (Terence O.) Ranger (1992).

The Invention of tradition . Cambridge University Pressv.

ISBN 978-0-521-43773-8 .

Kurz-Milcke, Elke; Maritgnon, Laura (2002).

"Modeling Practices and "Tradition" " .

Model-based reasoning: science, technology, values . Springer. pp.

127– 144.

ISBN 978-0-306-47244-2 .

Shils, Edward (2006).

Tradition . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-75326-3 .

Further reading [ edit ] Sowell, T (1980) Knowledge and Decisions Basic Books.

ISBN 0-465-03738-0 Polanyi, M (1964) Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy ISBN 0-226-67288-3 Pelikan, Jaroslav (1984).

The Vindication of Tradition . New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

ISBN 0-300-03638-8 pbk.

Klein, Ernest, A comprehensive etymological dictionary of the English language: Dealing with the origin of words and their sense development thus illustrating the history and civilization of culture , Elsevier, Oxford, 7th ed., 2000.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Traditions .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Tradition .

विविधता में एकता का परिचायक है 'परंपरा- नगर चौरासी' (in Hindi) v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Folklore genres and types Narrative Animal tale Fable Fairy tale list Legend Tall tales Parable Personal narrative Urban legend Oral tradition Folk etymology False Joke Nursery rhyme Proverb Repositories Riddle Saying Word game Folk belief Birthstone Folk religion Folk saint Ghostlore Legend tripping Luminous gemstones Mythology Old wives' tale Ritual Silver bullet Weather lore Folk arts Folk art Folk costume Folk epic Folk dance Folk instrument Folk music Folk play Folk poetry Folk wrestling Foodways Society Cunning folk Fakelore Folk devil Folk healer Folk hero See also Folklore studies Morphology (folkloristics) Aarne–Thompson–Uther Index Motif-Index of Folk-Literature Storytelling Tradition Knowledge Medicine Story Vernacular Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic 2 3 Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐2rtql
Cached time: 20250818064124
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.962 seconds
Real time usage: 1.163 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5080/1000000
Revision size: 43541/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 201776/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3512/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 202673/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.554/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16569939/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  864.051      1 -total
 37.42%  323.295      1 Template:Reflist
 21.08%  182.136     20 Template:Cite_book
 18.94%  163.646      1 Template:Conservatism_sidebar
 10.44%   90.240     12 Template:Lang
  6.57%   56.803      1 Template:Short_description
  6.35%   54.866      1 Template:Conservatism_navbox
  5.15%   44.529      9 Template:Cite_web
  4.86%   41.994      1 Template:Commons_category
  4.83%   41.722      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30067:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818064124 and revision id 1306527379. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tradition&oldid=1306527379 " Categories : Tradition Political culture Social agreement Social philosophy Sociological terminology Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2011 CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2021 Articles with hAudio microformats Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Hindi-language sources (hi) Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 06:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tradition 95 languages Add topic

