Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents A. Roberto Frisancho 3 languages فارسی مصرى 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia A. Roberto Frisancho Born ( 1939-02-04 ) February 4, 1939 (age 86) Cusco , Peru Nationality Peru Known for developmental human adaptation Scientific career Fields biological anthropologist Institutions University of Michigan A. Roberto Frisancho (born February 4, 1939) is a biological anthropologist and the Arthur F. Thurnau Professor of Anthropology at the University of Michigan . He is the 2008 recipient of the Franz Boas Distinguished Achievement Award in Anthropology  bestowed by the American Human Biology Association . He is best known for his work on developmental human adaptation to extreme environments such as high altitudes , growth, anthropometry and evaluation of nutritional status . Specifically, he advanced the hypothesis and demonstrated that the origin of adult variability of biological phenotypic traits are function of the effects and adaptations to environmental conditions that the organism makes during the developmental stage. Within this conceptual framework, he has contributed numerous papers on bioenergetics , the nutrition and developmental determinants of pre-natal and post-natal growth including teenage pregnancy. In 2013, he received the Charles Darwin Lifetime Achievement Award bestowed by the American Association of Physical Anthropologists.

Early life [ edit ] Frisancho was born on February 4, 1939, in Cusco , Peru , speaking both Spanish and Quechua as a child. He attended the Tourist Guide School of Cusco and worked as a tour guide in Cusco and Machu Picchu . That job allowed Frisancho to develop an interest in anthropology and expand his linguistic skills and become fluent in multiple languages (including Spanish, Quechua, English, French and Portuguese). Later in 1962 he graduated with a Bachelor in Humanities from the National University of San Antonio Abad of Cusco. Upon graduating, he married Hedy G. Moscoso and had two sons, Roberto Javier and Juan Frisancho. In 1963 he won a Fulbright fellowship and went to  Pennsylvania State University to study biological anthropology. During that time, he cultivated his interest in physiological, cultural, and developmental adaptations to extreme environments such as high altitude, cold, heath, under-nutrition and over-nutrition.

Career [ edit ] In 1969, he received his Ph.D.

in Anthropology from Pennsylvania State University and subsequently became a Research Scientist at the University of Michigan Center for Human Growth and Development and Assistant Professor of Anthropology at the Department of Anthropology. In 1972 he was named Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

He was the recipient of the LS&A Excellence in Education Award in 1996, 1997, and 1998, and the Amoco Distinguished Faculty Achievement Award in 1997. In 1999 he was named the Arthur A. Thurnau Professor of Anthropology. In June 2006, he was awarded the title of Honorary Professor of Anthropology of the National University of San Antonio Abad of Cusco and in April 2008 received the Franz Boas Distinguished Achievement Award from the American Human Biology Association. In 2013, he received the Charles Darwin Lifetime Achievement Award bestowed by the American Association of Physical Anthropologists.

His research interest focuses on the connection between biology, evolution and culture in determining the expression of biological traits. His approach seeks to evaluate contemporary biological traits as byproducts of past biological adaptations both in contemporary and evolutionary perspective. He is also interested in anthropometric standards for the evaluation of child and adult growth and nutritional status.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ Leonard, William R (2009).

"Contributions of A. Roberto Frisancho to human population biology: an introduction" .

Am. J. Hum. Biol.

21 (5). United States: 599– 605.

doi : 10.1002/ajhb.20916 .

PMID 19367580 .

External links [ edit ] publications Roberto Frisancho Biography at the University of Michigan Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=A._Roberto_Frisancho&oldid=1263753726 " Categories : 1939 births Living people People from Cusco Physical anthropologists 21st-century American anthropologists Peruvian anthropologists Peruvian people of Quechua descent University of Michigan faculty Pennsylvania State University alumni Hidden category: Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 18 December 2024, at 12:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents A. Roberto Frisancho 3 languages Add topic

