Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early Soviet experiments 2 Freudenthal's LINCOS 3 Ollongren's LINCOS 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Astrolinguistics 3 languages Català Français 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Field of linguistics related to extraterrestrial life Astrolinguistics is a field of linguistics connected with the search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI).

[ 1 ] Early Soviet experiments [ edit ] Arguably the first attempt to construct a language for interplanetary communication was the AO language created by the anarchist philosopher Wolf Gordin (brother of Abba Gordin ) in his books Grammar of the Language of the Mankind AO (1920) and Grammar of the Language AO (1924), [ 2 ] was presented as a language for interplanetary communication at the First International Exhibition of Interplanetary Machines and Mechanisms (dedicated to the 10th anniversary of the Russian Revolution and the 70th anniversary of the birth of Tsiolkovsky ) in Moscow, 1927.

[ 3 ] The declared goal of Gordin was to construct a language which would be non-"fetishizing", non-"sociomorphic", non-gender based and non- classist . The design of the language was inspired by Russian Futurist poetry , the Gordin brothers' pan-anarchist philosophy, and Tsiolkovsky's early remarks on possible cosmic messaging (which were in accord with Hans Freudenthal's later insights ).

[ 4 ] However, Sergei N. Kuznetsov notes that "Gordin nowhere defines his language as intended for space use," and that "in none of his works does he deal with problems of space communication, only mentioning 'Interplanetary Communication' in passing among other technical areas." [ 5 ] Freudenthal's LINCOS [ edit ] Main article: Lincos (artificial language) An integral part of the SETI project in general is research in the field of the construction of messages for extraterrestrial intelligence, possibly to be transmitted into space from Earth.

[ 6 ] As far as such messages are based on linguistic principles, the research can be considered to belong to astrolinguistics. The first proposal in this field was put forward by the mathematician Hans Freudenthal at the University of Utrecht in the Netherlands , in 1960 – around the time of the first SETI effort at Greenbank in the US. Freudenthal conceived a complete Lingua Cosmica. His book LINCOS: Design of a Language for Cosmic Intercourse seems at first sight non-linguistic, because mathematical concepts are the core of the language. The concepts are, however, introduced in conversations between persons ( Homo sapiens ), de facto by linguistic means. This is witnessed by the innovative examples presented. The book set a landmark in astrolinguistics. This was witnessed by Bruno Bassi's review years later. Bassi noted: “LINCOS is there. In spite of its somewhat ephemeral 'cosmic intercourse' purpose it remains a fascinating linguistic and educational construction, deserving existence as another Toy of Man's Designing”. Freudenthal eventually had lost interest in creating further work altogether because of rising issues in applying LINCOS "for [anything] other than mathematical contents due to the potential different sociological aspects of alien receivers".

[ 7 ] Ollongren's LINCOS [ edit ] The concept astrolinguistics in scientific research was coined as such, also with a view towards message construction for ETI, in 2013 in the monograph Astrolinguistics: Design of a Linguistic System for Interstellar Communication Based on Logic, written by the astronomer and computer scientist Alexander Ollongren from the University of Leiden (the Netherlands). This book presents a new Lingua Cosmica totally different from Freudenthal's design. It describes the way the logic of situations in human societies can be formulated in the lingua, also named LINCOS. This astrolinguistic system, also designed for use in interstellar communication, is based on modern constructive logic [ 8 ] – which assures that all expressions are verifiable. At a deeper, more fundamental level, however, astrolinguistics is concerned with the question whether linguistic universalia can be identified which are potentially useful in communication across interstellar distances between intelligence species. In the view of the new LINCOS these might be certain logic descriptions of specific situations and relations (possibly in an Aristotelian sense). Kadri Tinn's (Astronomy for Humans) review of Ollongren's book recognised that aspect – she wrote: Astrolinguistics is the study of interstellar languages and possibility of communication using an artificially created language that is self-contained and wouldn't include some of the aspects of natural languages. … new Lingua Cosmica is a language system based on applied logic, the understanding of which might be expected from a civilization that has developed technology advanced enough to receive radio emissions.

See also [ edit ] Alien language Alien language in science fiction Wow! signal References [ edit ] ^ Oberhaus, Daniel (2019-10-22).

Extraterrestrial Languages . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-04306-9 .

OCLC 1142708941 .

^ Wolf Gordin, Grammatika logicheskogo yazyka AO [Grammar of the Language AO] (1924) (Russian) ^ Smith, Michael G. (2014-12-01).

Rockets and Revolution: A Cultural History of Early Spaceflight . U of Nebraska Press. p. 130.

ISBN 978-0-8032-8656-6 .

OCLC 1109730256 .

^ (in French) Kuznecov S. Linguistica cosmica: La naissance du paradigme cosmique // Une familière étrangeté: La linguistique russe et soviétique. Paris, 1995 (Histoire Épistémologie Langage. 17/11 (Tome XVII – fascicule 2)), pp. 211–234.

^ (in Russian) Kuznetsov, Sergei N. (2014). "Linguistica cosmica: rozhdeniye 'kosmicheskoy paradigmy' ".

Sovremennaya Nauka (2): 59– 60.

(The updated version of Kuznetsov's 1995 French-language article) ^ "Mission" . Retrieved 8 December 2019 .

^ Dunér, David; Persson, Erik; Holmberg, Gustav (2013-09-26).

The History and Philosophy of Astrobiology: Perspectives on Extraterrestrial Life and the Human Mind . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 203.

ISBN 978-1-4438-5302-6 .

OCLC 942487127 .

^ Ollongren, Alexander (2012-11-27).

Astrolinguistics: Design of a Linguistic System for Interstellar Communication Based on Logic . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 128.

ISBN 978-1-4614-5468-7 .

OCLC 939853829 .

Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Astrolinguistics Resources in your library Resources in other libraries LINCOS: Design of a Language for Cosmic Intercourse , Part I, by Hans Freudenthal, Professor of Mathematics and Logic, University of Utrecht, The Netherlands, 224 pp. North Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam 1960.

Astrolinguistics: Design of a Linguistic System for Interstellar Communication Based on Logic , by Alexander Ollongren, Professor of Computer Science and Dynamical Astronomy, University of Leiden, The Netherlands, 248 pp. Springer Publishers, New York 2013 v t e Constructed languages Classification Artistic Fictional Language game International auxiliary Zonal Engineered Experimental Musical Philosophical Specific languages by group International auxiliary Babm Blissymbols Bolak Communicationssprache Esperanto Adjuvilo Arcaicam Esperanto II Ido Mundolinco Reformed Romániço Universal other esperantidos Glosa Interglossa Idiom Neutral Intal Interlingua Interlingue International Sign Kotava Langue nouvelle Latino sine flexione Lingua Franca Nova Lingwa de planeta Mondial Neo Nal Bino Novial Pasilingua Sambahsa Solresol Sona Unish Universalglot Uropi Volapük Zonal Afrihili Budinos Efatese Eurolengo Guosa Ortatürk Pan-Germanic language Tutonish Pan-Romance language Neolatino Romance Romanid Pan-Slavic language Interslavic Iazychie Runyakitara Wede Weltdeutsch Engineered aUI Basic English Dutton Speedwords Ithkuil Kalaba-X Astrolinguistics Lincos Lingua generalis Loglan Logopandecteision Lojban Real Character Ro Toki Pona Viossa Fictional and other artistic Atlantean Belter Creole Brithenig Chakobsa Dritok Dothraki Elvish languages Enchanta Kēlen Kiliki Klingon Kobaïan Láadan Lapine Loxian Lydnevi Mänti Middle-earth languages Adûnaic Quenya Sindarin Black Speech Khuzdul Valarin Westron Naʼvi Nadsat Newspeak Simlish Spocanian Star Wars languages Syldavian Talossan Teonaht Tsolyáni Utopian Valyrian Venedic Verdurian Wenja Ritual and other Balaibalan Damin Enochian Eskayan Kukurá Lingua ignota Medefaidrin Myska Palawa kani Yerkish Zaum Neography Constructed script Esperanto orthography Sitelen Pona Tolkien's scripts Cirth Sarati Tengwar Study Esperantology A Secret Vice Bridge of Words Conlanging: The Art of Crafting Tongues In the Land of Invented Languages La Ricerca della Lingua Perfetta nella Cultura Europea Comparisons Esperanto/Ido Esperanto/Interlingua Esperanto/Novial Ido/Interlingua Ido/Novial Interlingue/Interlingua Lojban/Loglan List of constructed languages List of language creators Portal v t e Extraterrestrial life Events and objects Shergotty meteorite (1865) Nakhla meteorite (1911) Murchison meteorite (1969) Viking lander biological experiments (1976) Allan Hills 77005 (1977) Allan Hills 84001 (1984) Yamato 000593 (2000) CI1 fossils (2011) Signals of interest Misidentified CP 1919 (misidentified pulsar) CTA-102 (misidentified quasar) Stars KIC 8462852 (unusual light fluctuations) EPIC 204278916 (unusual light fluctuations) VVV-WIT-07 (unusual light fluctuations) HD 164595 signal (unknown origin) Other SHGb02+14a (radio source) Wow! signal (inconclusive) Fast radio burst (unknown origin) BLC1 (radio signal) Life in the Universe Earliest known life forms Planetary habitability in the Solar System Life on Venus Life on Mars Life on Titan Planetary habitability Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems List of potentially habitable exoplanets Planetary habitability Superhabitable planet Tholin Space missions Beagle 2 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection BioSentinel Curiosity rover Darwin Dragonfly Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover ExoLance EXPOSE Foton-M3 Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Geyser Hopper Mars sample-return mission Mars 2020 Northern Light Opportunity rover Perseverance rover SpaceX Red Dragon Spirit rover Tanpopo Titan Mare Explorer Venus In Situ Explorer Viking 1 Viking 2 Interstellar communication Active SETI Allen Telescope Array Arecibo message Arecibo Observatory Berkeley SETI Research Center Bracewell probe Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Gauss's Pythagorean right triangle proposal Astrolinguistics Lincos language NIROSETI Pioneer plaque Project Cyclops Project Ozma Project Phoenix SERENDIP Search for extraterrestrial intelligence SETI@home setiQuest Voyager Golden Record Water hole Xenolinguistics Types of alleged extraterrestrial beings Energy beings Grey aliens Insectoids Little green men Nordic aliens Reptilian humanoids Hypotheses Cosmic pluralism Directed panspermia Drake equation Extraterrestrial hypothesis Fermi paradox Hypothetical types of biochemistry Interplanetary contamination Kardashev scale Mediocrity principle Non-planetary abiogenesis Panspermia Fermi paradox solutions Aestivation hypothesis Berserker hypothesis Dark forest hypothesis Firstborn hypothesis Great Filter Hart–Tipler conjecture Neocatastrophism Planetarium hypothesis Rare Earth hypothesis Zoo hypothesis Related topics Ancient astronauts Astrobiology Astroecology Biosignature Brookings Report Exotheology Extraterrestrials in fiction Extremophile Hemolithin History of the extraterrestrial life debate Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Noogenesis Planetary protection Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Post-detection policy San Marino Scale Technosignature UFO religion Xenoarchaeology v t e Interstellar communications Programs Active SETI Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Search for extraterrestrial intelligence Messages List of interstellar radio messages A Message from Earth Across the Universe Arecibo message Bracewell probe Cosmic Call CosmicOS Hello from Earth Pioneer plaque Teen Age Message Voyager Golden Record People Frank Drake Ann Druyan Hans Freudenthal Sebastian von Hoerner Nikolai Kardashev Jon Lomberg Carl Sagan Linda Salzman Sagan Iosif Shklovsky Aleksandr Zaitsev Other Alien language Archaeology, Anthropology, and Interstellar Communication Astrobiology Astrolinguistics Drake equation Extraterrestrial life Lincos Fermi paradox Prix Guzman San Marino Scale Category Space Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Astrolinguistics&oldid=1289672003 " Categories : Extraterrestrial life Alien language Hidden categories: Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 03:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Astrolinguistics 3 languages Add topic

