Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Confederate victory at Bull Run (July 1861) 2 Confederate invasion of Kentucky (September 1861) 3 Union capture of Forts Henry and Donelson (February 1862) 4 Albert Sidney Johnston's death (April 1862) 5 Union capture of New Orleans (April 1862) 6 Union victory at Battle of Antietam (September 1862) 7 Stonewall Jackson's death (May 1863) 8 Battle of Gettysburg and Union capture of Vicksburg (July 1863) 9 Union victory in the Chattanooga Campaign (November 1863) 10 Grant's appointment as Union general-in-chief (March 1864) 11 Union capture of Atlanta (September 1864) 12 Lincoln's reelection (November 1864) 13 See also 14 Notes 15 References Toggle the table of contents Turning point of the American Civil War 3 languages العربية Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The Battle of Gettysburg , fought over three days from July 1 to July 3, 1863, in and around Gettysburg, Pennsylvania , proved the deadliest battle in both the American Civil War and of any battle in American history with over 50,000 casualties. In the battle, the Union army repelled Confederate general Robert E. Lee 's attempt to invade the North, which turned the war in favor of the Union , leading to its victory two years later, end of the war , and the nation's preservation.

The turning point of the American Civil War was a military victory or other development after which it seems certain that the Union would prevail. While there is no unanimity as to which battle or development constituted the Civil War 's turning point , the victory of the Union army in the Battle of Gettysburg , fought over three days from July 1 to July 3, 1863 in and around Gettysburg, Pennsylvania , followed immediately by the July 4th Union victory in the siege of Vicksburg on the Mississippi River is often cited as the Civil War's turning point. Several other decisive battles and events throughout the war have also been proposed as turning points.

This list includes a chronological listing of the military developments sometimes cited as turning points in the war and the associated arguments in support of their respective roles as turning points in the war. The list includes battle victories by the military forces of the Confederate States in the first few months after the Civil War commenced in April 1861, which led to changes in the plans and resources of the armed forces of the Union in the war, which concluded with the Confederacy signing the articles of surrender in April 1865.

Confederate victory at Bull Run (July 1861) [ edit ] Main article: First Battle of Bull Run The Confederate States Army captures a Union army battery during the First Battle of Bull Run The First Battle of Bull Run , on July 21, 1861, was the first major land battle of the war. Until this time, the North was generally confident about its prospects for quickly crushing the rebellion with an easy, direct strike against the Confederate capital at Richmond, Virginia . The embarrassing rout of Brig. Gen.

Irvin McDowell 's army during the battle made clear the fallacy of this viewpoint. Many Northerners were shocked and realized that the war was going to be much lengthier and bloodier than they had anticipated. It steeled their determination. If Confederates had hoped before this that they could sap Northern willpower and quietly slip away from the Union with a minor military investment, their victory at Bull Run, ironically, destroyed those hopes.

[ 1 ] Lincoln immediately signed legislation that increased the Union Army by 500,000 men and allowed for their terms of service to last the duration of the war. Congress quickly passed the Confiscation Act of 1861 , which declared that if a slave holder used his slaves to support the Confederacy he would forfeit his right to them. While the status of the slaves was unclear at the time (they were held as war contraband until the Emancipation Proclamation), this was the first legislative step toward defining the war as a matter of ending slavery .

Civil War division, 1863 Union states Free territories (Union) Border states (Union slave states) Confederate states Slave territories (contested) Confederate invasion of Kentucky (September 1861) [ edit ] Main article: Kentucky in the American Civil War Union assault on Confederate entrenchments at the Battle of Fort Donelson By mid-1861, eleven states had seceded, but four more slave-owning " border states " remained in the Union, Missouri , Kentucky , Maryland , and Delaware . Kentucky was considered the most at risk; the state legislature had declared neutrality in the dispute, which was seen as a moderately pro-Confederate stance. The loss of Kentucky might have been catastrophic because of its control of the strategic Tennessee and Ohio rivers and its position from which the vital state of Ohio could be invaded. Lincoln wrote, "I think to lose Kentucky is nearly the same as to lose the whole game." On September 3, 1861, Confederate General Leonidas Polk extended his defensive line north from Tennessee when Gideon Pillow occupied Columbus, Kentucky (in response to Ulysses S. Grant 's occupation of Belmont, Missouri , directly across the Mississippi River). Polk followed this by moving through the Cumberland Gap and occupying parts of southeastern Kentucky. This violation of state neutrality enraged many of its citizens; the state legislature, overriding the veto of Governor Beriah Magoffin , requested assistance from the federal government. Kentucky was never again a safe area of operation for Confederate forces. Polk's actions were not directed by the Confederate government. Almost by accident, the Confederacy was placed at an enormous strategic disadvantage. The early Union successes in the Western Theater (the locale of all their successful large-scale non-naval initiatives until 1864) can be directly tied to Polk's blunder.

Union capture of Forts Henry and Donelson (February 1862) [ edit ] Main articles: Battle of Fort Henry and Battle of Fort Donelson In Tennessee, the capture of Forts Henry and Donelson , and the Confederate surrender at the latter, were the first significant Union victories during the war and the start of a mostly successful campaign in the Western Theater. Ulysses S. Grant completed both actions by February 16, 1862, and by doing so, opened the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers as Union supply lines and avenues of invasion to Tennessee, Mississippi , and eventually Georgia . The loss of control of these rivers was a significant strategic defeat for the Confederacy. This was the start of offensive actions by Grant that, with the sole exception of the Battle of Shiloh , would continue for the rest of the war. The victories and Grant's successful demand for unconditional surrender were the beginning of intensive press coverage of Grant and would propel his career until he would become leader of the Army of the Potomac, the army that would take Lee's surrender at Appomattox Court House just over three years later.

Albert Sidney Johnston's death (April 1862) [ edit ] Further information: Albert Sidney Johnston and Battle of Shiloh Confederates launch a surprise early morning attack on the Union encampment on the first day of the Battle of Shiloh Albert Sidney Johnston was considered one of the best generals serving in the Western Theater. By 1862, he commanded all Confederate forces between the Cumberland Gap and Arkansas . Before the battles of Fort Henry and Fort Donelson, Johnston had advocated improving the forts' structures as well as deploying additional troops and arms to more adequately defend them. The Confederate government failed to meet these recommendations. Ulysses S. Grant captured the forts in February 1862 and launched a full-scale invasion of Tennessee. The fall of these forts was inaccurately blamed on Johnston, but he continued to serve.

In March 1862, Johnston organized the Army of Mississippi with P. G. T. Beauregard . He launched his attack at the Battle of Shiloh in April 1862. Johnston's plan was to drive the Union army from its landing point on the Tennessee River into the surrounding swamps. He assigned Beauregard to coordinate the attack. Beauregard disagreed with his strategy and instead planned to drive the enemy back toward the river. He in turn directed reconnaissance at this plan, resulting in the ultimate failure to pinpoint Grant's army. On the first day of battle, Johnston personally led the attack on the enemy. He was possibly a victim of friendly fire, receiving a hit in the knee which severed his popliteal artery . Johnston died within an hour. His death resulted in critical reassignments of his command to less talented generals who failed to repair the virtually doomed Western Theater.

Union capture of New Orleans (April 1862) [ edit ] Further information: New Orleans in the American Civil War Farragut's fleet forces its way past the downstream forts prior to the capture of New Orleans Early in the war, Confederate strategists believed the primary threat to New Orleans would come from the north, and made their defensive preparations accordingly. As forces under Grant made gains in the Western Theater, much of the military equipment and manpower in the city's vicinity was sent up the Mississippi River in an attempt to stem the victorious Union tide.

[ 2 ] When Flag Officer David Farragut was able to force the Union Navy 's West Gulf Blockading Squadron past the Confederacy's only two forts below the city in the Battle of Forts Jackson and St. Philip , New Orleans had no means to oppose capture . Thus the port, by far the largest Confederate city, fell undamaged into Union hands, tightening its grip on the Mississippi River and fulfilling a key element of the Anaconda Plan for the South's defeat. Although the occupation under Maj. Gen.

Benjamin Butler was detested by the city's antebellum elites, he was astute enough to build a base of political support among the poorer classes and create an extensive intelligence and counterespionage capability, nullifying the threat of insurrection. The Confederacy's loss of its greatest port had significant diplomatic consequences. Confederate agents abroad were generally received more coolly, if at all, after news of the city's capture reached London and Paris.

Union victory at Battle of Antietam (September 1862) [ edit ] Main article: Battle of Antietam Union forces cross Burnside's Bridge at the Battle of Antietam The Battle of Antietam , fought September 17, 1862, was the bloodiest single day of conflict in American military history. But it also had two strategic consequences. Although considered a tactical draw between the Army of the Potomac and the much smaller Army of Northern Virginia , it marked the end of Robert E. Lee 's invasion of the North. One of his goals was to entice the slave-holding state of Maryland to join the Confederacy, or at least recruit soldiers there. He failed in that objective; he also failed in marshaling Northern fears and opinions to pressure a settlement to the war.

[ 3 ] But more strategically, George B. McClellan 's victory was just convincing enough that President Lincoln thought it time to announce his preliminary Emancipation Proclamation , which stated that, one hundred days later, on January 1, 1863, he would issue his final Emancipation Proclamation, proclaiming all slaves in states in rebellion to be free. He had been counseled by his cabinet to postpone issuing the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation until a Union battlefield victory could be announced, lest it appear to be an act of desperation. Along with its immense effect on American history and race relations, the Emancipation Proclamation effectively prevented the British Empire from recognizing the Confederacy as a legitimate government. The British public had strong anti-slavery beliefs and would not have tolerated joining the pro-slavery side of a fight where slavery was now a prominent issue.

[ 4 ] This greatly diminished the Confederacy's hopes of surviving a lengthy war against the North's suffocating naval blockade. Support from Napoleon III's France was still a possibility, but it never came to pass. Antietam and two other coincident failed actions— Braxton Bragg 's invasion of Kentucky (sometimes called the "high-water mark of the Confederacy in the Western Theater" [ 5 ] ) and Earl Van Dorn 's advance against Corinth, Mississippi —represented the Confederacy's only attempts at coordinated strategic offensives in multiple theaters of war.

[ 6 ] Stonewall Jackson's death (May 1863) [ edit ] Further information: Stonewall Jackson Stonewall Jackson on his deathbed in May 1863, following a friendly fire incident After winning the Battle of Chancellorsville , the Army of Northern Virginia lost Lt. Gen.

Stonewall Jackson to pneumonia following a friendly fire accident. His death was a blow to the morale of the Confederate Army , since he was considered one of its most popular and successful commanders. Two months later, Robert E. Lee had no general with Jackson's audacity available at the Battle of Gettysburg . Many historians argue that Jackson might have succeeded in seizing key battlefield positions, including Culp's Hill and Cemetery Hill at the end of the first day of fighting in the Battle of Gettysburg, which his replacements were unable or unwilling to take.

[ 7 ] Lee shared this belief, telling his subordinate generals on different occasions that they should have acted like Jackson would have.

[ 8 ] Battle of Gettysburg and Union capture of Vicksburg (July 1863) [ edit ] Main articles: Battle of Gettysburg and Siege of Vicksburg A Union battalion scales the defenses of Vicksburg in a costly failed assault ordered by Grant early in the siege Union troops repulsed Pickett's Charge on the last day of the Battle of Gettysburg , fought on July 3, 1863 During the Battle of Gettysburg , a three-day battle fought between July 1 and July 3, 1863, the Union army , led by Maj. Gen.

George Meade , repelled an attempt by the Confederate Army general Robert E. Lee to penetrate the North. The Battle of Gettysburg resulted in over 50,000 Confederate and Union casualties, the most of both any Civil War battle and any battle in American military history. The Union victory in the Battle of Gettysburg is routinely cited as the war's turning point, representing a decisive and strategic Union victory that altered the war in the Union's favor and led ultimately to the nation's preservation. The day following the Union victory in the Battle of Gettysburg, on July 4, 1863, the most important Confederate stronghold, located on the Mississippi River in Vicksburg, Mississippi , also fell to the Union, in the Siege of Vicksburg .

[ 9 ] The Battle of Gettysburg was the first major defeat suffered by Lee. During the three-day battle, the Union's Army of the Potomac decisively repelled Lee's second attempt to invade the North, resulting in extensive casualties on Lee's Army of Northern Virginia . The National Park Service marks the point at which Pickett's Charge collapsed, a copse of trees on Cemetery Ridge, as the high-water mark of the Confederacy . From this point onward, Lee ceased attempting strategic offensive military attacks against the Union. While the Civil War endured for two additional years and the Union ultimately concluded that a more aggressive military approach, which Union general Ulysses S. Grant brought to the war, was required to fully subdue the Confederates, any realistic probability of a Confederate victory ended with the Confederate defeat in the Battle of Gettysburg and its subsequent loss of its stronghold in Vicksburg. Two years later, at Appomattox Court House in 1865, the Civil War ended in the Union's favor.

While Gettysburg was seen by military and civilian observers at the time as a great battle, those in the North were less aware that two more bloody years would be required to ultimately end the Civil War in the Union's favor. Lincoln was distraught following Meade's failure to engage Lee and his Confederate troops as they retreated from Gettysburg, believing that doing so might have led to a Union victory and the Civil War's end.

[ 10 ] Southern morale deteriorated substantially following the Union victories at Gettysburg and Vicksburg, creating a perception among Confederate forces that "the coil was tightening around us".

[ 11 ] Some economic historians also observe that the Confederate defeats in Gettysburg and Vicksburg led to a precipitous drop in the market for Confederate war bonds . "… European investors gave the Confederacy approximately a 42 percent chance of victory prior to the battle of Gettysburg/Vicksburg. News of the severity of the two rebel defeats led to a sell-off in Confederate bonds. By the end of 1863, the probability of a Southern victory fell to about 15 percent [in the bond market]." [ 12 ] The loss of the Confederate stronghold at Vicksburg split the Confederacy in two, denying it any further movement along or across the Mississippi River and preventing supplies from Texas and Arkansas , which may have allowed Confederate forces to prevent Union forces from progressing east of it. Lincoln echoed this sentiment, saying, "See what a lot of land these fellows hold, of which Vicksburg is the key! The war can never be brought to a close until that key is in our pocket.... We can take all the northern ports of the Confederacy and they can defy us from Vicksburg." Union victory in the Chattanooga Campaign (November 1863) [ edit ] Main article: Chattanooga Campaign In one of the war's most dramatic events, a spontaneous Union infantry advance carries Missionary Ridge near Chattanooga, Tennessee , taking a position widely viewed as one that should have been impregnable [ 13 ] Military historian J. F. C. Fuller contended that Grant's defeat of Braxton Bragg's army during the Chattanooga Campaign was the turning point of the war because it reduced the Confederacy to the Atlantic coast and opened the way for William T. Sherman 's Atlanta Campaign and March to the Sea .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Grant's appointment as Union general-in-chief (March 1864) [ edit ] Further information: Ulysses S. Grant The Battle of the Wilderness , May 1864, early in the Overland Campaign Following the victory at Chattanooga, Grant was appointed general-in-chief of all Union armies on March 12, 1864. Leaving Sherman in command of forces in the Western Theater , he moved his headquarters east to Virginia . Previous Union commanders in the critical Eastern Theater had not mounted effective campaigns, or successful pursuits of Confederate forces after gaining rare victories. Grant devised a coordinated strategy that would strike at the Confederacy from multiple directions: against Lee and the Confederate capital, Richmond ; in the Shenandoah Valley ; against Johnston and Atlanta ; against railroad supply lines in western Virginia ; and against the port of Mobile . In May, Grant launched the Overland Campaign towards Richmond, an attritional campaign that took full advantage of the North's edge in population and resources. Although he suffered a tactical reverse in his first encounter with Lee in the Battle of the Wilderness , Grant pressed forward, putting the Confederates under an unremitting pressure that was maintained until the fall of their capital and the surrender of Lee's Army of Northern Virginia .

Union capture of Atlanta (September 1864) [ edit ] Main article: Battle of Atlanta Sherman's troops destroy a railroad in Battle of Atlanta Some contend that Sherman's successful siege of Atlanta was the turning point, since the heavily fortified city was the most critical remaining stronghold in the South.

[ 16 ] The capture of Atlanta, following a tedious and frustrating campaign, lifted the spirits of Union forces just in time to build the popular support necessary to re-elect Lincoln. Its military assault also crippled transportation in the heart of the Confederacy, nearly destroying the city.

Lincoln's reelection (November 1864) [ edit ] Main article: 1864 United States presidential election A pro- Lincoln campaign poster on October 1, 1864, weeks prior to the 1864 presidential election in which Lincoln won a second term The reelection of Abraham Lincoln in 1864 is beyond the final point at which a positive conclusion for the Confederacy could have been contemplated.

[ citation needed ] His opponent, former general George B. McClellan , ran on a Democratic Party platform that favored a negotiated settlement with the Confederacy. Although McClellan disavowed this platform, the South would have likely seen his election as a strategic victory. Thus, Lincoln's success may have further emboldened belief, on both sides, that the war would end with the Union's original ambition achieved.

See also [ edit ] Conclusion of the American Civil War Notes [ edit ] ^ Rawley, pp. 49–67.

^ McPherson, pp. 418–19 ; Foote, vol. 1, p. 361 ^ Rawley, pp. 97–114.

^ Rawley, p. 142.

^ McPherson (p. 858) considers the Union victory at Perryville in combination with that at Antietam to be the second of the war's four major turning points, one in which the possibility of an imminent Southern victory was quashed.

^ Rawley, p. 101.

^ "May 2, 1863: Stonewall Jackson Shot by His Own Men at Chancellorsville" .

The New York Times . 2012-05-02. Archived from the original on 2012-05-03 . Retrieved 2020-03-04 .

^ Martin, pp. 563–65; Foote, vol. 2, p. 596 ^ McPherson, p. 665 ^ Rawley, pp. 156–57 ; Foote, vol. 2, pp. 626–27 ; McPherson, pp. 666–67 .

^ Rawley, p. 145 ; Rawley, p. 163 ; Foote, vol. 2, pp. 641–42 ; McPherson, p. 665 .

^ Weidenmier, M. D.; Oosterlinck, K. (November 2007).

"Victory or Repudiation? The Probability of the Southern Confederacy Winning the Civil War" .

NBER Working Paper Series (13567).

doi : 10.3386/w13567 .

^ McPherson, p. 677 , p. 680 ^ Fuller was inconsistent in naming turning points. In his 1929 work The Generalship of Ulysses S. Grant , he cited three ( p. 46 ): First Bull Run, which resulted in establishment of unity of command in the Union army; Fort Donelson, after which he considered Vicksburg and Atlanta and presumably Chattanooga to be inevitable; and the fall of Wilmington , which he claimed led directly to Lee's surrender at Appomattox Court House .

^ McPherson (p. 858) lumps this Union victory together with the earlier ones at Vicksburg and Gettysburg as the war's third major turning point.

^ McPherson (p. 858) considers the Union capture of Atlanta and its coincident victory in the Shenandoah Valley to be the last of the war's four major turning points, one which overcame the demoralizing effects of the appalling casualties of the Overland Campaign and the apparent stalemate at Petersburg to ensure continued Northern support for pursuit of ultimate victory.

References [ edit ] Foote, Shelby (2011).

The Civil War: A Narrative: Volume 1: Fort Sumter to Perryville . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-307-74467-8 .

OCLC 712783750 .

Foote, Shelby (2011).

The Civil War: A Narrative: Volume 2: Fredericksburg to Meridian . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-307-74468-5 .

OCLC 712783750 .

Foote, Shelby (2011).

The Civil War: A Narrative: Volume 3: Red River to Appomattox . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-307-74469-2 .

OCLC 712783750 .

Fuller, Maj. Gen. J. F. C.

(1929).

The Generalship of Ulysses S. Grant . Da Capo Press.

ISBN 978-0-306-80450-2 .

OCLC 1523705 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) McPherson, James M.

(1988).

Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era . OUP USA.

ISBN 978-0-19-503863-7 .

OCLC 15550774 .

Martin, David G. (2003).

Gettysburg, July 1 . Da Capo.

ISBN 978-0-306-81240-8 .

OCLC 44965867 .

Rawley, James A. (1966).

Turning Points of the Civil War .

University of Nebraska Press .

ISBN 978-0-8032-8935-2 .

OCLC 44957745 .

Unpublished remarks by Gary Gallagher and James M. McPherson , 2005 University of Virginia seminar: Great Battles and Turning Points of the Civil War .

v t e American Civil War Origins Origins Timeline leading to the War Bleeding Kansas Border states Compromise of 1850 John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry Kansas-Nebraska Act Lincoln–Douglas debates Missouri Compromise Nullification crisis Panic of 1857 Popular sovereignty Secession South Carolina Declaration of Secession States' rights Proclamation 80 Slavery African Americans Cornerstone Speech Crittenden Compromise Dred Scott v. Sandford Emancipation Proclamation Fire-Eaters Fugitive slave laws Plantations in the American South Positive good Slave Power Treatment of slaves in the United States Uncle Tom's Cabin Abolitionism Abolitionism in the United States Susan B. Anthony James G. Birney John Brown Frederick Douglass William Lloyd Garrison Lane Debates on Slavery Elijah Parish Lovejoy J. Sella Martin Lysander Spooner George Luther Stearns Thaddeus Stevens Charles Sumner Caning Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Combatants Theaters Campaigns Battles States Combatants Union Army Navy Marine Corps Revenue Cutter Service Confederacy Army Navy Marine Corps Theaters Eastern Western Lower Seaboard Trans-Mississippi Pacific Coast Union naval blockade Major campaigns Anaconda Plan Blockade runners New Mexico Jackson's Valley Peninsula Northern Virginia Maryland Stones River Vicksburg Tullahoma Gettysburg Morgan's Raid Bristoe Knoxville Red River Overland Atlanta Valley 1864 Bermuda Hundred Richmond-Petersburg Franklin–Nashville Price's Missouri Expedition Sherman's March Carolinas Mobile Appomattox Major battles Fort Sumter 1st Bull Run Wilson's Creek Fort Donelson Pea Ridge Hampton Roads Shiloh New Orleans Corinth Seven Pines Seven Days 2nd Bull Run Antietam Perryville Fredericksburg Stones River Chancellorsville Gettysburg Vicksburg Chickamauga Chattanooga Wilderness Fort Pillow Spotsylvania Cold Harbor Atlanta Crater Mobile Bay Franklin Nashville Five Forks Involvement States and territories Alabama Arkansas Arizona California Colorado Connecticut Dakota Territory District of Columbia Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indian Territory Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina Ohio Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Cities Atlanta Charleston Chattanooga New Orleans Richmond Washington, D.C.

Winchester Leaders Confederate Military R. H. Anderson Beauregard Bragg Buchanan Cooper Early Ewell Forrest Gorgas Hill Hood Jackson A. S. Johnston J. E. Johnston Lee Longstreet Morgan Mosby Polk Price Semmes E. K. Smith Stuart Taylor Wheeler Civilian Benjamin Bocock Breckinridge Davis Hunter Mallory Memminger Seddon Stephens Union Military Anderson Buell Burnside Butler Du Pont Farragut Foote Frémont Grant Halleck Hooker Hunt McClellan McDowell Meade Meigs Ord Pope D. D. Porter Rosecrans Scott Sheridan Sherman Thomas Civilian Adams Chase Ericsson Hamlin Lincoln Pinkerton Seward Stanton Stevens Wade Welles Aftermath Constitution Reconstruction Amendments 13th Amendment 14th Amendment 15th Amendment Reconstruction Alabama Claims Brooks–Baxter War Carpetbaggers Colfax riot of 1873 Compromise of 1877 Confederate refugees Confederados Eufaula riot of 1874 Freedmen's Bureau Freedman's Savings Bank Homestead Acts Southern Homestead Act of 1866 Timber Culture Act of 1873 Impeachment of Andrew Johnson trial efforts timeline first inquiry second inquiry impeachment managers investigation Kirk–Holden war Knights of the White Camelia Ku Klux Klan Ethnic violence Memphis riots of 1866 Meridian riot of 1871 New Orleans riot of 1866 Pulaski (Tennessee) riot of 1867 South Carolina riots of 1876 Reconstruction acts Habeas Corpus Act of 1867 Enforcement Act of 1870 Enforcement Act of February 1871 Enforcement Act of April 1871 Reconstruction era Reconstruction military districts Reconstruction Treaties Indian Council at Fort Smith Red Shirts Redeemers Scalawags South Carolina riots of 1876 Southern Claims Commission White League Post- Reconstruction Commemoration Centennial Civil War Discovery Trail Civil War Roundtables Civil War Trails Program Civil War Trust Confederate History Month Confederate Memorial Day Decoration Day Historical reenactment Robert E. Lee Day Confederate Memorial Hall Disenfranchisement Black Codes Jim Crow Historiographic issues Lost Cause mythology Modern display of the Confederate flag Red Shirts Sons of Confederate Veterans Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War Daughters of Union Veterans of the Civil War National Society Daughters of the Union 1861-1865 Southern Historical Society United Confederate Veterans United Daughters of the Confederacy Children of the Confederacy Wilmington insurrection of 1898 Monuments and memorials Union List Grand Army of the Republic memorials to Lincoln Confederate List artworks in Capitol memorials to Davis memorials to Lee Removal Cemeteries Ladies' Memorial Associations U.S. national cemeteries Veterans 1913 Gettysburg reunion 1938 Gettysburg reunion Confederate Memorial Hall Confederate Veteran Grand Army of the Republic Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S.

Old soldiers' homes Southern Cross of Honor United Confederate Veterans Related topics Military Arms Armies Campaign Medal Cavalry Confederate Home Guard Confederate railroads Confederate revolving cannon Field artillery Infantry Medal of Honor recipients Medicine Naval battles Official Records Partisan rangers POW camps Rations Signal Corps Turning point Union corps badges U.S. Balloon Corps U.S. Home Guard U.S. Military Railroad Political Committee on the Conduct of the War Confederate States presidential election of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1862 Copperheads Diplomacy Emancipation Proclamation Habeas Corpus Act of 1863 Hampton Roads Conference National Union Party Politicians killed Radical Republicans Trent Affair Union Leagues U.S. Presidential Election of 1864 War Democrats Music Battle Hymn of the Republic Dixie John Brown's Body A Lincoln Portrait Marching Through Georgia Maryland, My Maryland Names from the War When Johnny Comes Marching Home Daar kom die Alibama By ethnicity African Americans German Americans Irish Americans Italian Americans Native Americans Catawba Cherokee Choctaw Seminole Other topics Baltimore riot of 1861 Battlefield preservation Bibliography Confederate war finance Confederate States dollar Espionage Confederate Secret Service Great Hanging at Gainesville Great Revival of 1863 Gender issues Juneteenth Naming the war New York City Gold Hoax of 1864 New York City riots of 1863 Photographers Richmond riots of 1863 Salt Supreme Court cases Tokens U.S. Sanitary Commission Women soldiers Related List of films and television shows about the American Civil War Category Portal v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐njlx2
Cached time: 20250817223239
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.504 seconds
Real time usage: 0.661 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2277/1000000
Revision size: 29899/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 238992/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2031/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 64455/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.274/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6504489/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  479.163      1 -total
 27.19%  130.281      1 Template:American_Civil_War
 26.57%  127.293      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 21.69%  103.954      1 Template:Reflist
 16.81%   80.555      1 Template:Cite_web
 13.27%   63.572      1 Template:Short_description
 12.51%   59.944     10 Template:Military_navigation
 10.33%   49.504      7 Template:Cite_book
  7.48%   35.834      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.72%   32.186      8 Template:Main Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1431266:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817223239 and revision id 1304606916. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Turning_point_of_the_American_Civil_War&oldid=1304606916 " Categories : Albert Sidney Johnston Historiography of the American Civil War Stonewall Jackson Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2017 CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 02:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Turning point of the American Civil War 3 languages Add topic

