Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 The Complete Art of Medicine Toggle The Complete Art of Medicine subsection 2.1 Medical ethics and research methodology 2.2 Neuroscience and psychology 2.3 Psychophysiology and psychosomatic medicine 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi 17 languages العربية বাংলা Deutsch Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina مصرى Occitan Português Русский کوردی Тоҷикӣ Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 10th century Persian physician and psychologist Manuscript of al-Majusi's Kamil al-Sana'ah al-Tibbiyyah , copy created in Iran, dated January–February 1194.

'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi ( Persian : علی بن عباس مجوسی ; died between 982 and 994), also known as Masoudi, or Latinized as Haly Abbas , was a Persian [ 1 ] physician and psychologist from the Islamic Golden Age , most famous for the Kitab al-Maliki or Complete Book of the Medical Art , his textbook on medicine and psychology .

Biography [ edit ] He was born in Ahvaz , southwestern Persia , to a Persian family [ 2 ] and studied under Shaikh Abu Maher Musa ibn Sayyār. He was considered one of the three greatest physicians of the Eastern Caliphate of his time, and became physician to Emir 'Adud al-Daula Fana Khusraw of the Buwayhid dynasty, who ruled from 949 CE to 983 CE.  The Emir was a great patron of medicine, and founded a hospital at Shiraz in Persia, and in 981 the Al-Adudi Hospital in Baghdad , where al-Majusi worked. His ancestors were Zoroastrian (whence the nisba " al-Majusi "), but he himself was a Muslim . The name of his father was Abbas, and according to Iranica, is not the kind of name typically taken by a neophyte, a fact which suggests that conversion to Islam took place in the generation of his grandparents, if not earlier. He himself seems to have been lacking in Muslim zeal, since no mention is made of the prophet Moḥammad in his introductory remarks, while his argument for the excellence of medicine is based entirely on pragmatic reasoning without recourse to the Quran or the Sunna. Moreover, by calling himself "Ali b. Abbas Majusi", the author intentionally calls attention to his Zoroastrian background.

[ 3 ] The Complete Art of Medicine [ edit ] Al-Majusi is best known for his Kitāb Kāmil aṣ-Ṣināʿa aṭ-Ṭibbiyya ( كتاب كامل الصناعة الطبية " Complete Book of the Medical Art "), later called The Complete Art of Medicine , which he completed circa 980. He dedicated the work to the Emir , and it became known as the Kitāb al-Malaki ( كتاب الملكي , " Royal Book ", or in Latin Liber Regalis or Regalis Dispositio ). The book is a more systematic and concise encyclopedia than Razi 's Hawi , and more practical than Avicenna 's The Canon of Medicine , by which it was superseded.

[ citation needed ] The Maliki is divided into 20 discourses, of which the first ten deal with theory and the second ten with the practice of medicine. Some examples of topics covered are dietetics and materia medica , a rudimentary conception of the capillary system , interesting clinical observations, and proof of the motions of the womb during parturition (for example, the child does not come out, but is pushed out).

In Europe a partial Latin translation was adapted as the Liber Pantegni by Constantinus Africanus (c. 1087), which became a founding text of the Schola Medica Salernitana in Salerno . A complete and much better translation was made in 1127 by Stephen of Antioch , and this was printed in Venice in 1492 and 1523. Haly's book of medicine is cited in Chaucer 's Canterbury Tales .

Medical ethics and research methodology [ edit ] The work emphasized the need for a healthy relationship between doctors and patients, and the importance of medical ethics . It also provided details on a scientific methodology that is similar to modern biomedical research .

Neuroscience and psychology [ edit ] Neuroscience and psychology were discussed in The Complete Art of Medicine . He described the neuroanatomy , neurobiology and neurophysiology of the brain and first discussed various mental disorders , including sleeping sickness , memory loss , hypochondriasis , coma , hot and cold meningitis , vertigo epilepsy , love sickness , and hemiplegia . He placed more emphasis on preserving health through diet and natural healing than he did on medication or drugs , which he considered a last resort.

Psychophysiology and psychosomatic medicine [ edit ] Ali ibn Abbas al-Majusi was a pioneer in psychophysiology and psychosomatic medicine . He described how the physiological and psychological aspects of a patient can have an effect on one another in his Complete Book of the Medical Art . He found a correlation between patients who were physically and mentally healthy and those who were physically and mentally unhealthy, and concluded that "joy and contentment can bring a better living status to many who would otherwise be sick and miserable due to unnecessary sadness, fear, worry and anxiety." [ 4 ] See also [ edit ] List of Iranian scientists Islamic medicine References [ edit ] ^ Frye, R. N., ed. (1975).

The Cambridge history of Iran (Repr. ed.). London: Cambridge U.P. pp.

415– 416.

ISBN 978-0-521-20093-6 .

The greatest of these figures, who ushered in the golden age of Islamic medicine and who are discussed separately by E. G. Browne in his Arabian Medicine, are four Persian physicians: 'All b. Rabban al-Tabarl, Muhammad b. Zakariyya' al-Razl, 'All b. al-'Abbas al-Majusi and Ibn Sina.

^ Glick, Thomas F.

; Livesey, Steven John; Wallis, Faith (2005).

Medieval Science, Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia . Psychology Press. p. 325.

ISBN 978-1-138-05670-1 .

He was a Zoroastrian, or at least came from a family of Zoroastrians, and was Persian by birth.

^ Richter-Bernburg, L.

"ʿALĪ B. ʿABBĀS MAJŪSĪ" . ENCYCLOPÆDIA IRANICA . Retrieved 20 April 2016 .

^ Nurdeen Deuraseh and Mansor Abu Talib (2005), "Mental health in Islamic medical tradition", The International Medical Journal 4 (2), p. 76-79.

Sources [ edit ] Lutz Richter-Bernburg, "‘Ali b. ‘Abbas Majusi", in Encyclopædia Iranica , ed.

Ehsan Yarshater , 6+ vols. (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul and Costa Mesa: Mazda, 1983 to present), vol. 1, pp. 837–8 [1] Manfred Ullmann, Die Medizin im Islam, Handbuch der Orientalistik , Abteilung I, Erg?nzungsband vi, Abschnitt 1 (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1970), pp. 140–146 Fuat Sezgin, Medizin-Pharmazie-Zoologie-Tierheilkunde bis ca 430 H., Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums , Band 3 (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1970), pp. 320–322 Manfred Ullmann, Islamic Medicine (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1978, reprinted 1997), pp. 55–85.

Wustenfeld: Geschichte der arabischen Aerzte (59, 1840).

Edward G. Browne , Islamic Medicine , 2002, p. 53-54, ISBN 81-87570-19-9 Charles S. F. Burnett, Danielle Jacquart (eds.), Constantine the African and ʻAlī Ibn Al-ʻAbbās Al-Magūsī: The Pantegni and Related Texts . Leiden: Brill, 1995.

ISBN 90-04-10014-8 Shoja MM, Tubbs RS. The history of anatomy in Persia. J Anat 2007; 210:359–378.

External links [ edit ] Hamarneh, Sami (2008) [1970-80].

"Al-Majūsī, Abu'l-Ḥasan 'Alī Ibn 'Abbās" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Encyclopedia.com.

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Greece Sweden Vatican Israel Catalonia People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=%27Ali_ibn_al-%27Abbas_al-Majusi&oldid=1288795106 " Categories : 10th-century deaths 10th-century Iranian physicians Medieval Iranian pharmacologists People from Ahvaz Scholars under the Buyid dynasty Iranian psychologists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2011 Year of birth missing Year of death uncertain This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 20:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi 17 languages Add topic

