Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Personnel Toggle Personnel subsection 1.1 Hand crews 1.2 Smokejumpers 1.3 Helitack 1.4 Rappellers 2 Vehicles Toggle Vehicles subsection 2.1 Engines 2.2 Crew transport 2.3 Tenders 2.4 Heavy equipment 3 Air suppression Toggle Air suppression subsection 3.1 Fixed-wing airplanes 3.2 Rotary-wing aircraft 4 Hand tools 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel 1 language Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel is part of the science of fire fighting focusing on the use of specialized equipment, training and tactics to effectively control, surround and eventually extinguish a natural cover fire.  There are several specially designed tools that through their function and user training, perform specialized tasks that are specific to natural cover firefighting.  This is used together in conjunction with the general understanding of the behavior of fire to form a viable plan of attack.

Personnel [ edit ] PPE or personal protective equipment is generally standardized for a certain type of team or crew. Smokejumpers for example require more protective equipment because of their method of delivery into the fire. Ordinarily, all firefighters regardless of assignment, require durable fire recommended eight inch (203 mm)  minimum boots , gloves , Nomex pants and shirt (typically green pants and a yellow shirt), a hard hat (sometimes full brim), Walkie-talkie , potable water , eye protection (goggles) and a fire shelter.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In the U.S., a firefighter's credentials and level of training is shown on their red card . For example, a sawyer will have a feller rating on their red card designating the capacity size tree they have been trained to fell. A firefighter trained as an EMT may have this certification on their card. Classes under the National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) and management qualification standards under the Interagency Fire Program Management (IFPM) are generally shown as well. At a minimum, the passing of the pack test is displayed showing the individual is physically able to perform appropriate duties.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] There are currently 2 wildland firefighter ratings. Firefighter Type 2, which is the basic firefighter qualification, and is required for most operational positions.  The Firefighter Type 2 requires several introductory classes as well as a practical day in the field. The dispatch code for a Firefighter Type 2 is FFT2.  The second rating is Firefighter Type 1. The Firefighter 1  rating requires advanced courses in wildland firefighting as well as acceptable performance as a FFT2.  Firefighter Type 1 is considered to be a senior and seasoned wildland Firefighter. The dispatch code for Firefighter Type 1 is FFT1.

Hand crews [ edit ] Typically, wildland firefighting organizations will use large handcrews of 20 or more people who travel in vehicles to the fire incident. Although these crews can vary above or below 20 firefighters, they are generally called twenty-man crews. The designations of these crews in the U.S., defined in large portion by training, are as follows: Crews [ 5 ] Type I Interagency Hotshot Crew Type II Initial Attack (IA) Crew Type II Crew Type III Crew (none currently in service) Some personnel are organized into fast attack teams typically consisting of five to eight personnel. Similar to the larger crews, they travel by vehicle.

Smokejumpers [ edit ] Smokejumpers are highly skilled firefighters specially trained in wildfire suppression tactics. They
parachute into remote areas from aircraft to combat wildfires and are equipped to work in remote areas for extended periods of time with little logistical support.

Helitack [ edit ] Water drop from helicopter, NPS photo by Harlan Kredit.

The use of helicopter-delivered fire resources varies by agency. Often, helitack crews perform duties similar to other initial attack crews.  Two or three firefighters will be dispatched to a newly reported fire. Helitack crews are usually used for initial attack on fires that are difficult for other firefighters to access, or on extended fires that require aerial support in the form of water drops, cargo delivery, crew shuttling, or reconnaissance.  A typical initial attack response by a helitack crew involves flying to the fire via helicopter and spending one to three days (although sometimes much longer) putting the fire out before hiking to the nearest road for pickup.

Rappellers [ edit ] A highly effective way to fight wilderness fire when no roads are nearby is to have wildland firefighters rappel from a helicopter. These firefighters then take suppressive action on the fire or clear a safe landing zone to receive additional firefighters if the fire is too large. Rappellers usually carry 30 pounds of personal gear plus up to 400 pounds of fire gear which is lowered down to them from their helicopter. Rappelling heights can range from 30 feet (in tall, continuous brush) to 300 feet (in timber). When suppression is complete on rappel fires, ground transport is typically arranged to pick up the firefighters at the nearest road.  These crews carry chainsaws, hand tools, radios, and can even have 75-US-gallon (280 L) water bags, known as blivets, flown in to help fight the fire. When not rappelling, the crew works as a helitack crew and can fly or hike to any regular fire.

Vehicles [ edit ] Engines [ edit ] Wildland fire engine Crew transport [ edit ] Buggy or crummy Crew bus Tenders [ edit ] When water is required to refill a fire engine, water delivery is vital.  The typical water tender carries 1,200 US gallons (4,500 L) of water to support fire engines.  In addition to supplying fire engines directly, tenders may fill water reservoirs for bucket-dropping helicopters when a lake or reservoir is not nearby.

Heavy equipment [ edit ] Masticator, which chews through brush and small trees, on the Zaca Fire Heavy equipment's primary function of wildfire suppression is through the application of heavy construction style equipment to move large amounts or earth or remove vegetation. Fuel breaks, safety zones, firelines and access to areas that maybe previously were inaccessible may be made.

Bulldozers and tractor plows are examples.

Air suppression [ edit ] In addition to aircraft being used for deploying ground personnel, firefighting groups may utilize helicopters and fixed-wing airplanes specially equipped for use in aerial firefighting to douse areas that are inaccessible to vehicles with water and/or flame retardant chemicals.

Fixed-wing airplanes [ edit ] Airtankers Lead aircraft Smokejumper transport aircraft Airlift aircraft Rotary-wing aircraft [ edit ] Helicopters (helitack & rappel) Helicopter (water delivery) Hand tools [ edit ] Holding a Pulaski , a wildland firefighter from the Angeles National Forest responds to a fire in Altadena, California on July 9, 2006.

A number of tools are used in wildland firefighting. Some examples include: Driptorch Fusee McLeod (tool) Pulaski (tool) Fire flapper (tool) Quick Release Firehose Clamp (tool) Hazel hoe Chainsaw Shovel Very pistol Hand held thermal detectors Sling psychrometer Portable bladder bag Two-way radio See also [ edit ] Glossary of wildfire terms Wildland Firefighter Foundation International Association of Wildland Fire Wildfire suppression References [ edit ] ^ National Wildfire Coordinating Group (Jan 2006). "Incident Response Pocket Guide" (PMS #461, NFES #1077): i-101.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ a b "IFPM Module" . U.S. Forest Service . Retrieved 2009-03-07 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "NWCG Equipping Fire Apparatus for Use in the Wildland/Urban Interface" . National Wildfire Coordinating Group . Retrieved 2009-03-12 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "NWCG Prescribed Burn Qualification Track" . Minnesota DNR. Archived from the original on 2006-07-07 . Retrieved 2009-03-07 .

^ "Minimum Crew Standards for Mobilization" . NIFC GACC. Archived from the original on 2009-12-22 . Retrieved 2009-04-28 .

External links [ edit ] Survival zone minimum size Archived 2011-07-06 at the Wayback Machine v t e Forestry tools and equipment Tree planting , afforestation Caulk boots Hoedad (hoedag) Groasis Waterboxx Mattock Pottiputki Root trainer Seed trap Tree planting bar (dibble bar) Tree shelter (Tuley tube) Tree spade Mensuration 3D scanner Angle gauge Biltmore stick Chain Cruising rod Diameter tape Hemispherical photography Inclinometer Increment borer Rangefinder laser Microtome Relascope Tree caliper Wedge prism Fire suppression Aerial firefighting DC-10 UAVs Driptorch Fire flapper Fire rake Fire retardant Helitack McLeod (rakehoe) Pulaski Axes Billhook Broadaxe Brush hook Froe (shake axe) Hatchet Labrys Log splitter Marking axe Splitting maul Tomahawk Saws Bow saw Bucksaw Chainsaw safety clothing safety features Crosscut saw Dragsaw Hacksaw Head saw Lumber edger Polesaw Portable sawmill Resaw Two-man saw Whipsaw Logging Cant hook Feller buncher Forwarder Go-devil Harvester Helicopter Log truck Lombard Steam Log Hauler Peavey Pickaroon Pike pole Skid cone Skidder Washington Winch Steam donkey Yarder swing Other Denailer Firewood processor Forest railway Forestry mulcher Hand compass Hand hook Hydraulic debarker Log house moulder Log pond Log flume Machete Stump grinder Chainsaw mill Tree tyer Tsakat Whoopie sling Wood-drying kiln Woodchipper Categories tools equipment Commons tools equipment WikiProject Forestry Types of tools Cleaning Cutting and abrasive Forestry Garden Hand Kitchen Machine and metalworking Masonry Measuring and alignment Mining Power Textile Woodworking v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wildfire_suppression_equipment_and_personnel&oldid=1292526242 " Category : Wildfire suppression equipment Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 12:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel 1 language Add topic

