Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Factors of a good work ethic Toggle Factors of a good work ethic subsection 1.1 Assumptions 2 Capitalist view 3 Anti-capitalist view 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents Work ethic 18 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית Nederlands Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( March 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Belief in the virtues of labor Work ethic is a belief that work and diligence have a moral benefit and an inherent ability, virtue or value to strengthen character and individual abilities.

[ 1 ] Desire or determination to work serves as the foundation for values centered on the importance of work or industrious work. Social ingrainment of this value is considered to enhance character through hard work that is respective to an individual's field of work.

[ 2 ] In ancient Greece, work was seen as a burden, and their term for it, ponos , shared its root with the Latin word poena , signifying sorrow. In Hebrew, work was associated with toil, representing the laborious act of extracting sustenance from the challenging earth.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] It was viewed as a consequence of the original sin in the Adam and Eve narrative. The Bible in Genesis 3:19 reflects this, stating that due to their transgression, "By the sweat of your brow you will eat your food until you return to the ground." Factors of a good work ethic [ edit ] Proponents of a strong work ethic consider it to be important for achieving goals, that it gives strength to their orientation and the right mindset.

[ citation needed ] A work ethic is a set of moral principles a person uses in their job. People who possess a strong work ethic embody certain principles that guide their work behaviour; according to proponents, a strong work ethic will result in the production of high-quality work which is consistent. The output motivates them to stay on track.

[ 5 ] A good work ethic fuels an individual's needs and goals, it is related to the initiative by a person for the objectives. It is considered by fans as a source of self-respect, satisfaction, and fulfillment.

[ citation needed ] Factors are: [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Goal-oriented actions: It is not about making plans or the next logical steps; it is about getting things done so that the work invested would not be counter-productive.

Prioritized focus: Focusing on qualitative activities that a person is responsible for and in areas where they can make a difference or a high impact based on objectives.

Being available and reliable: Spending time on the work and building oneself up for the task.

Conscientiousness: A desire to do a task well, being vigilant and organized.

Creating a rewarding routine/system: Engaging in tasks that provide strength and energy which can be transferred to your ultimate goals, creating a habit and a habitat for success.

Embracing positivity: Shape a problem with the statement "good, (action) (problem)", e.g. "I'm tired and it is time for a workout" leads to "Good. Workout tired".

Work ethic also has been measured as a multidimensional variable composed of seven factors, including self-reliance, ethical behavior, valuing leisure time, hard work, giving importance/centrality of work, productive use of time, and delay of gratification.

[ 8 ] A negative work ethic is a behavior of a single individual or a group that has led to a systematic lack of productivity, reliability, accountability and a growing sphere of unprofessional/unhealthy relationships (e.g., power politics, lack of social skills, etc.).

[ 9 ] Assumptions [ edit ] Assumptions about good work ethic, drawn out in the philosophical writings of Goldman, are: [ 10 ] The path to what you want is to take action.

The success of action plans depends upon how congruent one's worldview ( Weltanschauung ) is with the society's.

Many problems faced are only a temporary breakdown of self-management.

Setting time limits for achieving goals helps to overcome the edge of discomforts that time can have on subjective needs.

A positive problem-solving or goal attainment experience improves one's ability to cope with the next difficulty.

Hardships in life are a normality; they become a problem when they are the same over and over.

A person is what they do, and feelings flow from behavior.

Feelings can be viewed as beliefs about one's wants.

How hard you work will determine how far you go.

Capitalist view [ edit ] See also: Protestant work ethic The Puritans who settled in New England around the 17th and 18th centuries believed that working hard at one's call was a sign that one would be saved. They were followed by Calvinists who believed in predestination and had faith that they were chosen or had the call from God to fulfill their duty in the world. To both of them, accumulation of wealth was an indicator of working to their fullest capacity as a response to the call and assurance for receiving salvation . These ideologies are the foundations of the Protestant work ethic.

Max Weber quotes the ethical writings of Benjamin Franklin : Remember, that time is money. He that can earn ten shillings a day by his labor, and goes abroad, or sits idle, one half of that day, though he spends but sixpence during his diversion or idleness, ought not to reckon that the only expense; he has really spent, or rather thrown away, five shillings besides.

Remember, that money is the prolific, generating nature. Money can beget money, and its offspring can beget more, and so on. Five shillings turned is six, turned again is seven and threepence, and so on, till it becomes a hundred pounds. The more there is of it, the more it produces every turning, so that the profits rise quicker and quicker. He that kills a breeding sow, destroys all her offspring to the thousandth generation. He that murders a crown, destroys all that it might have produced, even scores of pounds.

[ 11 ] Franklin believes that valuing time and money is linked to seeing hard work and thriftiness as crucial qualities. He thinks that money, when used wisely, can multiply and create more wealth. This idea mirrors the Protestant ethic's focus on productive labor and reinvesting profits for progress. Franklin also states that reading the Bible showed him the importance of virtue. This also reflects the Christian search for understanding the ethic of living and the struggle to make a living.

[ 12 ] Max Weber's definition of work ethic was that a man should work well in his gainful occupation, not merely because he had to but because he wanted to; it was a sign of his virtue and a source of personal satisfaction.

[ 12 ] The notion of work ethic continued to grow in the work values of the Western world. In 1903, Theodore Roosevelt expressed, "Far and away the best prize that life offers is the chance to work hard at work worth doing." [ 13 ] Richard Thurnwald , in his work "Economies in Primitive Communities," emphasized that people engage in work actively because humans have a natural inclination towards staying active and doing things.

[ 14 ] In the 1940s, work ethic was considered very important and nonconformist ideals were dealt autocratically. It is recorded that, at the Ford Company, a worker named John Gallo was dismissed for, "...laughing with the other fellows, and slowing down the assembly line...".

[ 15 ] Steven Malanga refers to "what was once understood as the work ethic—not just hard work but also a set of accompanying virtues , whose crucial role in the development and sustaining of free markets too few now recall".

[ 16 ] Experimental studies have shown that people with fair work ethic are able to tolerate tedious jobs with equitable monetary rewards and benefits, are highly critical, and have a tendency for workaholism and a negative relation with leisure activity concepts. They valued meritocracy and egalitarianism.

[ 17 ] Even if the death of work were to happen due to technological advancement that eliminates the need for people to work, the desire to stay actively involved in some form of activity is not bound to any particular phasing out of its existence.

[ 4 ] Anti-capitalist view [ edit ] See also: Critique of work Countercultural groups and communities have challenged these values in recent decades.

The French Leftist philosopher André Gorz (1923–2007) wrote: "The work ethic has become obsolete. It is no longer true that producing more means working more, or that producing more will lead to a better way of life.
The connection between more and better has been broken; our needs for many products and services are already more than adequately met, and many of our as-yet-unsatisfied needs will be met not by producing more, but by producing differently, producing other things, or even producing less. This is especially true as regards our needs for air, water, space, silence, beauty, time and human contact.

Neither is it true any longer that the more each individual works, the better off everyone will be. In a post-industrial society , not everyone has to work hard in order to survive, though may be forced to anyway due to the economic system. The present crisis has stimulated technological change of an unprecedented scale and speed: ' the micro-chip revolution '. The object and indeed the effect of this revolution has been to make rapidly increasing savings in labour, in the industrial, administrative and service sectors. Increasing production is secured in these sectors by decreasing amounts of labour. As a result, the social process of production no longer needs everyone to work in it on a full-time basis. The work ethic ceases to be viable in such a situation and workbased society is thrown into crisis." [ 18 ] Anti-capitalists believe that the concept of "hard work" is meant by capitalists to delude the working class into becoming loyal servants to the elite , and that working hard, in itself, is not automatically an honorable thing, but only a means to creating more wealth for the people at the top of the economic pyramid . In the Soviet Union , the regime portrayed work ethic as an ideal to strive for.

[ 19 ] The recession is a contributing factor that holds back work ethic, because the generation that inherits economic decline lives in an economy that is not ready to receive them. Without work there to do, the ethic that is attached to it fails to generate distinctive value. The negative work ethic and power structures that do not value or credit work done or unethically attribute work done as a service or with higher moral ideals have dissolved the ethic presented in the society and turned the focus onto self-centered perks and individualism. Further, urbanization and an emphasis on large-scale businesses has led to eliminating avenues for learning vital concepts about work. Millennials in a research identified what made them unique was consumerist trends like technology use, music/pop culture, liberal/tolerant beliefs, clothes, and individualistic ones like greater intelligence than work, they were not able to distinguish the concept in the traditional understandings of work ethic.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Business ethics Contrafreeloading Happiness economics Humanistic economics Laziness Locus of control Maurice Blanchot ( Désoeuvrement · Inoperativity ) Ora et labora Protestant work ethic Prussian virtues Refusal of work Work etiquette Workaholism Workerism Aktion Arbeitsscheu Reich References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "What is work ethic? definition and meaning" .

BusinessDictionary.com . Retrieved 18 March 2018 .

^ T. Marek; W. Karwowski; M. Frankowicz; J. Kantola; P. Zgaga (2014).

Human Factors of a Global Society: A System of Systems Perspective . CRC Press. pp.

276– 277.

ISBN 978-1-4665-7287-4 .

^ "History of Work Ethic--1.Attitudes Toward Work During the Classical Period" . University of Georgia. 1996.

^ a b Granter, Edward (2012-12-28).

Critical Social Theory and the End of Work . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.

ISBN 978-1-4094-9187-3 .

^ Part of what makes humans unique is our freedom to determine how we'll act . The Ethics Centre . Retrieved 21 June 2020 .

Ethics is the process of questioning, discovering and defending our values, principles and purpose.

^ Schawbel, Dan (21 December 2011).

"Reviving Work Ethic in America" .

forbes.com . Retrieved 18 March 2018 .

^ Swan, Andy (5 October 2016).

"7 Work Ethic Commandments For An Entrepreneur" .

forbes.com . Retrieved 15 April 2018 .

^ Miller, M.J., Woehr, D.J., & Hudspeth, N. (2002). The meaning and measurement of work ethic: Construction and initial validation of a multidimensional inventory. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 60, 451–489.

https://doi.org/10.1006/jvbe.2001.1838 ^ Robert Vaux.

"Negative Work Ethic Definition" .

Houston Chronicle . Retrieved 15 April 2018 .

^ Alvin I. Goldman (1970).

A theory of human action . Prentice-Hall.

ISBN 9780139144400 .

^ Benjamin Franklin , Advice to a Young Tradesman, Written by an Old One (1748), Italics in the original ^ a b Weber, Max The Protestant Ethic and "The Spirit of Capitalism" (Penguin Books, 2002) translated by Peter Baehr and Gordon C. Wells, pp.9-12 ^ Davidson, Donald J. (2018-07-31).

The Wisdom of Theodore Roosevelt . Citadel Press. p. 80.

ISBN 978-0-8065-4017-7 .

^ Thurnwald, Richard (1932).

Economics in Primitive Communities . Humphrey Milford. p. 209.

^ Christopher Robert (19 December 2016).

The Psychology of Humor at Work: A Psychological Perspective .

Taylor & Francis . p. 149.

ISBN 978-1-317-37077-2 .

^ "Whatever Happened to the Work Ethic? by Steven Malanga, City Journal Summer 2009" .

^ Mirels and Garrett (1971). Protestant Work Ethic. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 36, 40–44.

^ "GSD: Andre Gorz" .

^ "Intro to Capitalism - Does capitalism work for the benefit of all, or is it just a tool to exploit the working classes? Or is Anarchy the way forward?" .

Our Mayday . April 2003 . Retrieved 15 April 2018 .

^ Erica Williams (8 April 2010).

"Debunking The Millennials' Work Ethic "Problem" " .

Harvard Business Review . Retrieved 18 March 2018 .

Sources [ edit ] Daniel T. Rodgers.

The Work Ethic in Industrial America, 1850-1920 . Univ. of Chicago Press, 1978 2nd edition 2014 "Max Weber and the Protestant Ethic - BBC Radio 4" on YouTube v t e Critique of work Historical persons Abbie Hoffman Edward Bellamy Alfredo M. Bonanno André Gorz Bob Black Günther Anders Guy Debord Heinrich Böll Ivan Illich Mikhail Bakunin Paul Lafargue Walter Benjamin Antonio Negri Bertrand Russell Friedrich Nietzsche Henry David Thoreau Herbert Marcuse Jerry Rubin Josef Pieper Karl Marx Max Stirner Max Weber Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Raoul Vaneigem Renzo Novatore Zo d'Axa Contemporary persons Franco Berardi L. Susan Brown Madeleine Bunting David Graeber Michael Hardt Maurizio Lazzarato Claus Peter Ortlieb Roland Paulsen Jeremy Rifkin Penelope Rosemont Mark Slouka Nick Srnicek Claire Wolfe John Zerzan Terminology and related topics 996 working hour system Absenteeism Abusive supervision Aktion Arbeitsscheu Reich All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy Autonomism Bare minimum Monday Bullshit job Career catfishing Coffee badging Corporatocracy Conscious quitting Cycle of poverty Dolce far niente Effects of overtime Eight-hour day Employee ghosting Extermination through labour Career cushioning Careerism Flextime Forced labour Four-day workweek Funemployment Ghost job Uberisation / Gig worker Glass cliff Happiness economics Honeymoon-hangover effect Hush trip Infinite workday Job crafting Job cuffing Jobless employed Karoshi Loud quitting Neijuan Microretirement Occupational burnout Occupational safety and health Occupational stress Orange S.A. suicides Overwork Performance punishment Post-work society Precariat Presenteeism Digital presenteeism Productivity theater Professional abuse Protestant work ethic Psychological safety Quick quitting Quiet hiring Quiet promotion Quiet quitting Quiet thriving Lazy girl job Rage applying Refusal of work Resenteeism Right to rest and leisure Sampo generation Sunday scaries Six-hour day Tang ping Technological unemployment Toxic workplace Narcissism Psychopathy Wage slavery Work ethic Workaholic Working poor Work–life interface Theater, movies, music and art À Nous la Liberté Office Space Swedish Public Freedom Service " Take This Job and Shove It " The Future of Work and Death The Main Thing Is Work!

The Working Class Goes to Heaven Yama—Attack to Attack Literature Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral Bartleby, the Scrivener Bonjour paresse Bullshit Jobs The Conquest of Bread Critique of Economic Reason Fight Club Future Primitive and Other Essays In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays Inventing the Future Manifesto Against Work New Escapologist On the Poverty of Student Life The Society of the Spectacle Steal This Book The Abolition of Work The End of Work The Human Use of Human Beings The Idler The Revolution of Everyday Life The Right to Be Lazy The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy Communities R/antiwork CrimethInc.

Situationist International See also Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Job strain v t e Employment Classifications Academic tenure Casual Contingent work Full-time job Gig worker Job sharing Part-time job Self-employment Side job Skilled worker Journeyman Technician Tradesperson Independent contractor Labour hire Temporary work Laborer Wage labour Hiring Application Background check Business networking Cover letter Curriculum vitae Drug testing Employment contract Employment counsellor Executive search list Induction programme Job fair Job fraud Job hunting Job interview Letter of recommendation Onboarding Overqualification Person–environment fit Personality–job fit theory Personality hire Probation Realistic job preview Recruitment Résumé Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates Underemployment Work-at-home scheme Roles Cooperative Employee Employer Internship Job Labour hire Permanent employment Supervisor Volunteering Working class Blue-collar Green-collar Grey-collar Pink-collar Precariat White-collar Red-collar New-collar No-collar Orange-collar Scarlet-collar Black-collar Gold-collar Career and training Apprenticeship Artisan Master craftsman Avocation Career assessment Career counseling Career development Coaching Creative class Education Continuing education E-learning Employability Further education Graduate school Induction training Knowledge worker Licensure Lifelong learning Overspecialization Practice-based professional learning Professional association Professional certification Professional development Professional school Reflective practice Retraining Vocational education Vocational school Vocational university Mentorship Occupational Outlook Handbook Practice firm Profession Operator Professional Tradesman Vocation Attendance Break Break room Career break Furlough Gap year Leave of absence Long service leave No call, no show Sabbatical Sick leave Stress leave Time clock Schedules 35-hour workweek Four-day week Eight-hour day 996 working hour system Flextime On-call Overtime Remote work Six-hour day Shift work Working time Workweek and weekend Wages and salaries Frisch elasticity of labor supply Global labor arbitrage Labour economics Labor share Labour supply Living wage Maximum wage National average salary World Europe Minimum wage Canada Hong Kong Europe United States Price elasticity of demand Progressive wage Singapore Overtime rate Paid time off Performance-related pay Remuneration Salary cap Benefits Annual leave Casual Friday Child care Disability insurance Health insurance Life insurance Marriage leave Parental leave Pension By country Sick leave United States Take-home vehicle Taxes Payroll tax Tax bracket Income tax Negative Disposable income Salary packaging Unreported employment Safety and health Crunch Epilepsy and employment Human factors and ergonomics Karoshi List of countries by rate of fatal workplace accidents Occupational burnout Occupational disease Occupational exposure limit Occupational health psychology Occupational injury Occupational noise Occupational stress Personal protective equipment Repetitive strain injury Right to sit United States Sick building syndrome Work accident Occupational fatality Workers' compensation Workers' right to access the toilet Workplace health promotion Workplace phobia Workplace wellness Equal opportunity Affirmative action Discrimination Equal pay for equal work Gender pay gap Glass ceiling Infractions Corporate collapses and scandals Accounting scandals Control fraud Corporate behaviour Corporate crime Exploitation of labour Dress code Employee handbook Employee monitoring Evaluation Labour law Sexual harassment Sleeping while on duty Wage theft Whistleblower Workplace bullying Workplace harassment Workplace incivility Willingness Boreout Careerism Civil conscription Conscription Critique of work Dead-end job Job satisfaction McJob Organizational commitment Refusal of work Slavery Bonded labour Human trafficking Labour camp Penal labour Peonage Truck wages Unfree labour Wage slavery Work ethic Work–life interface Downshifting Slow living Workaholic Termination At-will employment Dismissal Banishment room Constructive dismissal Wrongful dismissal Employee offboarding Exit interview Layoff Notice period Pink slip Resignation Letter of resignation Restructuring Retirement Mandatory retirement Microretirement Retirement planning Retirement spend-down Severance package Golden handshake Golden parachute Turnover Unemployment Barriers to entry Discouraged worker Economic depression Great Depression Long Depression Frictional unemployment Full employment Graduate unemployment Involuntary unemployment Jobless recovery Phillips curve Recession Great Recession Job losses caused by the Great Recession Lists of recessions Recession-proof job Reserve army of labour Structural unemployment Technological unemployment Types of unemployment Unemployment benefits Unemployment Convention, 1919 Unemployment extension List of countries by unemployment rate Employment-to-population ratio List Wage curve Youth unemployment Public programs Workfare Unemployment insurance Make-work job Job creation program Job creation index Job guarantee Employer of last resort Guaranteed minimum income Right to work Historical: U.S.A.: Civil Works Administration Works Progress Administration Comprehensive Employment and Training Act See also Bullshit job Busy work Credentialism and educational inflation Emotional labor Evil corporation Going postal Kiss up kick down Labor rights Make-work job Narcissism in the workplace Post-work society Presenteeism Psychopathy in the workplace Sunday scaries Slow movement (culture) Toxic leader Toxic workplace Wage compression Working poor Workhouse See also templates Aspects of corporations Aspects of jobs Aspects of occupations Aspects of organizations Aspects of workplaces Corporate titles Critique of work Organized labor Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐6lgwb
Cached time: 20250817010144
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.498 seconds
Real time usage: 0.628 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2134/1000000
Revision size: 16423/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 103379/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2269/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 80966/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.295/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6451490/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  488.624      1 -total
 35.80%  174.923      1 Template:Reflist
 21.92%  107.084      8 Template:Cite_web
 18.68%   91.271      2 Template:Navbox
 16.19%   79.125      1 Template:Critique_of_work
 12.17%   59.485      1 Template:Globalize
  9.55%   46.665      1 Template:Ambox
  9.29%   45.398      1 Template:Short_description
  8.74%   42.709      7 Template:Cite_book
  7.24%   35.386      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1166665:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817010144 and revision id 1295526194. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Work_ethic&oldid=1295526194 " Categories : Ethical principles Working time Criticism of work Work Hidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2025 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 08:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Work ethic 18 languages Add topic

