Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Human sex ratio at birth Toggle Human sex ratio at birth subsection 1.1 High or low human sex ratio implies sex-selective abortion 1.2 High or low human sex ratio may be natural 1.3 Data on human sex ratio at birth 1.4 Data reliability 2 Prenatal sex discernment 3 Africa and the Middle East 4 Asia Toggle Asia subsection 4.1 China 4.2 India 4.3 Pakistan 4.4 South Korea 4.5 Other Asian countries 5 Europe Toggle Europe subsection 5.1 Caucasus 5.2 Southeast Europe 6 Americas Toggle Americas subsection 6.1 United States 7 Other countries 8 Estimates of missing women 9 Disparate gendered access to resources 10 Reasons for sex-selective abortion Toggle Reasons for sex-selective abortion subsection 10.1 Socioeconomic reasons for son preference and daughter aversion 10.1.1 Cultural preference 10.1.2 Dowry 10.1.3 Trivers–Willard hypothesis 10.2 One-child policy 11 Societal effects Toggle Societal effects subsection 11.1 Missing women 11.2 Trafficking, forced marriage and sex work 11.3 Widening of the gender social gap 11.4 Potential positive effects 11.5 Controversies 12 Sex-selective abortion in the context of abortion 13 Laws, campaigns and policies against sex-selective abortion Toggle Laws, campaigns and policies against sex-selective abortion subsection 13.1 International 13.2 By country 14 See also 15 References Toggle the table of contents Sex-selective abortion 24 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia मराठी Norsk bokmål پښتو Português Română Русский தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pregnancy termination based on predicted sex World map of birth sex ratios, 2012 Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Sex-selective abortion is the practice of terminating a pregnancy based upon the predicted sex of the infant. As the practice overwhelmingly targets female fetuses, sex-selective abortion often specifically refers to female-selective abortion. Sex-selective abortion is closely linked to female infanticide , and is recognized by many human rights organizations as an act of violence against women .

[ 1 ] The selective abortion of female fetuses is most common where male children are valued over female children, especially in parts of East Asia and South Asia (particularly in countries such as People's Republic of China , India and Pakistan ), as well as in the Caucasus , Western Balkans , and to a lesser extent North America .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Based on the third National Family and Health Survey, results showed that if both partners, mother and father, or just the father, preferred male children, sex-selective abortion was more common. In cases where only the mother prefers sons, this is likely to result in sex-selective neglect in which the child is not likely to survive past infancy.

[ 5 ] Sex-selective abortion was first documented in 1975, [ 6 ] and became commonplace by the late 1980s in South Korea and China and around the same time or slightly later in India.

Sex-selective abortion affects the human sex ratio —the relative number of males to females in a given age group, [ 7 ] [ 8 ] with China and India, the two most populous countries of the world, having unbalanced gender ratios. Studies and reports focusing on sex-selective abortion are predominantly statistical; they assume that birth-sex ratio—the overall ratio of boys and girls at birth—for a regional population is an indicator of sex-selective abortion. This assumption has been questioned by some scholars.

[ 9 ] Researchers have shown that in India there are approximately 50,000 to 100,000 female abortions each year, significantly affecting the human sex ratio.

[ 10 ] Recent studies have expanded the understanding of this issue by quantifying trends in conditional sex ratios (CSRs) among Asian diaspora populations in Australia, Canada, the UK, and the US, showing that sex selection practices have persisted among diaspora communities from 1999 to 2019.

[ 11 ] Research into the past four decades of sex-selective abortions in China highlights the significant role these practices have played in shaping the country's demographic profile, despite challenges in estimating exact numbers due to underreporting and the controversial level of sex ratio at birth (SRB).

[ 12 ] According to demographic scholarship, the expected birth-sex ratio range is 103 to 107 males to 100 females at birth.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Human sex ratio at birth [ edit ] Main article: Human sex ratio The human sex ratio at birth can vary for natural reasons as well as from sex-selective abortion. In many nations abortion is legal (see above map, dark blue).

Sex-selective abortion affects the human sex ratio —the relative number of males to females in a given age group.

[ 7 ] Studies and reports that discuss sex-selective abortion are based on the assumption that birth sex ratio—the overall ratio of boys and girls at birth for a regional population, is an indicator of sex-selective abortion.

[ 9 ] [ 16 ] The natural human sex ratio at birth was estimated, in a 2002 study, to be close to 106 boys to 100 girls.

[ 17 ] Human sex ratio at birth that is significantly different from 106 is often assumed to be correlated to the prevalence and scale of sex-selective abortion. Countries considered to have significant practices of sex-selective abortion are those with birth sex ratios of 108 and above (selective abortion of females), and 102 and below (selective abortion of males).

[ 13 ] This assumption is controversial, and the subject of continuing scientific studies.

High or low human sex ratio implies sex-selective abortion [ edit ] One school of scholars suggest that any birth sex ratio of boys to girls that is outside the normal 105–107 range, necessarily implies sex-selective abortion. These scholars [ 18 ] claim that both the sex ratio at birth and the population sex ratio are remarkably constant in human populations. Significant deviations in birth sex ratios from the normal range can only be explained by manipulation, that is sex-selective abortion.

[ 19 ] In a widely cited article, [ 20 ] Amartya Sen compared the birth sex ratio in Europe (106) and the United States (105) with those in Asia (107+) and argued that the high sex ratios in East Asia, West Asia and South Asia may be due to excessive female mortality. Sen pointed to research that had shown that if men and women receive similar nutritional and medical attention and good health care then females have better survival rates, and it is the male which is the genetically fragile sex.

[ 14 ] Sen estimated 'missing women' from extra women who would have survived in Asia if it had the same ratio of women to men as Europe and the United States. According to Sen, the high birth sex ratio over decades implies a female shortfall of 11% in Asia, or over 100 million women as missing from the 3 billion combined population of South Asia, West Asia, North Africa and China.

High or low human sex ratio may be natural [ edit ] Other scholars question whether birth sex ratio outside 103–107 can be due to natural reasons. William James and others [ 9 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] suggest that conventional assumptions have been: there are equal numbers of X and Y chromosomes in mammalian sperms X and Y stand equal chance of achieving conception therefore equal number of male and female zygotes are formed, and that therefore any variation of sex ratio at birth is due to sex selection between conception and birth.

James cautions that available scientific evidence stands against the above assumptions and conclusions. He reports that there is an excess of males at birth in almost all human populations, and the natural sex ratio at birth is usually between 102 and 108. However the ratio may deviate significantly from this range for natural reasons such as early marriage and fertility, teenage mothers, average maternal age at birth, paternal age, age gap between father and mother, late births, ethnicity, social and economic stress, warfare, environmental and hormonal effects.

[ 9 ] [ 25 ] This school of scholars support their alternate hypothesis with historical data when modern sex-selection technologies were unavailable, as well as birth sex ratio in sub-regions, and various ethnic groups of developed economies.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] They suggest that direct abortion data should be collected and studied, instead of drawing conclusions indirectly from human sex ratio at birth.

James' hypothesis is supported by historical birth sex ratio data before technologies for ultrasonographic sex-screening were discovered and commercialized in the 1960s and 1970s, as well by reverse abnormal sex ratios currently observed in Africa. Michel Garenne reports that many African nations have, over decades, witnessed birth sex ratios below 100, that is more girls are born than boys.

[ 28 ] Angola , Botswana and Namibia have reported birth sex ratios between 94 and 99, which is quite different from the presumed 104 to 106 as natural human birth sex ratio.

[ 28 ] : 95 John Graunt noted that in London over a 35-year period in the 17th century (1628–62), [ 29 ] the birth sex ratio was 1.07; while Korea's historical records suggest a birth sex ratio of 1.13, based on 5 million births, in 1920s over a 10-year period.

[ 30 ] Other historical records from Asia too support James' hypothesis. For example, Jiang et al. claim that the birth sex ratio in China was 116–121 over a 100-year period in the late 18th and early 19th centuries; in the 120–123 range in the early 20th century; falling to 112 in the 1930s.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Data on human sex ratio at birth [ edit ] In the United States, the sex ratios at birth over the period 1970–2002 were 105 for the white non-Hispanic population, 104 for Mexican Americans, 103 for African Americans and Native Americans, and 107 for mothers of Chinese or Filipino ethnicity.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] In the aggregated results of 56 Demographic and Health Surveys [ 36 ] in African countries, the birth sex ratio was found to be 103, though there is also considerable country-to-country, and year-to-year variation.

[ 37 ] In a 2005 study, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services reported sex ratio at birth in the United States from 1940 over 62 years.

[ 33 ] This statistical evidence suggested the following: For mothers having their first baby, the total sex ratio at birth was 106 overall, with some years at 107. For mothers having babies after the first, this ratio consistently decreased with each additional baby from 106 towards 103. The age of the mother affected the ratio: the overall ratio was 105 for mothers aged 25 to 35 at the time of birth; while mothers who were below the age of 15 or above 40 had babies with a sex ratio ranging between 94 and 111, and a total sex ratio of 104. This United States study also noted that American mothers of Hawaiian, Filipino, Chinese, Cuban and Japanese ethnicity had the highest sex ratio, with years as high as 114 and average sex ratio of 107 over the 62-year study period. Outside of United States, European nations with extensive birth records, such as Finland, report similar variations in birth sex ratios over a 250-year period, that is from 1751 to 1997 AD.

[ 27 ] Female Selective abortions in Asia are predominantly practiced in areas such as Taiwan, China, and India. The Sex ratio at birth in Asia based on worldwide data is 104 and 107 males per 100 females, which was the accepted norm before sex selective abortion was available. Unfortunately, census results from 2000 are still being reviewed and currently unavailable.

[ 38 ] In 2017, according to CIA estimates, [ 39 ] the countries with the highest birth sex ratio were Liechtenstein (125), Northern Mariana Islands (116), China (114), Armenia (112), Falkland Islands (112), India (112), Grenada (110), Hong Kong (110), Vietnam (110), Albania (109), Azerbaijan (109), San Marino (109), Isle of Man (108), Kosovo (108) and Macedonia (108). Also in 2017 the lowest ratio (i.e. more girls born) was in Nauru at 83.

[ 39 ] There were ratios of 102 and below in several countries, most of them African countries or Black/African majority population Caribbean countries: Angola, Aruba, Barbados, Bermuda, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Cayman Islands, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Republic of the Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gabon, The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Kazakhstan, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Niger, Puerto Rico, Qatar, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Togo, Uganda, Zambia.

[ 39 ] There is controversy about the notion of the exact natural sex ratio at birth. In a study around 2002, the natural sex ratio at birth was estimated to be close to 1.06 males/female.

[ 17 ] There is controversy whether sex ratios outside the 103-107 range are due to sex-selection, as suggested by some scholars, or due to natural causes. The claims that unbalanced sex ratios are necessary due to sex selection have been questioned by some researchers.

[ 9 ] Some researchers argue that an unbalanced sex ratio should not be automatically held as evidence of prenatal sex-selection; Michel Garenne reports that many African nations have, over decades, witnessed birth sex ratios below 100, that is more girls are born than boys.

[ 28 ] Angola, Botswana and Namibia have reported birth sex ratios between 94 and 99, which is quite different than the presumed "normal" sex ratio, meaning that significantly more girls have been born in such societies.

[ 28 ] : 95 In addition, in many developing countries there are problems with birth registration and data collection, which can complicate the issue.

[ 40 ] With regard to the prevalence of sex selection, the media and international attention has focused mainly on a few countries, such as China, India and the Caucasus , ignoring other countries with a significant sex imbalance at birth. For example, Liechtenstein 's sex ratio is far worse than that of those countries, but little has been discussed about it, and virtually no suggestions have been made that it may practice sex selection, although it is a very conservative country where women could not vote until 1984 .

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] At the same time, there have been accusations that the situation in some countries, such as Georgia , has been exaggerated.

[ 43 ] In 2017, Georgia' sex ratio at birth was 107, according to CIA statistics.

[ 44 ] Data reliability [ edit ] The estimates for birth sex ratios, and thus derived sex-selective abortion, are a subject of dispute as well. For example, United States' CIA projects [ 45 ] the birth sex ratio for Switzerland to be 106, while the Switzerland's Federal Statistical Office that tracks actual live births of boys and girls every year, reports the latest birth sex ratio for Switzerland as 107.

[ 46 ] Other variations are more significant; for example, CIA projects [ 45 ] the birth sex ratio for Pakistan to be 105, United Nations FPA office claims [ 47 ] the birth sex ratio for Pakistan to be 110, while the government of Pakistan claims its average birth sex ratio is 111.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] The two most studied nations with high sex ratio and sex-selective abortion are China and India. The CIA estimates [ 45 ] a birth sex ratio of 112 for both in recent years. However, The World Bank claims the birth sex ratio for China in 2009 was 120 boys for every 100 girls; [ 51 ] while United Nations FPA estimates China's 2011 birth sex ratio to be 118.

[ 52 ] For India, the United Nations FPA claims a birth sex ratio of 111 over 2008–10 period, [ 52 ] while The World Bank and India's official 2011 Census reports a birth sex ratio of 108.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] These variations and data reliability is important as a rise from 108 to 109 for India, or 117 to 118 for China, each with large populations, represent a possible sex-selective abortion of about 100,000 girls.

Bias is due to the unreported births in hospitals which makes a slight difference on the data they report vs the census. If parents obtain sex testing before birth, and abortion was made and it was based on female fetus, it is more likely for the abortion to happen in the hospital for safety purposes and would have been reported. With no comparative data with hospitals vs nonhospital births the length of biased would be unable to determine opposed to those countries where most hospital births occur and are actually reported.

[ 38 ] Prenatal sex discernment [ edit ] Main article: Prenatal sex discernment Sign in an Indian hospital stating that prenatal sex determination is not done there and is illegal Ultrasonography image showing the fetus is a boy The earliest post-implantation test, cell free fetal DNA testing, involves taking a blood sample from the mother and isolating the small amount of fetal DNA that can be found within it. When performed after week seven of pregnancy, this method is about 98% accurate.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Obstetric ultrasonography , either transvaginally or transabdominally, checks for various markers of fetal sex. It can be performed at or after week 12 of pregnancy. At this point, 3 ⁄ 4 of fetal sexes can be correctly determined, according to a 2001 study.

[ 57 ] Accuracy for males is approximately 50% and for females almost 100%. When performed after week 13 of pregnancy, ultrasonography gives an accurate result in almost 100% of cases.

[ 57 ] The most invasive measures are chorionic villus sampling (CVS) and amniocentesis , which involve testing of the chorionic villus (found in the placenta) and amniotic fluid , respectively. Both techniques typically test for chromosomal disorders but can also reveal the sex of the child and are performed early in the pregnancy. However, they are often more expensive and more dangerous than blood sampling or ultrasonography, so they are seen less frequently than other sex determination techniques.

[ 58 ] Prenatal sex determination is restricted in many countries, and so is the communication of the sex of the fetus to the pregnant woman or her family, in order to prevent sex selective abortion.
In India, prenatal sex determination is regulated under the Pre-conception and Prenatal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act 1994.

[ 59 ] Availability China launched its first ultrasonography machine in 1979.

[ 16 ] Chinese health care clinics began introducing ultrasound technologies that could be used to determine prenatal sex in 1982. By 1991, Chinese companies were producing 5,000 ultrasonography machines per year. Almost every rural and urban hospital and family planning clinics in China had a good quality sex discernment equipment by 2001.

[ 16 ] The launch of ultrasonography technology in India too occurred in 1979, but its expansion was slower than China. Ultrasound sex discernment technologies were first introduced in major cities of India in the 1980s, its use expanded in India's urban regions in the 1990s, and became widespread in the 2000s.

[ 60 ] Africa and the Middle East [ edit ] Sex selective abortion based on son preference is significant in North Africa and the Middle East .

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 40 ] Asia [ edit ] The total numbers of "missing women" are about 11.9 million and 10.6 million in China and India respectively, out of 23 million world-wide, according to a 2019 study.

[ 15 ] Given that the total number of recorded abortions is much lower than that, some dispute those numbers.

China [ edit ] Further information: Son preference in China , Missing women of China , Female infanticide in China , and List of Chinese administrative divisions by gender ratio A roadside slogan calls motorists to crack down on medically unnecessary antenatal sex identification and sex-selective pregnancy termination practices. ( Daye, Hubei , 2008) Roadside sign in Danshan Township, which reads "It is forbidden to discriminate against, abuse or abandon baby girls" China, the most populous country in the world, has a serious problem with an unbalanced sex ratio population. A 2010 BBC article stated that the sex birth ratio was 119 boys born per 100 girls, which rose to 130 boys per 100 girls in some rural areas.

[ 63 ] The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences estimated that more than 24 million Chinese men of marrying age could find themselves without spouses by 2020.

[ 63 ] In 1979, China enacted the one-child policy , which, within the country's deeply patriarchal culture, resulted in an unbalanced birth sex ratio. The one child policy was enforced throughout the years, including through forced abortions and forced sterilizations , but gradually loosened until it was formally abolished in 2015.

[ 64 ] When sex ratio began being studied in China in 1960, it was still within the normal range. However, it climbed to 111.9 by 1990 [ 16 ] and to 118 by 2010 per its official census.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Researchers believe that the causes of this sex ratio imbalance are increased female infant mortality, underreporting of female births and sex-selective abortion. According to Zeng et al. (1993), the most prominent cause is probably sex-selective abortion, but this is difficult to prove that in a country with little reliable birth data because of the hiding of "illegal" (under the One-Child Policy) births.

[ 67 ] These illegal births have led to underreporting of female infants. Zeng et al., using a reverse survival method, estimate that underreporting keeps about 2.26% male births and 5.94% female births off the books. Adjusting for unreported illegal births, they conclude that the corrected Chinese sex ratio at birth for 1989 was 111 rather than 115.

[ 67 ] These national averages over time, mask the regional sex ratio data. For example, in 2005 Anhui , Jiangxi , Shaanxi , Hunan and Guangdong , had a sex ratio at birth of more than 130.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Traditional Chinese techniques have been used to determine sex for hundreds of years, primarily with unknown accuracy. It was not until ultrasonography became widely available in urban and rural China that sex was able to be determined scientifically. In 1986, the Ministry of Health posted the Notice on Forbidding Prenatal Sex Determination, but it was not widely followed.

[ 70 ] Three years later, the Ministry of Health outlawed the use of sex determination techniques, except for in diagnosing hereditary diseases.

[ 71 ] Individuals or clinics that violated the ban on prenatal determination at the request of the mother were subject to financial penalties, and the ban was repeatedly affirmed in the 1980s, early 1990s, and early 2000s.

[ 72 ] However, many people have personal connections to medical practitioners and strong son preference still dominates culture, leading to the widespread use of sex determination techniques.

[ 16 ] Hardy, Gu, and Xie suggest sex-selective abortion is more prevalent in rural China because son preference is much stronger there.

[ 73 ] Urban areas of China, on average, are moving toward greater equality for both sexes, while rural China tends to follow more traditional views of gender. This is partially due to the belief that, while sons are always part of the family, daughters are only temporary, going to a new family when they marry. Additionally, if a woman's firstborn child is a son, her position in society moves up, while the same is not true of a firstborn daughter.

[ 16 ] Families in China are aware of the critical lack of female children and its implication on marriage prospects in the future; many parents are beginning to work extra when their sons are young so that they will be able to pay for a bride for them.

[ 16 ] Birth sex ratios have dramatically changed in China since the implementation of the One-Child Policy .

In a 2005 study, Zhu, Lu, and Hesketh found that the highest sex ratio was for those ages 1–4, and two provinces, Tibet and Xinjiang, had sex ratios within normal limits. Two other provinces had a ratio over 140, four had ratios between 130 and 139, and seven had ratios between 120 and 129, each of which is significantly higher than the natural sex ratio.

[ 69 ] The birth sex ratio in China, according to a 2012 news report, has decreased to 117 males born for every 100 females.

[ 74 ] The sex ratio peaked in 2004 at around 121, and had declined to around 112 in 2017.

[ 75 ] The ratio was forecast to drop below 112 by 2020 and 107 by 2030, according to the National Population Development Outline by the State Council.

[ 76 ] In December 2016, researchers at the University of Kansas reported that the missing women might be largely a result of administrative under-reporting and that delayed registration of females, instead of abortion and infanticide practices. The finding questioned the earlier assumptions that rural Chinese villagers aborted their daughters on a massive scale and concluded that as many as 10 to 15 million missing women hadn't received proper birth registration since 1982.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] The reason for underreporting was attributed to families trying to avoid penalties when girls were born, and local government concealing the lack of enforcement from the central government. This implied that the sex disparity of the Chinese newborns was likely exaggerated significantly in previous analyses.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] Though the degree of data discrepancy, the challenge in relation to sex-ratio imbalance in China is still disputed among scholars.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] India [ edit ] Further information: Female foeticide in India A map of India's child sex ratio, 2011.

A research by Pew Research Center based on Union government data indicates foeticide of at least 9 million females in the years 2000–2019. The research found that 86.7% of these foeticides were by Hindus (80% of the population), followed by Sikhs (1.7% of the population) with 4.9%, and Muslims (14% of the population) with 6.6%. The research also indicated an overall decline in preference for sons in the time period.

[ 84 ] India's 2001 census revealed a national 0–6 age child sex ratio of 108, which increased to 109 according to 2011 census (927 girls per 1000 boys and 919 girls per 1000 boys respectively, compared to expected normal ratio of 943 girls per 1000 boys).

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] The national average masks the variations in regional numbers according to 2011 census—Haryana's ratio was 120, Punjab's ratio was 118, Jammu & Kashmir was 116, and Gujarat's ratio was 111.

[ 87 ] The 2011 Census found eastern states of India had birth sex ratios between 103 and 104, lower than normal.

[ 88 ] In contrast to decadal nationwide census data, small non-random sample surveys report higher child sex ratios in India.

[ 89 ] The child sex ratio in India shows a regional pattern. India's 2011 census found that all eastern and southern states of India had a child sex ratio between 103 and 107, [ 87 ] typically considered as the "natural ratio." The highest sex ratios were observed in India's northern and northwestern states – Haryana (120), Punjab (118) and Jammu & Kashmir (116).

[ 90 ] The western states of Maharashtra and Rajasthan 2011 census found a child sex ratio of 113, Gujarat at 112 and Uttar Pradesh at 111.

[ 90 ] The Indian census data suggests there is a positive correlation between abnormal sex ratio and better socio-economic status and literacy. Urban India has higher child sex ratio than rural India according to 1991, 2001 and 2011 Census data, implying higher prevalence of sex selective abortion in urban India. Similarly, child sex ratio greater than 115 boys per 100 girls is found in regions where the predominant majority is Hindu, Muslim, Sikh or Christian; furthermore "normal" child sex ratio of 104 to 106 boys per 100 girls are also found in regions where the predominant majority is Hindu, Muslim, Sikh or Christian. These data contradict any hypotheses that may suggest that sex selection is an archaic practice which takes place among uneducated, poor sections or particular religion of the Indian society.

[ 87 ] [ 91 ] The male to female sex ratio for India, based on its official census data from 1941 through to 2011. The data suggests the existence of high sex ratios before and after the arrival of ultrasound-based prenatal care and sex screening technologies in India.

Richard Bourke, 6th Earl of Mayo , who was Governor-General of India at the time of the Female Infanticide Prevention Act, 1870 .

Rutherford and Roy, in their 2003 paper, suggest that techniques for determining sex prenatally that were pioneered in the 1970s, gained popularity in India.

[ 92 ] These techniques, claim Rutherford and Roy, became broadly available in 17 of 29 Indian states by the early 2000s. Such prenatal sex determination techniques, claim Sudha and Rajan in a 1999 report, where available, favored male births.

[ 93 ] Arnold, Kishor, and Roy, in their 2002 paper, too hypothesize that modern fetal sex screening techniques have skewed child sex ratios in India.

[ 94 ] Ganatra et al., in their 2000 paper, use a small survey sample to estimate that 1 ⁄ 6 of reported abortions followed a sex determination test.

[ 95 ] The Indian government and various advocacy groups have continued the debate and discussion about ways to prevent sex selection. The immorality of prenatal sex selection has been questioned, with some arguments in favor of prenatal discrimination as more humane than postnatal discrimination by a family that does not want a female child. Others question whether the morality of sex selective abortion is any different over morality of abortion when there is no risk to the mother nor to the fetus, and abortion is used as a means to end an unwanted pregnancy.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] [ 98 ] India passed its first abortion-related law, the so-called Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act of 1971, making abortion legal in most states, but specified legally acceptable reasons for abortion such as medical risk to mother and rape. The law also established physicians who can legally provide the procedure and the facilities where abortions can be performed, but did not anticipate sex selective abortion based on technology advances.

[ 99 ] With increasing availability of sex screening technologies in India through the 1980s in urban India, and claims of its misuse, the Government of India passed the Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques Act (PNDT) in 1994. This law was further amended into the Pre-Conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) (PCPNDT) Act in 2004 to deter and punish prenatal sex screening and sex selective abortion. The impact of the law and its enforcement is unclear. However, research shows that there was about a 0.7%-1% increase in female births after the PNDT Act was passed in 1994. Unfortunately, this data was not significant.

[ 10 ] United Nations Population Fund and India's National Human Rights Commission, in 2009, asked the Government of India to assess the impact of the law. The Public Health Foundation of India, an activist NGO in its 2010 report, claimed a lack of awareness about the Act in parts of India, inactive role of the Appropriate Authorities, ambiguity among some clinics that offer prenatal care services, and the role of a few medical practitioners in disregarding the law.

[ 91 ] At the start of passing this act, women were still able to travel across borders to continue having sex-selective abortions. This was until the national PNDT was passed in 1996.

[ 10 ] The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of India has targeted education and media advertisements to reach clinics and medical professionals to increase awareness. The Indian Medical Association has undertaken efforts to prevent prenatal sex selection by giving its members Beti Bachao (save the daughter) badges during its meetings and conferences.

[ 91 ] In November 2007, MacPherson estimated that 100,000 abortions every year continue to be performed in India solely because the fetus is female.

[ 100 ] Women may further be subject to violence for birthing daughters over sons. In 2016, Anu Bansal was murdered by her husband after giving birth to another daughter. She was burned to death.

[ 101 ] Pakistan [ edit ] Main article: Female infanticide in Pakistan Pakistan has a tradition of sex selection. Similarly with India, the tradition of dowry plays role.

For Pakistan, the United Nations Population Fund, in its 2012 report estimates the Pakistan birth sex ratio to be 110. In the urban regions, particularly its densely populated region of Punjab, report a sex ratio above 112 (less than 900 females per 1000 males).

[ 102 ] Hudson and Den Boer estimate the resulting deficit to be about 6 million missing girls in Pakistan than what would normally be expected.

[ 103 ] In 2017, two Pakistani organisations discovered large cases of infanticide in Pakistani cities. This was led by the Edhi Foundation and Chhipa Welfare Foundation. The infanticide victims were almost all were female infants. The reason given by the local authorities were poverty and local customs, where boys are preferred to girls. However, the large discovery in Karachi shows that many of the female infants were killed because of the local clerics, who ordered that out-of-wedlock babies should be disregarded. This is due to the fact that fornication is a major sin in Islam, although it is also haram (forbidden) to kill an innocent soul, which babies and children fall under.

[ 104 ] In fact, Muhammad explicitly banned the killing of female infants, as it was a custom in Pre-Islamic Arabia .

[ 105 ] From January 2017 to April 2018, Edhi Center foundation and Chhipa Welfare organisation have found 345 such new born babies dumped in garbage in Karachi only and 99 percent of them were girls.

"We have been dealing with such cases for years and there are a few such incidents which shook our souls as much. It left us wondering whether our society is heading back to primitive age," Anwar Kazmi, a senior manager in Edhi Foundation Karachi, told The News.

Edhi Foundation has found 355 such dead infants from the garbage dumps across the country in 2017; 99 percent of them were identified girls. And Karachi has topped in this notorious ranking with 180 cases in 2017. As many as 72 dead girls have been buried in the first four months of this year by Edhi Foundation alone in the metropolitan city. The given data is just tip of the iceberg as Edhi foundation maintains the data of those cities where it provides services.

[ 104 ] South Korea [ edit ] Further information: Sex-selective abortion in South Korea Sex-selective abortion gained popularity in the mid-1980s to early 1990s in South Korea , where selective female abortions were commonplace as male children were preferred. Historically, much of Korea's values and traditions were based on Confucianism that dictated the patriarchal system, [ 106 ] motivating the heavy preference for sons. Additionally, even though the abortion ban existed, the combination of son preference and availability of sex-selective technology led to an increasing number of sex-selective abortions and boys born.

[ 107 ] As a result, South Korea experienced drastically high sex ratios around mid-1980s to early 1990s.

[ 106 ] However, in recent years, with the changes in family policies and modernization, attitudes towards son preference have changed, normalizing the sex ratio and lowering the number of sex-selective abortions.

[ 106 ] With that being said, there has been no explicit data on the number of induced sex selective abortions reportedly performed due to the abortion ban and controversy surrounding the topic. Therefore, scholars have been continuously analyzing and generating connections among sex-selection, abortion policies, gender discrimination, and other cultural factors.

Other Asian countries [ edit ] Other countries with large populations but high sex ratios include Vietnam . The United Nations Population Fund, in its 2012 report, [ 108 ] claims the birth sex ratio of Vietnam at 111 with its densely populated Red River Delta region at 116.

Taiwan has reported a sex ratio at birth between 1.07 and 1.11 every year, across 4 million births, over the 20-year period from 1991 to 2011, with the highest birth sex ratios in the 2000s.

[ 109 ] Sex-selective abortion is reported to be common in South Korea too, but its incidence has declined in recent years.

[ 110 ] [ 40 ] [ 111 ] As of 2015, South Korea's sex ratio at birth was 1.07 male/female.

[ 39 ] In 2015, Hong Kong had a sex ratio at birth of 1.12 male/female.

[ 39 ] A 2001 study on births in the late 1990s concluded that "sex selection or sex-selective abortion might be practiced among Hong Kong Chinese women".

[ 112 ] Recently, a rise in the sex ratio at birth has been noted in some parts of Nepal , most notably in the Kathmandu Valley , but also in districts such as Kaski .

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] High sex ratios at birth are most notable amongst richer, more educated sections of the population in urban areas.

[ 113 ] Europe [ edit ] Abnormal sex ratios at birth, possibly explained by growing incidence of sex-selective abortion, have also been noted in some other countries outside South and East Asia. According to CIA, the most imbalanced birth sex ratios in Europe (2017) are in Liechtenstein, Armenia, Albania, Azerbaijan, San Marino,  Kosovo and Macedonia; with Liechtenstein having the most imbalanced sex ratio in the world.

[ 39 ] Caucasus [ edit ] Topography of the Caucasus ,  a region at the border of Europe and Asia , situated between the Black and the Caspian seas The Caucasus has been named a "male-dominated region", and as families have become smaller in recent years, the pressures to have sons has increased.

[ 115 ] Before the dissolution of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s, the birth sex ratio in Caucasus countries such as Azerbaijan , Armenia and Georgia was in the 105 to 108 range. After the collapse, the birth sex ratios sharply climbed and have remained high for the last 20 years.

[ 24 ] Armenia, Georgia, and Azerbaijan have seen strongly imbalanced birth sex ratios in the first decade of the 21st century.

[ 53 ] In Georgia, the birth sex ratio for the years 2005–2009 was cited by The Economist to be about 120, a trend The Economist claims suggests that the practice of sex-selective abortion in the Caucasus has been similar to those in East Asia and South Asia in recent decades.

[ 53 ] According to an article in The Economist the sex ratio in Armenia is seen to be a function of birth order. The article claimed that among first born children, there are 138 boys for every 100 girls.

[ 53 ] Overall, the birth sex ratio in Armenia exceeded 115 in some years, far higher than India's which was cited at 108.

[ 53 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] While these high birth sex ratios suggest sex-selective abortion, there is no direct evidence of observed large-scale sex-selective abortions in Caucasus.

[ 24 ] According to latest CIA data, the 2017 sex ratio in the region is 112 for Armenia, 109 for Azerbaijan, and 107 for Georgia.

[ 39 ] Southeast Europe [ edit ] An imbalanced birth sex ratio has been present in the 21st century in the Western Balkans , in countries such as Albania , Macedonia , Kosovo and Montenegro . Scholars claim this suggests that sex-selective abortions are common in southeast Europe.

[ 4 ] [ 118 ] [ 119 ] As of 2017, according to CIA estimates, Albania's birth sex ratio is 109.

[ 39 ] According to Eurostat and birth record data over 2008–11, the birth sex ratios of Albania and Montenegro for that period were 112 and 110 respectively.

[ 52 ] In recent years, Montenegrin health authorities have expressed concern with regard to the significant imbalance between the number of male and female births.

[ 120 ] However the data from CIA in 2017 cites the birth ratio for Montenegro within the normal range, at 106.

[ 39 ] In recent years, the birth registration data for Macedonia and Kosovo indicate unbalanced birth sex ratios, including a birth rate in 2010 of 112 for Kosovo [ 52 ] : 23 As 2017, CIA cited both Macedonia and Kosovo at 108.

[ 39 ] Americas [ edit ] United States [ edit ] As in other countries, sex-selective abortion is difficult to track in the United States because of lack of data.

While the vast majority of parents in the United States do not practice sex-selective abortion, there is certainly a trend toward male preference. According to a 2011 Gallup poll , if they were only allowed to have one child, 40% of respondents said they would prefer a boy, while only 28% preferred a girl.

[ 121 ] When told about prenatal sex selection techniques such as sperm sorting and in-vitro-fertilization embryo selection, 40% of Americans surveyed thought that picking embryos by sex was an acceptable manifestation of reproductive rights.

[ 122 ] These selection techniques are available at about half of American fertility clinics, as of 2006.

[ 123 ] However, other studies show a larger preference for females. According to the Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology, 80% of American couples who wanted to get gender selection wanted girls over boys.

[ 124 ] A study of the 2000 United States Census suggests possible male bias in families of Chinese, Korean and Indian immigrants, which was getting increasingly stronger in families where the first one or two children were female. In those families where the first two children were girls, the birth-sex ratio of the third child was 1.51:1.

[ 125 ] Because of this movement toward sex preference and selection, many bans on sex-selective abortion have been proposed at the state and federal level. In 2010 and 2011, sex-selective abortions were banned in Oklahoma and Arizona , respectively. Legislators in Georgia , West Virginia , Michigan , Minnesota , New Jersey , and New York have also tried to pass acts banning the procedure.

[ 122 ] Other countries [ edit ] A 2013 study [ 117 ] by John Bongaarts based on surveys in 61 major countries calculates the sex ratios that would result if parents had the number of sons and daughters they want. In 35 countries, claims Bongaarts, the desired birth sex ratio in respective countries would be more than 110 boys for every 100 girls if parents in these countries had a child matching their preferred gender (higher than India's, which The Economist claims is 108).

[ 53 ] Estimates of missing women [ edit ] Number of 'Missing Women' in the world, Our World in Data.

[ 126 ] Estimates of implied missing girls, considering the "normal" birth sex ratio to be the 103–107 range, vary considerably between researchers and underlying assumptions for expected post-birth mortality rates for men and women. For example, a 2005 study estimated that over 90 million females were "missing" from the expected population in Afghanistan , Bangladesh , China , India , Pakistan , South Korea and Taiwan alone, and suggested that sex-selective abortion plays a role in this deficit.

[ 3 ] [ 103 ] For early 1990s, Sen estimated 107 million missing women, Coale estimated 60 million as missing, while Klasen estimated 89 million missing women in China, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, West Asia and Egypt .

[ 19 ] Guilmoto, [ 127 ] in his 2010 report, uses recent data (except for Pakistan), and estimates a much lower number of missing girls, but notes that the higher sex ratios in numerous countries have created a gender gap – shortage of girls – in the 0–19 age group.

Country Gender gap 0–19 age group (2010) [ 127 ] % of minor females [ 127 ] Region Religious situation [ improper synthesis?

] Afghanistan 265,000 3.0 South Asia Mostly Islam Albania 21,000 4.2 Southeast Europe Religiously diverse Armenia 35,000 8.4 Caucasus Mostly Christianity Azerbaijan 111,000 8.3 Caucasus Mostly Islam Bangladesh 416,000 1.4 South Asia Mostly Islam China 25,112,000 15.0 East Asia Religiously diverse Georgia 24,000 4.6 Caucasus Mostly Christianity India 12,618,000 5.3 South Asia Religiously diverse Montenegro 3,000 3.6 Southeast Europe Mostly Christianity Nepal 125,000 1.8 South Asia Mostly Hinduism Pakistan 206,000 0.5 South Asia Mostly Islam South Korea 336,000 6.2 East Asia Religiously diverse Singapore 21,000 3.5 Southeast Asia Religiously diverse Vietnam 139,000 1.0 Southeast Asia Religiously diverse Disparate gendered access to resources [ edit ] Although there is significant evidence of the prevalence of sex-selective abortions in many nations (especially India and China), there is also evidence to suggest that some of the variation in global sex ratios is due to disparate access to resources. As MacPherson (2007) notes, there can be significant differences in gender violence and access to food, healthcare, immunizations between male and female children. This leads to high infant and childhood mortality among girls, which causes changes in sex ratio.

[ 100 ] Disparate, gendered access to resources appears to be strongly linked to socioeconomic status. Specifically, poorer families are sometimes forced to ration food, with daughters typically receiving less priority than sons.

[ 19 ] However, Klasen's 2001 study revealed that this practice is less common in the poorest families, but rises dramatically in the slightly less poor families.

[ 19 ] Klasen and Wink's 2003 study suggests that this is "related to greater female economic independence and fewer cultural strictures among the poorest sections of the population". In other words, the poorest families are typically less bound by cultural expectations and norms, and women tend to have more freedom to become family breadwinners out of necessity.

[ 19 ] Increased sex ratios can be caused by disparities in aspects of life other than vital resources. According to Sen (1990), differences in wages and job advancement also have a dramatic effect on sex ratios. This is why high sex ratios are sometimes seen in nations with little sex-selective abortion.

[ 20 ] Additionally, high female education rates are correlated with lower sex ratios (World Bank 2011).

[ 128 ] Lopez and Ruzikah (1983) found that, when given the same resources, women tend to outlive men at all stages of life after infancy. However, globally, resources are not always allocated equitably. Thus, some scholars argue that disparities in access to resources such as healthcare, education, and nutrition play at least a small role in the high sex ratios seen in some parts of the world.

[ 19 ] For example, Alderman and Gerter (1997) found that unequal access to healthcare is a primary cause of female death in developing nations, especially in Southeast Asia. Moreover, in India, lack of equal access to healthcare has led to increased disease and higher rates of female mortality in every age group until the late thirties (Sen 1990). This is particularly noteworthy because, in regions of the world where women receive equal resources, women tend to outlive men (Sen 1990). Women outlive men in all but 2 countries.

[ 129 ] Economic disadvantage alone may not always lead to increased sex ratio, claimed Sen in 1990. For example, in sub-Saharan Africa, one of the most economically disadvantaged regions of the world, there is an excess of women. So, if economic disadvantage is uncorrelated with sex ratio in Africa, some other factor(s) may be at play.

[ 20 ] More detailed analysis of African demographics, in 2002, suggests that Africa too has wide variation in birth sex ratios (from 1.01 in Bantu populations of East Africa to 1.08 in Nigeria and Ethiopia).

[ 37 ] Thus economic disadvantage remains a possible unresolved hypothesis for Africa as well.

Reasons for sex-selective abortion [ edit ] According to the 2012 report of the United Nations Fund for Population Activities on sex imbalances at birth, there are three preconditions for sex-selective abortion.

[ 130 ] First, the practice should be feasible with the availability of abortion methods and prenatal sex-screening technologies (e.g., obstetric ultrasonography , cell-free fetal DNA , amniocentesis ).

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] Second, changing the sex composition of children should be advantageous to the parents and the family. A variety of socioeconomic factors can account for this sex preference such as inherence rules, patronymic transmission, dowry systems, social preference of family composition.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] Third, sex-selective abortion should be necessary because of low or decreasing fertility. Given the existence of the social benefits associated with sons, the need for having sons while maintaining a limited number of children is intensified by low fertility.

[ 130 ] [ 61 ] Low fertility can be a result of social norms of family size, rising marginal costs of an additional child, or birth control policies.

Some demographers question whether sex-selective abortion or infanticide claims are accurate, because underreporting of female births may also explain high sex ratios.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] Natural reasons may also explain some of the abnormal sex ratios.

[ 9 ] [ 26 ] In contrast to these possible causes of abnormal sex ratio, Klasen and Wink suggest India and China's high sex ratios are primarily the result of sex-selective abortion.

[ 19 ] Socioeconomic reasons for son preference and daughter aversion [ edit ] Cultural preference [ edit ] Burying Babies in China (p.40, March 1865, XXII). There is a long tradition of female infanticide in China .

[ 134 ] Infanticide committed by throwing an infant into the Ganges river The reason for intensifying sex-selection abortion in China and India can be seen through history and cultural background. Generally, before the information era , male babies were preferred because they provided manual labor and continuation of the family lineage . Labor is still important in developing nations as China and India, but when it comes to family lineage, it is of great importance.

The selective abortion of female fetuses is most common in areas where cultural norms value male children over female children for a variety of social and economic reasons.

[ 2 ] A son is often preferred as an "asset" since he can earn and support the family; a daughter is a "liability" since she will be married off to another family, and so will not contribute financially to her parents. Sex selective female abortion is a continuation, in a different form, of a practice of female infanticide or withholding of postnatal health care for girls in certain households.

[ 135 ] Furthermore, in some cultures sons are expected to take care of their parents in their old age.

[ 136 ] These factors are complicated by the effect of diseases on child sex ratio, where communicable and noncommunicable diseases affect males and females differently.

[ 135 ] In parts of India and Pakistan, there are social norms such as purdah , which stipulate that female seclusion and confinement to the home is necessary. Such practices are prevalent among some Muslim and Hindu communities in South Asia. When females interact with men, or are believed to do so, the " family honor " is tarnished.

Historically, in many South Asian populations, women were allocated a very low status, evidenced through practices such as sati , an ancient funeral custom where a widow immolated herself on her husband's pyre or committed suicide in another fashion shortly after her husband's death.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] [ 139 ] Such societies, in placing almost no value on females, encouraged parents to commit infanticide of girls or to abandon them. The modern practice of sex-selective abortion is therefore a continuation of other historical practices. During the 19th century, in the Northwest British India , one-fourth of the population preserved only half the daughters, while other 3/4th of the population had balanced sex ratio. There were 118 males per 100 females. This is comparable to the contemporary sex ratio in the area, now divided between India and Pakistan.

[ 140 ] Chinese culture is deeply patriarchal. Pre-modern Chinese society was predominantly patriarchal and patrilineal from at least the 11th century BC onwards.

[ 141 ] There has long been a son preference in China, leading to high rates of female infanticide, as well as a strong tradition of restricting the freedom of movement of women, particularly upper-class women, manifested through the practice of foot binding . Although the legal and social standing of women have greatly improved in the 20th century, son preference remains still strong, and the situation was aggravated by the one child policy .

Interpretations of Confucianism have been argued to contribute to the low status of women. The gender roles prescribed in the Three Obediences and Four Virtues became a cornerstone of the family, and thus, societal stability. Starting from the Han period, Confucians began to teach that a virtuous woman was supposed to follow the males in her family: the father before her marriage, the husband after she marries, and her sons in widowhood. In the later dynasties, more emphasis was placed on the virtue of chastity. The Song dynasty Confucian Cheng Yi stated that: "To starve to death is a small matter, but to lose one's chastity is a great matter." [ 142 ] The "cult of chastity" accordingly, condemned many widows to poverty and loneliness by placing a social stigma on remarriage.

[ 143 ] In modern East Asia, a large part of the pattern of preferences leading to this practice can be condensed simply as a desire to have a male heir. Monica Das Gupta (2005) observes, from 1989 birth data for China, there was no evidence of selective abortion of female fetuses among firstborn children. However, there was a strong preference for a boy if the first born was a girl.

[ 135 ] Dowry [ edit ] A social awareness campaign in India against dowries Further information: Dowry system in India Wedding gifts for the son of the Imam of Delhi, India, with soldiers and 2000 guests. Large dowries are expected among several populations in South Asia, especially in India and Pakistan.

Dowry is the property that parents of a female transfer at her marriage. Dowry is an ancient practice, that has been common in many cultures around the world, and which is today prevalent especially in South Asia. The custom of dowry is most common in cultures that are strongly patrilineal and that expect women to reside with or near their husband's family ( patrilocality ).

[ 144 ] Kirti Singh states that dowry is widely considered to be both a cause and a consequence of son preference, and this may lead to girls being unwanted, sex selective abortion, female infanticide or abuse of female children.

[ 145 ] The dowry system in India is a major part of Indian culture and refers to the durable goods, cash, and real or movable property that the bride's family gives to the bridegroom, his parents, or his relatives as a condition of the marriage.

[ 146 ] Dowry consists of a payment in cash or some kind of gifts given to the bridegroom's family along with the bride and includes cash, jewelry, electrical appliances, furniture, bedding, crockery, utensils and other household items that help the newlyweds set up their home.

[ 147 ] Disputes regarding dowry sometimes lead to dowry deaths .

Trivers–Willard hypothesis [ edit ] The Trivers–Willard hypothesis argues that resource availability affects male reproductive success more than female and that, consequently, parents should prefer males when resources are plentiful and females when resources are scarce. This has been applied to resource differences between individuals in a society and also to resource differences between societies. Empirical evidence is mixed, with higher support in better studies, according to Cronk in a 2007 review. One example: in a 1997 study of a group with a preference for females was Romani in Hungary , a low-status group. They "had a female-biased sex ratio at birth, were more likely to abort a fetus after having had one or more daughters, nursed their daughters longer, and sent their daughters to school for longer." [ 148 ] One-child policy [ edit ] The one child policy in China has contributed to the imbalanced sex ratios. Image shows a community bulletin board in Nonguang Village, Sichuan province , China, keeping track of the town's female population, listing recent births by name and noting that several thousand yuan of fines for unauthorized births remain unpaid from the previous year.

Following the 1949 creation of the People's Republic of China, the issue of population control came into the national spotlight. In the early years of the Republic, leaders believed that telling citizens to reduce their fertility was enough, repealing laws banning contraception and instead promoting its use. However, the contraceptives were not widely available, both because of lack of supply and because of cultural taboo against discussing sex. Efforts were slowed following the famine of 1959–61 but were resumed shortly thereafter with virtually the same results. Then, in 1964, the Family Planning Office was established to enforce stricter guidelines regarding fertility and it was moderately successful.

[ 149 ] In 1979, the government adopted the One-Child Policy , which limited many families to one child, unless specified by provincial regulations. It was instituted as an attempt to boost the Chinese economy. Under it, families who break rules regarding the number of children they are allowed are given various punishments (primarily monetary), dependent upon the province in which they live.

[ 150 ] As stated above, the sex ratios of a province are largely determined by the type of restriction placed upon the family, pointing to the conclusion that much of the imbalance in sex ratio in China can be attributed to the policy. Research by Junhong (2001) found that many parents are willing to pay to ensure that their child is male (especially if their first child is female), but will not do the same to ensure their child is female.

[ 16 ] Likely, fear of the harsh monetary punishments of the One-Child Policy make ensuring a son's birth a smart investment. Therefore, son's cultural and economic importance to families and the large expenses associated with multiple children are primary factors leading to China's disparate sex ratio.

In 2013, China announced plans to formally change the One-Child policy, making it less stringent. The National People's Congress has changed the policy to allow couples to have two children, so long as one of the partners is an only child. This change was not sparked by sex ratios, but rather by an aging population that is causing the workforce to become increasingly smaller. It is estimated that this new law will lead to two million more births per year and could cause a baby boom in China. In 2015, China officially relaxed its one child law.

[ 151 ] Unfortunately, many of China's social problems are based on overpopulation. So, it is unclear if this new law will actually lead to women being more valued in Chinese society as the number of citizens increases.

[ 152 ] Societal effects [ edit ] Missing women [ edit ] Main article: Missing women The idea of "missing women" was first suggested by Amartya Sen, one of the first scholars to study high sex ratios and their causes globally, in 1990. In order to illustrate the gravity of the situation, he calculated the number of women that were not alive because of sex-selective abortion or discriminatory practices. He found that there were 11 percent fewer women than there "should" have been, if China had the natural sex ratio. This figure, when combined with statistics from around the world, led to a finding of over 100 million missing women. In other words, by the early 1990s, the number of missing women was "larger than the combined casualties of all famines in the twentieth century" (Sen 1990).

[ 20 ] This has led to particular concern due to a critical shortage of wives. In some rural areas, there is already a shortage of women, which is tied to migration into urban areas (Park and Cho 1995).

[ 153 ] In South Korea and Taiwan , high male sex ratios and declining birth rates over several decades have led to cross-cultural marriage between local men and foreign women from countries such as mainland China, Vietnam and the Philippines.

[ 154 ] However, sex-selective abortion is not the only cause of this phenomenon; it is also related to migration and declining fertility.

[ 153 ] Trafficking, forced marriage and sex work [ edit ] Some scholars argue that as the proportion of women to men decreases globally, there will be an increase in trafficking and sex work (both forced and self-elected), as many men will be willing to do more to obtain a sexual partner (Junhong 2001).

[ 16 ] Already, there are reports of women from Vietnam , Myanmar , and North Korea systematically trafficked to mainland China and Taiwan and sold into forced marriages .

[ 155 ] Moreover, Ullman and Fidell (1989) suggested that pornography and sex-related crimes of violence (i.e., rape and molestation) would also increase with an increasing sex ratio.

[ 156 ] Widening of the gender social gap [ edit ] As Park and Cho (1995) note, families in areas with high sex ratios that have mostly sons tend to be smaller than those with mostly daughters (because the families with mostly sons appear to have used sex-selective techniques to achieve their "ideal" composition).

[ 153 ] Particularly in poor areas, large families tend to have more problems with resource allocation, with daughters often receiving fewer resources than sons.

[ 153 ] Blake (1989) is credited for noting the relationship between family size and childhood "quality." Therefore, if families with daughters continue to be predominantly large, it is likely that the social gap between genders will widen due to traditional cultural discrimination and lack of resource availability.

[ 157 ] Guttentag and Secord (1983) hypothesized that when the proportion of males throughout the world is greater, there is likely to be more violence and war.

[ 158 ] Potential positive effects [ edit ] Some scholars believe that when sex ratios are high, women actually become valued more because of their relative shortage.

[ 153 ] Park and Cho (1995) suggest that as women become more scarce, they may have "increased value for conjugal and reproductive functions" (75). Eventually, this could lead to better social conditions, followed by the birth of more women and sex ratios moving back to natural levels.

[ 153 ] This claim is supported by the work of demographer Nathan Keifitz. Keifitz (1983) wrote that as women become fewer, their relative position in society will increase. However, to date, no data has supported this claim.

[ 159 ] It has been suggested by Belanger (2002) that sex-selective abortion may have positive effects on the mother choosing to abort the female fetus. This is related to the historical duty of mothers to produce a son in order to carry on the family name. As previously mentioned, women gain status in society when they have a male child, but not when they have a female child. Oftentimes, bearing of a son leads to greater legitimacy and agency for the mother. In some regions of the world where son preference is especially strong, sonless women are treated as outcasts. In this way, sex-selective abortion is a way for women to select for male fetuses, helping secure greater family status.

[ 160 ] Goodkind (1999) [ 2 ] argues that sex-selective abortion should not be banned purely because of its discriminatory nature. Instead, he argues, we must consider the overall lifetime possibilities of discrimination. In fact, it is possible that sex-selective abortion takes away much of the discrimination women would face later in life. Since families have the option of selecting for the fetal sex they desire, if they choose not to abort a female fetus, she is more likely to be valued later in life. In this way, sex-selective abortion may be a more humane alternative to infanticide, abandonment, or neglect. Goodkind (1999) poses an essential philosophical question, "if a ban were enacted against prenatal sex testing (or the use of abortion for sex-selective purposes), how many excess postnatal deaths would a society be willing to tolerate in lieu of whatever sex-selective abortions were avoided?" Controversies [ edit ] There are many controversies surrounding sex-selective abortion. Just like the practice of sex-selective abortion has been criticized, the solutions proposed or enacted by governments have also been criticized.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] Eklund & Purewal argued that the response to a patriarchal practice (sex selection) should not be another patriarchal practice (restricting women's reproductive rights), as such a situation creates a cycle: women's social status is lowered, which in turn leads to more sex-selective abortions.

[ 162 ] The association of public discourse on sex-selective abortion with the anti-abortion movement also complicates the situation.

[ 163 ] Furthermore, access to safe abortion is seen by some as important from a public health perspective; in India, although the abortion law is relatively liberal, most efforts are put into preventing sex-selective abortion, rather than adequate access to safe abortion, [ 162 ] as a result nearly 78% of all abortions in India take place outside of health facilities, with such unsafe abortions representing the third largest cause of maternal death in India.

[ 164 ] Another controversy in that of population planning campaigns such as the one child policy in China, and efforts from the governments of several Asian countries, including India and South Korea, from the 1970s onward to limit the number of children a family could have, which have intensified the desire to quickly have a son. An article by Al Jazeera titled " How Western family planners helped curb the birth of girls in developing countries, the effects of which are felt today " claimed that it was such population policies (which included forced sterilization ), which were fully supported, even pushed by the West, that contributed to unbalanced sex ratios.

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] Sex-selective abortion in the context of abortion [ edit ] MacPherson estimates that 100,000 sex-selective abortions every year continue to be performed in India.

[ 100 ] For a contrasting perspective, in the United States with a population 1 ⁄ 4 th of India, over 1.2 million abortions every year were performed between 1990 and 2007.

[ 167 ] In England and Wales with a population 1 ⁄ 20 th of India, over 189,000 abortions were performed in 2011, or a yearly rate of 17.5 abortions per 1,000 women aged 15–44.

[ 168 ] The average for the European Union was 30 abortions per year per 1,000 women.

[ 169 ] Many scholars have noted the difficulty in reconciling the discriminatory nature of sex-selective abortion with the right of women to have control over their own bodies. This conflict manifests itself primarily when discussing laws about sex-selective abortion. Weiss (1995:205) writes: "The most obvious challenge sex-selective abortion represents for pro-choice feminists is the difficulty of reconciling a pro-choice position with moral objections one might have to sex selective abortion (especially since it has been used primarily on female fetuses), much less the advocacy of a law banning sex-selective abortion." [ 170 ] As a result, arguments both for and against sex-selective abortion are typically highly reflective of one's own personal beliefs about abortion in general. Warren (1985:104) argues that there is a difference between acting within one's rights and acting upon the most morally sound choice, implying that sex-selective abortion might be within rights but not morally sound. Warren also notes that, if we are to ever reverse the trend of sex-selective abortion and high sex ratios, we must work to change the patriarchy-based society which breeds the strong son preference.

[ 171 ] Laws against sex-selective abortion, especially those that exist in some U.S. states , are controversial, because it is not clear how they can be enforced, and pro-choice activists argue that such laws are brought by anti-abortion movement forces who are using this as a pretext to restrict women's access to safe and legal abortion and to harass doctors who perform abortions: NARAL states that "For many years, anti-choice lawmakers have tried to ban abortion using every possible reason and excuse –including, now, on the grounds of purported concern about race or sex selection." [ 172 ] There is concern that such bans may put women who seek sex-selective abortions in danger because they may seek unsafe abortions, and that these bans do not address the root cause of sex-selective abortion, including the pregnant women's fear that they or their future daughters will suffer abuse, violence and stigmatization.

[ 161 ] Laws, campaigns and policies against sex-selective abortion [ edit ] Sign in an Indian clinic reading "Prenatal disclosure of sex of foetus is prohibited under law" in English and Hindi International [ edit ] The practice of prenatal sex selection has been condemned internationally. It is often seen as a result of discriminatory social views which consider females inferior to males. In 1994 over 180 states signed the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development , agreeing to "eliminate all forms of discrimination against the girl child".

[ 173 ] In 2011 the resolution of PACE 's Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men condemned the practice of prenatal sex selection.

[ 174 ] By country [ edit ] Many nations have attempted to address sex-selective abortion rates through a combination of media campaigns and policy initiatives.

Canada In 2013, Conservative MP Mark Warawa introduced a motion condemning discrimination against females through sex-selective abortion but which ultimately never came to a vote.

[ 175 ] In 2021, Conservative Cathay Wagantall introduced a private member's bill that would prohibit a medical practitioner from performing a sex-selective abortion. Although the bill was defeated 248-82, a majority of Conservative MPs voted in favour of the bill.

[ 176 ] USA The United States Congress has debated legislation that would outlaw the practice.

[ 177 ] The legislation ultimately failed to pass in the House of Representatives .

[ 178 ] On the state level, laws against sex-selective abortions have been passed in a number of U.S. states; [ 179 ] the law passed in Arizona in 2011 prohibits both sex-selective and race-selective abortion.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] [ 181 ] United Kingdom The law on sex-selective abortion is unresolved in the United Kingdom. In order for an abortion to be legal, doctors need to show that continuing the pregnancy could threaten the physical or mental health of the mother. In a recent case, two doctors were caught on camera offering a sex-selective abortion but the Director of Public Prosecution deemed it not in the public interest to proceed with the prosecution.

[ 182 ] Following this incidence, MPs voted 181 to 1 for a Bill put forward by Tessa Munt and 11 other MPs aiming to end confusion about the legality of this practice.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] Organisations such as BPAS and Abortion Rights have been lobbying for the decriminalisation of sex-selective abortions.

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] China China's government has increasingly recognized its role in a reduction of the national sex ratio. As a result, since 2005, it has sponsored a "boys and girls are equal campaign." [ 187 ] For example, in 2000, the Chinese government began the "Care for Girls" Initiative.

[ 188 ] [ better source needed ] Furthermore, several levels of government have been modified to protect the "political, economic, cultural, and social" rights of women.

[ 187 ] Finally, the Chinese government has enacted policies and interventions to help reduce the sex ratio at birth. In 2005, sex-selective abortion was made illegal in China. This came in response to the ever-increasing sex ratio and a desire to try to detract from it and reach a more normal ratio.

[ 189 ] The sex ratio among firstborn children in urban areas from 2000 to 2005 did not rise at all, so there is hope that this movement is taking hold across the nation.

[ 16 ] UNICEF and UNFPA have partnered with the Chinese government and grassroots-level women's groups such as All China Women's Federation to promote gender equality in policy and practice, as well engage various social campaigns to help lower birth sex ratio and to reduce excess female child mortality rates.

[ 190 ] [ 191 ] India In India, according to a 2007 study by MacPherson, Prenatal Diagnostic Techniques Act (PCPNDT Act) was highly publicized by NGOs and the government. Many of the ads used depicted abortion as violent, creating fear of abortion itself within the population. The ads focused on the religious and moral shame associated with abortion. MacPherson claims this media campaign was not effective because some perceived this as an attack on their character, leading to many becoming closed off, rather than opening a dialogue about the issue.

[ 100 ] This emphasis on morality, claims MacPherson, increased fear and shame associated with all abortions, leading to an increase in unsafe abortions in India.

[ 100 ] The government of India, in a 2011 report, has begun better educating all stakeholders about its MTP and PCPNDT laws. In its communication campaigns, it is clearing up public misconceptions by emphasizing that sex determination is illegal, but abortion is legal for certain medical conditions in India. The government is also supporting implementation of programs and initiatives that seek to reduce gender discrimination, including media campaign to address the underlying social causes of sex selection.

[ 91 ] [ 192 ] Other recent policy initiatives adopted by numerous states of India, claims Guilmoto, [ 127 ] attempt to address the assumed economic disadvantage of girls by offering support to girls and their parents. These policies provide conditional cash transfer and scholarships only available to girls, where payments to a girl and her parents are linked to each stage of her life, such as when she is born, completion of her childhood immunization, her joining school at grade 1, her completing school grades 6, 9 and 12, her marriage past age 21. Some states are offering higher pension benefits to parents who raise one or two girls. Different states of India have been experimenting with various innovations in their girl-driven welfare policies. For example, the state of Delhi adopted a pro-girl policy initiative (locally called Laadli scheme ), which initial data suggests may be lowering the birth sex ratio in the state.

[ 127 ] [ 193 ] See also [ edit ] Abortion debate Child abandonment Fetal rights Feticide Gendercide Gender role Female foeticide in India Genetics and abortion Infanticide Missing women of Asia Missing women of China Psychohistorical views on infanticide Selective reduction Sex selection References [ edit ] ^ "Sex-selective abortions are discriminatory and should be banned" .

Commissioner for Human Rights . Retrieved March 20, 2025 .

^ a b c Goodkind D (1999). "Should Prenatal Sex Selection be Restricted?: Ethical Questions and Their Implications for Research and Policy".

Population Studies .

53 (1): 49– 61.

doi : 10.1080/00324720308069 .

JSTOR 2584811 .

^ a b Gettis A, Getis J, Fellmann JD (2004).

Introduction to Geography (Ninth ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 200.

ISBN 0-07-252183-X .

^ a b Guilmoto CZ (2012).

"High Sex Ratio at Birth in Southeast Europe" (PDF) . France: CEPED, Université Paris-Descartes. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 23, 2015.

^ Robitaille MC, Chatterjee I (January 2, 2018).

"Sex-selective Abortions and Infant Mortality in India: The Role of Parents' Stated Son Preference" .

The Journal of Development Studies .

54 (1): 47– 56.

doi : 10.1080/00220388.2016.1241389 .

ISSN 0022-0388 .

S2CID 42247421 .

Archived from the original on September 3, 2023 . Retrieved March 16, 2022 .

^ Hvistendahl M (November 2, 2015).

"China's New Birth Rule Can't Restore Missing Women and Fix a Population" .

Scientific American .

Archived from the original on January 22, 2019 . Retrieved September 7, 2018 .

^ a b Kumm J, Laland KN, Feldman MW (December 1994).

"Gene-culture coevolution and sex ratios: the effects of infanticide, sex-selective abortion, sex selection, and sex-biased parental investment on the evolution of sex ratios" .

Theoretical Population Biology .

46 (3): 249– 278.

Bibcode : 1994TPBio..46..249K .

doi : 10.1006/tpbi.1994.1027 .

PMID 7846643 .

^ Gammage J (June 21, 2011).

"Gender imbalance tilting the world toward men" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer . Archived from the original on April 9, 2016 . Retrieved June 27, 2013 .

^ a b c d e f James WH (July 2008).

"Evidence that mammalian sex ratios at birth are partially controlled by parental hormone levels around the time of conception" .

The Journal of Endocrinology .

198 (1): 3– 15.

doi : 10.1677/JOE-07-0446 .

PMID 18577567 .

^ a b c Nandi A (October 2, 2015). "The Unintended Effects of a Ban on Sex-Selective Abortion on Infant Mortality: Evidence from India".

Oxford Development Studies .

43 (4): 466– 482.

doi : 10.1080/13600818.2014.973390 .

ISSN 1360-0818 .

S2CID 154284754 .

^ Meh C, Jha P (September 2022). Franco E, Gerland P (eds.).

"Trends in female-selective abortion among Asian diasporas in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada and Australia" .

eLife .

11 : e79853.

doi : 10.7554/eLife.79853 .

PMC 9514843 .

PMID 36165452 .

^ Mei L, Jiang Q (March 3, 2022).

Sex-selective Abortions Over the Past Four Decades in China (Report). In Review.

doi : 10.21203/rs.3.rs-1392935/v1 .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2024 . Retrieved March 5, 2024 .

^ a b "Report of the International Workshop on Skewed Sex Ratios at Birth" (PDF) .

United Nations FPA . 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 11, 2014.

^ a b Kraemer S (December 23, 2000).

"The fragile male" .

BMJ .

321 (7276): 1609– 1612.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.321.7276.1609 .

PMC 1119278 .

PMID 11124200 .

^ a b Chao F, Gerland P, Cook AR, Alkema L (May 2019).

"Systematic assessment of the sex ratio at birth for all countries and estimation of national imbalances and regional reference levels" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

116 (19): 9303– 9311.

Bibcode : 2019PNAS..116.9303C .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1812593116 .

PMC 6511063 .

PMID 30988199 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Junhong C (2001). "Prenatal Sex Determination and Sex-Selective Abortion in Rural Central China".

Population and Development Review .

27 (2): 260.

doi : 10.1111/j.1728-4457.2001.00259.x .

^ a b Grech V, Savona-Ventura C, Vassallo-Agius P (April 2002).

"Research pointers: Unexplained differences in sex ratios at birth in Europe and North America" .

BMJ .

324 (7344): 1010– 1011.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.324.7344.1010 .

PMC 102777 .

PMID 11976243 .

^ Hesketh T, Xing ZW (September 2006).

"Abnormal sex ratios in human populations: causes and consequences" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

103 (36): 13271– 13275.

Bibcode : 2006PNAS..10313271H .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0602203103 .

PMC 1569153 .

PMID 16938885 .

^ a b c d e f g Klausen S, Wink C (2003). "Missing Women: Revisiting the Debate".

Feminist Economics .

9 ( 2– 3): 263– 299.

doi : 10.1080/1354570022000077999 .

S2CID 154492092 .

^ a b c d Sen A (July 2017). "More than 100 million women are missing.".

Gender and Justice . Routledge. pp.

219– 222.

^ James WH (October 1987). "The human sex ratio. Part 1: A review of the literature".

Human Biology .

59 (5): 721– 752.

PMID 3319883 .

^ James WH (December 1987). "The human sex ratio. Part 2: A hypothesis and a program of research".

Human Biology .

59 (6): 873– 900.

PMID 3327803 .

^ Bernstein ME (March 1958).

"Studies in the human sex ratio. 5. A genetic explanation of the wartime increase in the secondary sex ratio" .

American Journal of Human Genetics .

10 (1): 68– 70.

PMC 1931860 .

PMID 13520702 .

^ a b c Meslé F, Vallin J, Badurashvili I (2007). "A sharp increase in sex ratio at birth in the Caucasus. Why? How?".

Watering the Neighbour's Garden: The Growing Demographic Female Deficit in Asia (PDF) . Paris: Committee for International Cooperation in National Research in Demography. pp.

73– 88.

ISBN 978-2-910053-29-1 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 17, 2018 . Retrieved December 28, 2013 .

^ Graffelman J, Hoekstra RF (June 2000). "A statistical analysis of the effect of warfare on the human secondary sex ratio".

Human Biology .

72 (3): 433– 445.

PMID 10885189 .

^ a b Jacobsen R, Møller H, Mouritsen A (December 1999).

"Natural variation in the human sex ratio" .

Human Reproduction .

14 (12): 3120– 3125.

doi : 10.1093/humrep/14.12.3120 .

PMID 10601107 .

^ a b Vartiainen T, Kartovaara L, Tuomisto J (October 1999).

"Environmental chemicals and changes in sex ratio: analysis over 250 years in finland" .

Environmental Health Perspectives .

107 (10): 813– 815.

Bibcode : 1999EnvHP.107..813V .

doi : 10.1289/ehp.99107813 .

PMC 1566625 .

PMID 10504147 .

^ a b c d Garenne M (January 2004). "Sex ratios at birth in populations of Eastern and Southern Africa".

Southern African Journal of Demography .

9 (1): 91– 96.

JSTOR 20853265 .

^ Campbell RB (August 2001). "John Graunt, John Arbuthnott, and the human sex ratio".

Human Biology .

73 (4): 605– 610.

doi : 10.1353/hub.2001.0048 .

PMID 11512687 .

S2CID 41810038 .

^ Ciocco A (1938).

"Variation in the Sex Ratio at Birth in the United States" .

Human Biology .

10 (1): 36– 64.

Archived from the original on June 24, 2021 . Retrieved May 11, 2022 .

^ Nie JB (2011).

"Non-medical sex-selective abortion in China: ethical and public policy issues in the context of 40 million missing females" .

British Medical Bulletin .

98 : 7– 20.

doi : 10.1093/bmb/ldr015 .

PMID 21596712 .

^ Jiang B, Li S (2009).

The Female Deficit and the Security of Society . Beijing: Social Sciences Academic. pp.

22– 26.

^ a b Mathews TJ, Hamilton BE (June 2005).

"Trend analysis of the sex ratio at birth in the United States" (PDF) .

National Vital Statistics Reports: From the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System .

53 (20). U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics: 1– 17.

PMID 15974501 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 14, 2019 . Retrieved September 11, 2017 .

^ "UN Sex Ratio Statistics" . United Nations Population Division.

Archived from the original on November 13, 2018 . Retrieved June 29, 2017 .

^ "Sex ratio at birth (per 100 female newborn)" . United Nations Data Division.

Archived from the original on June 22, 2018 . Retrieved December 28, 2013 .

^ "Demographic and Health Survey" .

Measure DHS .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2016 . Retrieved December 28, 2013 .

^ a b Garenne M (December 2002). "Sex ratios at birth in African populations: a review of survey data".

Human Biology .

74 (6): 889– 900.

doi : 10.1353/hub.2003.0003 .

PMID 12617497 .

S2CID 12297795 .

^ a b Miller BD (December 2001). "Female-selective abortion in Asia: patterns, policies, and debates".

American Anthropologist .

103 (4): 1083– 95.

doi : 10.1525/aa.2001.103.4.1083 .

JSTOR 684130 .

PMID 12769123 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency" . Archived from the original on October 16, 2013 . Retrieved May 17, 2016 .

^ a b c Hesketh T, Lu L, Xing ZW (September 2011).

"The consequences of son preference and sex-selective abortion in China and other Asian countries" .

CMAJ .

183 (12): 1374– 1377.

doi : 10.1503/cmaj.101368 .

PMC 3168620 .

PMID 21402684 .

^ Eveleth R (September 17, 2013).

"Liechtenstein Has the Most Skewed Ratio of Baby Boys and Girls in the World Right Now" .

Smithsonian Magazine .

Archived from the original on April 9, 2019 . Retrieved December 24, 2018 .

^ Kircher MM (October 30, 2015).

"The country with the highest gender disparity at birth isn't China" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2019 . Retrieved December 24, 2018 .

^ "Georgia: Data Glitch Distorts Abortion Picture" .

Eurasianet .

Archived from the original on April 9, 2019 . Retrieved December 24, 2018 .

^ "The World Factbook" .

Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on October 16, 2013 . Retrieved May 17, 2016 .

^ a b c "Sex Ratio" .

The World Factbook, CIA, US Government . 2013. Archived from the original on June 13, 2007.

Note: Sex ratio of 1.26 is same as 126 boys per 100 girls ^ "Births and deliveries" .

Federal Statistical Office, Switzerland . 2013. Archived from the original on November 18, 2008.

^ Guilmoto CZ (2011).

"Sex Ratios" (PDF) .

UNFPA . p. 13. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 4, 2012.

^ "Sex ratio at birth – National and Regional Census Data" .

Pakistan Census . 2013. Archived from the original on May 13, 2017.

^ "Gender Imbalance: Pakistan's Missing Women" .

Dawn . Pakistan. 2013. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013.

^ "Abandoned, Aborted, or Left for Dead: These Are the Vanishing Girls of Pakistan" .

The Atlantic . June 19, 2012.

Archived from the original on January 19, 2019 . Retrieved March 11, 2017 .

^ Ebenstein AY, Sharygin EJ (2009).

"The Consequences of the 'Missing Girls' of China" (PDF) .

The World Bank Economic Review .

23 (3): 399– 425.

doi : 10.1093/wber/lhp012 .

hdl : 10986/4508 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 10, 2016 . Retrieved March 10, 2020 .

^ a b c d "Sex Imbalances at Birth: Current trends, consequences and policy implications" (PDF) .

United Nations FPA . August 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 30, 2013.

^ a b c d e f "Gendercide in the Caucasus" .

The Economist . September 13, 2013. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017.

^ "India Census 2011 Provisional Report" .

Government of India . 2013. Archived from the original on February 8, 2014.

^ Devaney SA, Palomaki GE, Scott JA, Bianchi DW (August 2011).

"Noninvasive fetal sex determination using cell-free fetal DNA: a systematic review and meta-analysis" .

JAMA .

306 (6): 627– 636.

doi : 10.1001/jama.2011.1114 .

PMC 4526182 .

PMID 21828326 .

^ Michelle R (August 10, 2011).

"Baby gender blood tests 'accurate' " .

BBC News Online .

Archived from the original on July 23, 2017 . Retrieved June 20, 2018 .

^ a b Mazza V, Falcinelli C, Paganelli S, Contu G, Mantuano SM, Battafarano SD, et al. (June 2001).

"Sonographic early fetal gender assignment: a longitudinal study in pregnancies after in vitro fertilization" .

Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology .

17 (6): 513– 516.

doi : 10.1046/j.1469-0705.2001.00421.x .

hdl : 11380/741241 .

PMID 11422974 .

S2CID 37709826 .

^ Young C, von Dadelszen P, Alfirevic Z (January 2013).

"Instruments for chorionic villus sampling for prenatal diagnosis" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2013 (1): CD000114.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD000114.pub2 .

PMC 7050982 .

PMID 23440775 .

^ "The Pre-Conception and Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 1994: Answers to Frequently Asked Questions" (PDF) .

Center for Enquiry Into Health and Allied Themes (CEHAT) . Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2016 . Retrieved June 7, 2017 .

^ Akbulut-Yuksel M, Rosenblum D (January 2012). "The Indian Ultrasound Paradox".

IZA Discussion Paper (6273).

SSRN 1989245 .

^ a b Goodkind D (2015). "Sex Selective Abortion".

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences . pp.

686– 688.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-08-097086-8.31038-8 .

ISBN 978-0-08-097087-5 .

^ Basu A, Das Gupta M (2001). "Family Systems and the Preferred Sex of Children".

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences . pp.

5350– 5357.

doi : 10.1016/B0-08-043076-7/02151-3 .

ISBN 978-0-08-043076-8 .

^ a b "China faces growing sex imbalance" . January 11, 2010.

Archived from the original on October 16, 2018 . Retrieved December 15, 2017 .

^ "China to end one-child policy" .

BBC News . October 29, 2015.

Archived from the original on November 21, 2016 . Retrieved June 20, 2018 .

^ "China's sex ratio declines for two straight years" .

news.xinhuanet.com . Xinhua, China. Archived from the original on February 22, 2015.

^ Kang C, Wang Y (2003). Sex ratio at birth.

Theses collection of 2001 national family planning and reproductive health survey.

(Report). pp.

88– 98.

^ a b Yi Z, Ping T, Baochang G, Yi X, Bohua L, Yongpiing L (1993). "Causes and implications of the recent increase in the reported sex ratio at birthin China".

Population and Development Review .

19 (2): 283– 302.

doi : 10.2307/2938438 .

JSTOR 2938438 .

^ Branigan T (November 2, 2011).

"China's Great Gender Crisis" .

The Guardian, UK . Archived from the original on September 1, 2023.

^ a b Zhu WX, Lu L, Hesketh T (April 2009).

"China's excess males, sex selective abortion, and one child policy: analysis of data from 2005 national intercensus survey" .

BMJ .

338 (7700): 920– 923.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.b1211 .

JSTOR 20512658 .

PMC 2667570 .

PMID 19359290 .

^ Ministry of Health and State Family Planning Commission.1986. "Notice on strictly forbidding prenatal sex determination," reprinted in Peng Peiyun(ed.), 1997, Family Planning Encyclopedia of China. Beijing: China Population Press, p. 939.

^ Ministry of Health. 1989. "Urgent notice on strictly forbidding the use of medical technology to perform prenatal sex determination," reprinted in Peng Peiyun (ed.), 1997, Family Planning Encyclopedia of China. Beijing: China Population Press, pp. 959–960.

^ Rodriguez SM (2023).

Reproductive realities in modern China : birth control and abortion, 1911-2021 . Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press . p. 191.

ISBN 978-1-009-02733-5 .

OCLC 1366057905 .

^ Hardee, Karen, Gu Baochang, and Xie Zhenming. 2000. "Holding up more than half the sky:Fertility control and women's empowerment in China,"paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Population Association of America, March 23–25, Los Angeles.

^ "China sees decrease in male-to-female birth ratio gap - China.org.cn" .

www.china.org.cn .

Archived from the original on February 18, 2019 . Retrieved October 23, 2019 .

^ Somaia P, Islamiah Zahroh R, Bohren M (March 11, 2020).

"Where are all the missing girls?" .

Pursuit .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2022 . Retrieved September 12, 2020 .

^ "Report: Sex ratio to balance out by 2030 - China - Chinadaily.com.cn" .

www.chinadaily.com.cn .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2022 . Retrieved September 12, 2020 .

^ Steger I (November 29, 2016).

"It's a myth that China has 30 million "missing girls" because of the one-child policy, a new study says" .

Quartz .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2023 . Retrieved April 29, 2023 .

^ Denyer S (November 30, 2016).

"Researchers may have 'found' many of China's 30 million missing girls" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 29, 2023 . Retrieved April 29, 2023 .

^ Shi Y, Kennedy JJ (December 2016).

"Delayed Registration and Identifying the "Missing Girls" in China" .

The China Quarterly .

228 : 1018– 1038.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741016001132 .

ISSN 0305-7410 .

^ Jozuka E (December 1, 2016).

"Study finds millions of China's 'missing girls' actually exist" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on April 2, 2023 . Retrieved April 29, 2023 .

^ Zhuang P (November 30, 2016).

"China's 'missing women' theory likely overblown, researchers say" .

South China Morning Post .

Archived from the original on December 15, 2019 . Retrieved April 29, 2023 .

^ Cai Y (2017).

"Missing Girls or Hidden Girls? A Comment on Shi and Kennedy's "Delayed Registration and Identifying the 'Missing Girls' in China" " .

The China Quarterly .

231 (231): 797– 803.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741017001060 .

S2CID 158924618 .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2023 . Retrieved April 29, 2023 .

^ den Boer A, M Hudson V (January 9, 2017).

"Have China's Missing Girls Actually Been There All Along?" .

New Security Beat .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2023 . Retrieved April 29, 2023 .

^ Kaur B (September 6, 2022).

"Foeticide: More 'Missing' Girls Among Hindus Than Muslims in Last Two Decades, Official Data Shows" .

The Wire .

Archived from the original on September 6, 2022 . Retrieved September 6, 2022 .

^ "Sex ratio worsens in small families, improves with 3 or more children" .

The Times of India . February 15, 2016.

Archived from the original on December 25, 2018 . Retrieved May 14, 2018 .

^ "India at Glance – Population Census 2011 – Final" .

Census of India, Government of India . 2013. Archived from the original on January 8, 2014.

^ a b c Chandramouli C (2011).

"Child Sex Ratio in India" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on December 3, 2013.

Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India ^ "Census of India 2011: Child sex ratio drops to lowest since Independence" .

The Economic Times, India . Archived from the original on July 18, 2012.

^ "Trends in Sex Ratio at Birth and Estimates of Girls Missing at Birth in India" (PDF) .

UNFPA . July 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 21, 2012.

^ a b "Child Sex Ratio 2001 versus 2011" (PDF) .

Census of India . Government of India. 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 28, 2014.

^ a b c d "Implementation of the PCPNDT Act in India – Perspectives and Challenges" (PDF) .

Public Health Foundation of India . 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 23, 2015.

Supported by United Nations FPA ^ Retherford RD, Roy TK (2003). Factors affecting sex-selective abortion in India and 17 major states.

National Family Health Survey Subject Reports (Report). Vol. 21. Mumbai, India Honolulu, Hawaii, USA: International Institute for Population Sciences, East-West Center Program on Population.

hdl : 10125/3488 .

^ Sudha S, Irudaya RS (July 1999). "Female demographic disadvantage in India 1981-1991: sex selective abortions and female infanticide".

Development and Change .

30 (3): 585– 618.

doi : 10.1111/1467-7660.00130 .

PMID 20162850 .

S2CID 33446683 .

^ Arnold F, Kishor S, Roy TK (2002). "Sex-Selective Abortions in India".

Population and Development Review .

28 (4): 759– 785.

doi : 10.1111/j.1728-4457.2002.00759.x .

^ Ganatra BR (2000). "Abortion research in India: What we know, and what we need to know". In Ramasubban R, Jejeebhoy SJ (eds.).

Women's Reproductive Health in India . New Delhi: Rawat Publications.

^ Kumar D (1983). "Male utopias or nightmares?".

Economic and Political Weekly .

13 (3): 61– 64.

JSTOR 4371751 .

^ Gangoli G (1998). "Reproduction, abortion and women's health".

Social Scientist .

26 ( 11– 12): 83– 105.

doi : 10.2307/3517661 .

JSTOR 3517661 .

^ Goodkind D (1996). "On substituting sex preference strategies in East Asia: Does pre-natal sex selection reduce post natal discrimination?".

Population and Development Review .

22 (1): 111– 125.

doi : 10.2307/2137689 .

JSTOR 2137689 .

^ "Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act 1971 – Introduction" .

Med India . October 20, 2013.

Archived from the original on April 10, 2019 . Retrieved December 26, 2018 .

^ a b c d e MacPherson Y (November 2, 2007).

"Images and icons: harnessing the power of the media to reduce sex-selective abortion in India" .

Gender & Development .

15 (3): 413– 423.

doi : 10.1080/13552070701630574 .

^ "Bulandshahr: India girls who wrote letter with blood get justice" .

BBC News . July 29, 2022 . Retrieved April 22, 2025 .

^ N Purewal (2010), "Son Preference, Sex Selection, Gender and Culture in South Asia", Oxford International Publishers / Berg, ISBN 978-1-84520-468-6 , page 38 ^ a b Hudson VM, Den Boer A (2005).

"Missing Women and Bare Branches: Gender Balance and Conflict" (PDF) .

Environmental Change and Security Program Report . ECSP Report (11): 20– 24. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 3, 2018.

^ a b "Karachi becoming a killing field for newborn girls" .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2022 . Retrieved May 8, 2020 .

^ Tasgheer A, Ishfaq M (October 17, 2021).

"Female Infanticide in Pre-Islamic Arab Society: A Quranic and Historical Perspective" .

Al-Qawarir .

3 (1): 6 – via ResearchGate.

^ a b c Chun H, Das Gupta M (March 2009). "Gender discrimination in sex selective abortions and its transition in South Korea".

Women's Studies International Forum .

32 (2): 89– 97.

doi : 10.1016/j.wsif.2009.03.008 .

^ Lee J, Smith JP (April 2018).

"Fertility behaviors in South Korea and their association with ultrasound prenatal sex screening" .

SSM - Population Health .

4 : 10– 16.

doi : 10.1016/j.ssmph.2017.10.003 .

PMC 5769124 .

PMID 29349269 .

^ Sex Imbalances at Birth: Current trends, consequences and policy implications (PDF) . UNFPA. p. 20.

ISBN 978-974680-3380 . Archived from the original (PDF) on December 30, 2013.

^ Lee IW, Lai YC, Kuo PL, Chang CM (December 2012).

"Human sex ratio at amniocentesis and at birth in Taiwan" .

Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology .

51 (4): 572– 575.

doi : 10.1016/j.tjog.2012.09.012 .

PMID 23276560 .

^ "Sex-ratio imbalance in Asia: Trends, consequences and policy responses" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 17, 2018 . Retrieved October 23, 2019 .

^ Vogel L (February 2012).

"Sex-selective abortions: no simple solution" .

CMAJ .

184 (3): 286– 288.

doi : 10.1503/cmaj.109-4097 .

PMC 3281151 .

PMID 22271910 .

^ Wong SF, Ho LC (August 2001). "Sex selection in practice among Hong Kong Chinese".

Social Science & Medicine .

53 (3): 393– 397.

doi : 10.1016/s0277-9536(00)00306-3 .

PMID 11439822 .

^ a b Frost MD, Puri M, Hinde PR (May 2013).

"Falling sex ratios and emerging evidence of sex-selective abortion in Nepal: evidence from nationally representative survey data" .

BMJ Open .

3 (5): e002612.

doi : 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-002612 .

PMC 3657664 .

PMID 23674444 .

^ "Gender inequality in Nepal: How can we tackle sex-selective abortion?" .

Oxford Institute of Population Ageing . Archived from the original on September 15, 2019 . Retrieved November 2, 2016 .

^ Forestier-Walker R (June 22, 2015).

"Azerbaijan pressured over sex-selective abortions | News" .

al Jazeera .

Archived from the original on April 9, 2019 . Retrieved October 5, 2016 .

^ Michael M, King L, Guo L, McKee M, Richardson E, Stuckler D (June 2013).

"The mystery of missing female children in the Caucasus: an analysis of sex ratios by birth order" .

International Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health .

39 (2): 97– 102.

doi : 10.1363/3909713 .

JSTOR 41959961 .

PMID 23895886 .

^ a b Bongaarts J (June 2013). "The Implementation of Preferences for Male Offspring".

Population and Development Review .

39 (2): 185– 208.

doi : 10.1111/j.1728-4457.2013.00588.x .

^ Stump D (2011).

"Prenatal Sex Selection" (PDF) .

Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men . Council of Europe. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 21, 2017.

^ Verropoulou G, Tsimbos C (May 2010). "Differentials in sex ratio at birth among natives and immigrants in Greece: an analysis employing nationwide micro-data".

Journal of Biosocial Science .

42 (3): 425– 430.

doi : 10.1017/s0021932009990599 .

PMID 20361419 .

S2CID 22202092 .

^ Tomovic D (September 18, 2014).

"Abortions of Girls Cause Male Surplus in Montenegro" .

BalkanInsight .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2017 . Retrieved June 7, 2017 .

^ Newport F (June 23, 2011).

"Americans Prefer Boys to Girls, Just as They Did in 1941" .

Gallup .

^ a b Jesudason S, Shenker-Osorio A (May 31, 2012).

"Sex Selection in America: Why It Persists and How We Can Change It" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on November 13, 2013 . Retrieved November 3, 2013 .

^ "Half fertility clinics allow parents to pick gender" . Associated Press. September 21, 2006 – via Msnbc.com.

^ "Sex Selection" (PDF) .

Postnote (198). Parliamentary Office for Science and Technology. July 2003.

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 25, 2021 . Retrieved September 6, 2020 .

^ Roberts S (June 15, 2009).

"U.S. Births Hint at Bias for Boys in Some Asians" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 18, 2018 . Retrieved May 23, 2010 .

^ "Search" .

Our World in Data .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2022 . Retrieved December 5, 2022 .

^ a b c d e Guilmoto CZ (October 2011).

"Sex imbalances at birth Trends, consequences and policy implications" (PDF) .

United Nations Population Fund . Hanoi. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 4, 2012.

^ World Bank, Engendering Development, The World Bank, (2001) ^ Austad SN, Fischer KE (June 2016).

"Sex Differences in Lifespan" .

Cell Metabolism .

23 (6): 1022– 1033.

doi : 10.1016/j.cmet.2016.05.019 .

PMC 4932837 .

PMID 27304504 .

^ a b c d United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA). Sex imbalances at birth: current trends, consequences and policy implications. United Nations: Bangkok, Thailand; 2012.

^ a b Hohmann SA, Lefèvre CA, Garenne ML (October 20, 2014).

"A framework for analyzing sex-selective abortion: the example of changing sex ratios in Southern Caucasus" .

International Journal of Women's Health .

6 : 889– 897.

doi : 10.2147/IJWH.S66333 .

PMC 4208631 .

PMID 25349481 .

^ Johansson S, Nygren O (1991). "The missing girls of China: a new demographic account".

Population and Development Review .

17 (1): 35– 51.

doi : 10.2307/1972351 .

JSTOR 1972351 .

^ Merli MG, Raftery AE (February 2000).

"Are births underreported in rural China? Manipulation of statistical records in response to China's population policies" .

Demography .

37 (1): 109– 126.

doi : 10.2307/2648100 .

JSTOR 2648100 .

PMID 10748993 .

S2CID 41085573 .

^ "Burying Babies in China" .

Wesleyan Juvenile Offering .

XXII : 40. March 1865.

Archived from the original on April 11, 2024 . Retrieved December 1, 2015 .

^ a b c Gupta MD (September 2005). "Explaining Asia's "missing women": a new look at the data".

Population and Development Review .

31 (3): 529– 535.

doi : 10.1111/j.1728-4457.2005.00082.x .

^ Mahalingam R (2007). "Culture, ecology, and beliefs about gender in son preference caste groups".

Evolution and Human Behavior .

28 (5): 319– 329.

Bibcode : 2007EHumB..28..319M .

doi : 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2007.01.004 .

^ Gilmartin S (1997). "The Sati, the Bride, and the Widow: Sacrificial Woman in the Nineteenth Century".

Victorian Literature and Culture .

25 (1): 141– 158.

doi : 10.1017/S1060150300004678 .

JSTOR 25058378 .

S2CID 162954709 .

^ Sharma A (1988).

Sati: historical and phenomenological essays (1st ed.). Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. pp.

19– 21.

ISBN 978-8120804647 .

^ On attested Rajput practice of sati during wars, see, for example Leslie J (1993).

"Suttee or Sati: Victim or Victor?" . In Arnold D, Robb PG (eds.).

Institutions and Ideologies: A SOAS South Asia Reader . Vol. 10. London: Routledge. p. 46.

ISBN 978-0-7007-0284-8 .

^ Hughes NS (1987).

Child Survival: Anthropological Perspectives on the Treatment and Maltreatment of Children . Springer. p. 99.

ISBN 978-1-55608-028-9 .

^ Wu X (2009). "周代男女角色定位及其对现代社会的影响" [Role orientation of men and women in the Zhou Dynasty and their effects on modern society].

Chang'An Daxue Xuebao (Shehui Kexue Ban) (in Chinese).

11 (3): 86– 92.

^ Patricia Buckley Ebrey (September 19, 2002).

Women and the Family in Chinese History . Routledge. pp.

10– 12.

ISBN 978-0-415-28822-4 .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2024 . Retrieved December 18, 2017 .

^ Adler JA (Winter 2006).

"Daughter/Wife/Mother or Sage/Immortal/Bodhisattva? Women in the Teaching of Chinese Religions" .

ASIANetwork Exchange, vol. XIV, no. 2 .

Archived from the original on March 20, 2006 . Retrieved May 18, 2011 .

^ "Dowry | marriage custom" . June 30, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 19, 2019 . Retrieved March 1, 2017 .

^ "Laws and son preference in India: a reality check" (PDF) .

india.unfpa.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 13, 2014 . Retrieved January 12, 2022 .

^ Jethmalani R, Dey PK (1995).

Dowry Deaths and Access to Justice in Kali's Yug: Empowerment, Law and Dowry Deaths . pp. 36, 38.

^ Diwan P, Diwan P (1997).

Law Relating to Dowry, Dowry Deaths, Bride Burning, Rape, and Related Offences . Delhi: Universal Law Pub. Co. p. 10.

^ Cronk L (December 2007). "Boy or girl: gender preferences from a Darwinian point of view".

Reproductive Biomedicine Online .

15 (Suppl 2): 23– 32.

doi : 10.1016/S1472-6483(10)60546-9 .

PMID 18088517 .

^ Henneberger S (2007). "History of the Policy.". In Henneberger S (ed.).

China's One-Child Policy . Archived from the original on February 5, 2010.

^ History of the One-Child Policy .

All Girls Allowed (Report). 2013.

^ "China birth rate up after one-child change" .

BBC News . January 23, 2017.

Archived from the original on August 19, 2019 . Retrieved June 20, 2018 .

^ "China's one-child policy to change in the new year" .

The Independent . December 29, 2013.

Archived from the original on October 23, 2019 . Retrieved October 23, 2019 .

^ a b c d e f Park CB, Cho NH (1995). "Consequences of son preference in a low- fertility society:Imbalance of the sex ratio at birth in Korea".

Population and Development Review .

21 (1): 59– 84.

doi : 10.2307/2137413 .

JSTOR 2137413 .

^ Onishi N (February 22, 2007).

"Korean Men Use Brokers to Find Brides in Vietnam" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 4, 2017 . Retrieved February 23, 2017 .

^ Last JV (June 24, 2011).

"The War Against Girls" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2019 . Retrieved August 7, 2017 .

^ Ullman JB, Fidell LS (1989). "Gender Selection and Society".

Gender in Transition . pp.

179– 187.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4684-5631-8_15 .

ISBN 978-1-4684-5633-2 .

^ Blake J (1989).

Family Size and Achievement . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-06296-2 .

[ page needed ] ^ Guttentag M, Secord PF (1983).

Too many women?: the sex ratio question . Sage Publications.

ISBN 978-0-8039-1918-1 .

[ page needed ] ^ Keifitz N (1983). "Foreword". In Bennett NG (ed.).

Sex selection of children . New York: Academic Press. pp.

xi– xiii.

^ Bélanger D (May 2002).

"Sex selective abortions: short-term and long-term perspectives" .

Reproductive Health Matters .

10 (19): 194– 196.

doi : 10.1016/S0968-8080(02)00033-2 .

JSTOR 3775793 .

PMID 12369329 .

S2CID 12574519 .

^ a b "Race and Sex Selection Abortion Bans Are Harmful to Women" (PDF) .

National Women's Law Center .

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 3, 2017 . Retrieved June 10, 2017 .

^ a b c Eklund L, Purewal N (February 2017).

"The bio-politics of population control and sex-selective abortion in China and India" (PDF) .

Feminism & Psychology .

27 (1): 34– 55.

doi : 10.1177/0959353516682262 .

S2CID 152171783 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 31, 2020 . Retrieved March 10, 2020 .

^ Mohapatra S (August 2015). "False Framings: The Co-opting of Sex-Selection by the Anti-Abortion Movement".

The Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics .

43 (2): 270– 274.

doi : 10.1111/jlme.12242 .

hdl : 1805/25403 .

PMID 26242948 .

S2CID 33140798 .

^ "Reduce Stigma to Make Women Comfortable Accessing Safe Abortions" . August 7, 2018.

Archived from the original on April 9, 2019 . Retrieved December 25, 2018 .

^ "The Politics of Population Control | India" .

al Jazeera .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2018 . Retrieved December 25, 2018 .

^ Hvistendahl M (June 27, 2011).

"Where Have All the Girls Gone?" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2020 . Retrieved May 22, 2020 .

^ "Abortions—Number and Rate by Race: 1990 to 2007" (PDF) .

US Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2012 . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 23, 2015.

^ "Abortion Statistics, England and Wales: 2011" (PDF) .

Department of Health . UK Government. May 2012. p. 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 28, 2017.

^ "Facts and figures about abortion in the European Region" .

World Health Organization . 2012. Archived from the original on August 14, 2014.

Summary Note 4 ^ Weiss G (February 1995). "Sex-selective abortion: a relational approach".

Hypatia .

10 (1): 202– 217.

doi : 10.1111/j.1527-2001.1995.tb01360.x .

JSTOR 3810465 .

PMID 11865874 .

S2CID 27987147 .

^ Warren MA (1985).

Gendercide: The Implications of Sex-Selection . Rowman and Allenheld.

ISBN 978-0-8476-7330-8 .

[ page needed ] ^ "Race- and Sex-Selection Abortion Bans: A False Solution to the Real Problems of Racism and Sexism" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 12, 2018 . Retrieved June 10, 2017 .

^ "Preventing gender-biased sex selection" (PDF) .

UNFPA .

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 11, 2011 . Retrieved November 1, 2011 .

^ "Prenatal sex selection" (PDF) .

PACE . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 3, 2011 . Retrieved November 1, 2011 .

^ "MP's motion on sex selection stirs abortion debate" .

CBC . December 5, 2012.

^ Press TC (June 2, 2021).

"Majority of Conservative MPs vote in favour of defeated sex-selective abortion bill" .

CTVNews . Retrieved July 31, 2025 .

^ "House debates abortion ban for sex of fetus" .

CNN Online . May 31, 2012.

Archived from the original on July 1, 2019 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ Steinhauer J (May 31, 2012).

"House Rejects Bill to Ban Sex-Selective Abortions" .

New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 20, 2016 . Retrieved May 31, 2010 .

^ a b Christie B (May 29, 2013).

"Arizona Race And Sex-Selective Abortion Ban Draws ACLU Lawsuit" .

HuffPost . Archived from the original on May 30, 2013.

^ "HB 2443: An Act amending Title 13, Chapter 36, Arizona Revised Statutes, by adding section 13-3603.02; ..." (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 12, 2019 . Retrieved May 31, 2013 .

^ "Arizona Revised Statutes, 13-3603.02. Abortion; sex and race selection; injunctive and civil relief; failure to report; definition" .

Arizona State Legislature . Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved May 31, 2013 .

^ Graham G (November 4, 2014).

"MPs vote to make sex selection abortion illegal" . Archived from the original on November 4, 2014.

^ "Burnham's MP Tessa Munt backs sex-selection abortion bill" . thewestcountry.co.uk. December 5, 2014.

Archived from the original on September 10, 2017 . Retrieved January 5, 2015 .

^ "UK: Sex-Selective Abortions Voted Illegal By Parliament Members" .

Gender Selection . gender-selection.com.au. December 1, 2014.

ISSN 2204-3888 . Archived from the original on January 5, 2015 . Retrieved January 5, 2015 .

[ unreliable source?

] ^ "Statement on sex-selective abortion" . Abortion Rights. September 18, 2014.

Archived from the original on September 11, 2017 . Retrieved December 9, 2014 .

^ "Statement on sex-selective abortion" . Spiked.com. May 23, 2014. Archived from the original on September 10, 2017 . Retrieved December 12, 2014 .

^ a b Song J (2009).

Rising sex ratio at birth in China: responses and effects of social policies . International Population Conference. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved March 14, 2014 .

^ "Care For Girls' Gaining Momentum" .

China Daily . August 7, 2004.

^ "China Makes Sex-Selective Abortions a Crime".

Reproductive Health Matters .

13 (25): 203. 2005.

JSTOR 3776292 .

^ "Gender Equality" .

UNICEF . 2012. Archived from the original on June 1, 2014.

^ "UNFPA First Agency to Campaign against Sex Selection in China" (PDF) .

United Nations Population Fund . 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 4, 2012.

^ "MTP and PCPNDT Initiatives Report" (PDF) .

Government of India . 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 1, 2014.

^ "Delhi Laadli Scheme" .

Government of Delhi, India . 2008. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014.

v t e Abortion Main topics Definitions History Methods Abortion debate Philosophical aspects Abortion law Movements Abortion-rights movements Anti-abortion movements Issues Abortion and mental health Beginning of human personhood Beginning of pregnancy controversy Abortion-breast cancer hypothesis Anti-abortion violence Abortion under communism Birth control Crisis pregnancy center Ethical aspects of abortion Eugenics Forced abortion Genetics and abortion Late-term abortion Legal protection of access Legalized abortion and crime effect Libertarian perspectives on abortion Limit of viability Malthusianism Men's rights Minors and abortion Misinformation related to abortion Natalism One-child policy Paternal rights and abortion Post-abortion care Prenatal development Prenatal rights Reproductive rights Self-induced abortion Sex-selective abortion Sidewalk counseling Societal attitudes towards abortion Socialism Termination for medical reasons Toxic abortion Unsafe abortion Women's rights By country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Hong Kong Cyprus Georgia India Iran Israel Japan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Laos Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Northern Cyprus Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Taiwan Timor-Leste Turkey United Arab Emirates Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom North America Bahamas Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Micronesia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands New Zealand Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Law Case law Constitutional law History of abortion law Laws by country Buffer zones Conscientious objection Fetal protection Six-week bans Informed consent Late-term restrictions Parental involvement Spousal consent Methods Vacuum aspiration Dilation and evacuation Dilation and curettage Intact D&X Hysterotomy Instillation Menstrual extraction Medical abortion Abortifacient drugs Methotrexate Mifepristone Misoprostol Oxytocin Self-induced abortion Unsafe abortion Religion Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Hinduism Islam Judaism Scientology Category v t e Population Major topics Demographics of the world Demographic transition Estimates of historical world population Population growth Population momentum Human population projections World population Population biology Population decline Population density Physiological density Population dynamics Population model Population pyramid Population ecology Biocapacity Carrying capacity I = P × A  × T Kaya identity Malthusian growth model Overshoot (population) World3 model Society and population Eugenics Dys genics Human overpopulation Malthusian catastrophe Human population planning Compulsory sterilization Dependency ratio Family planning One-child policy Two-child policy Overconsumption Political demography Population ethics Antinatalism Intergenerational equity Mere addition paradox Natalism Non-identity problem Reproductive rights Sustainable population Zero population growth Publications Population and Environment Population and Development Review Lists Population and housing censuses by country Dependency ratio Largest cities Number of births World population milestones 6 billion 7 8 Population concern organizations Events and organizations 7 Billion Actions Church of Euthanasia International Conference on Population and Development Population Action International Population Connection Population Matters United Nations Population Fund United Nations world population conferences Voluntary Human Extinction Movement World Population Conference World Population Day World Population Foundation Related topics Bennett's law Green Revolution Human impact on the environment Migration Net migration rate Sustainability Commons Category v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sex-selective_abortion&oldid=1303587916 " Categories : Female infanticide Abortion debate Abortion Sexism Gendercide Sex selection Hidden categories: CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2020 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2020 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2024 Articles with excerpts Articles that may contain original research from February 2023 Articles lacking reliable references from March 2023 This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 21:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sex-selective abortion 24 languages Add topic

