Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Criteria 2 Causes 3 References Toggle the table of contents Critically endangered 60 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kurdî Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ नेपाली 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Critically Endangered ) IUCN conservation category This article is about the conservation designation itself. For lists of critically endangered species, see Lists of IUCN Red List critically endangered species .

Conservation status by IUCN Red List category Extinct Extinct (EX) ( list ) Extinct in the Wild (EW) ( list ) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) ( list ) Endangered (EN) ( list ) Vulnerable (VU) ( list ) Lower Risk Near Threatened (NT) ( list ) Conservation Dependent (CD) ( list ) Least Concern (LC) ( lists ) Other categories Data Deficient (DD) ( list ) Not Evaluated (NE) Related topics International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) IUCN Red List NatureServe status Lists of organisms by population Comparison of Red List classes above and NatureServe status below v t e Pygmy three-toed sloth , a species of sloth with a conservation status of critically endangered An IUCN Red List critically endangered ( CR or sometimes CE ) species is one that has been categorized by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as facing an extremely high risk of extinction in the wild.

[ 1 ] As of December 2023, of the 157,190 species currently on the IUCN Red List, 9,760 of those are listed as critically endangered, with 1,302 being possibly extinct and 67 possibly extinct in the wild .

[ 2 ] The IUCN Red List provides the public with information regarding the conservation status of animal, fungi, and plant species.

[ 3 ] It divides various species into seven different categories of conservation that are based on habitat range, population size, habitat, threats, etc. Each category represents a different level of global extinction risk. Species that are considered to be critically endangered are placed within the "Threatened" category.

[ 4 ] As the IUCN Red List does not consider a species extinct until extensive targeted surveys have been conducted, species that are possibly extinct are still listed as critically endangered. IUCN maintains a list [ 5 ] of "possibly extinct" and "possibly extinct in the wild" species, modelled on categories used by BirdLife International to categorize these taxa .

Criteria [ edit ] To be defined as critically endangered in the Red List, a species must meet any of the following criteria (A–E): [ 6 ] A) Reduction in population size based on any of the following: 1. An observed, estimated, inferred or suspected population size reduction of ≥ 90% over the last 10 years or three generations, whichever is the longer, where the causes of the reduction are reversible AND understood AND ceased , based on (and specifying) any of the following: a. direct observation b. an index of abundance appropriate for the taxon c. a decline in area of occupancy, extent of occurrence or quality of habitat d. actual or potential levels of exploitation e. the effects of introduced taxa , hybridisation , pathogens, pollutants , competitors or parasites .

2. An observed, estimated, inferred or suspected population size reduction of ≥ 80% occurred over the last 10 years or three generations, whichever is the longer, where the reduction or its causes may not have ceased OR may not be understood OR may not be reversible , based on (and specifying) any of (a) to (e) under A1.

B) Geographic range in the form of either B1 (extent of occurrence) OR B2 (area of occupancy) OR both: 1. Extent of occurrence estimated to be less than 100 km 2 , and estimates indicating at least two of a-c: a.

Severely fragmented or known to exist at only one location.

b.

Continuing decline , inferred, observed or projected, in any of the following: i. extent of occurrence ii. area of occupancy iii. area, extent or quality of habitat iv. number of locations or subpopulations v. number of mature individuals c.

Extreme fluctuations in any of the following: i. extent of occurrence ii. area of occupancy iii. number of locations or subpopulations iv. number of mature individuals 2. Area of occupancy estimated to be less than 10 km 2 , and estimates indicating at least two of a-c: a.

Severely fragmented or known to exist at only one location.

b.

Continuing decline , inferred, observed or projected, in any of the following: i. extent of occurrence ii. area of occupancy iii. area, extent or quality of habitat iv. number of locations or subpopulations v. number of mature individuals c.

Extreme fluctuations in any of the following: i. extent of occurrence ii. area of occupancy iii. number of locations or subpopulations iv. number of mature individuals C) Population estimated to number fewer than 250 mature individuals and either: 1. An estimated continuing decline of at least 25% within ten years or three generations , whichever is longer, OR 2. A continuing decline, observed, projected, or inferred, in numbers of mature individuals AND at least one of the following (a-b): a. Population structure in the form of one of the following: i. no subpopulation estimated to contain more than 50 mature individuals, OR ii. at least 90% of mature individuals in one subpopulation b. Extreme fluctuations in the number of older individuals D) Population size estimated to number fewer than 50 mature individuals.

E) Quantitative analysis showing the probability of extinction in the wild is at least 50% within 10 years or three generations , whichever is the longer.

Causes [ edit ] The Beluga sturgeon ( Huso huso ) is an example of a critically endangered species. Their wild populations have been reduced significantly due to overharvesting for its caviar .

The current extinction crisis is witnessing extinction rates that are occurring at a faster rate than that of the natural extinction rate. It has largely been credited towards human impacts on climate change and the loss of biodiversity . This is along with natural forces that may create stress on the species or cause an animal population to become extinct.

[ 7 ] Currently, the biggest reason for species extinction is human interaction resulting in habitat loss.

[ 8 ] Species rely on their habitat for the resources needed for their survival. If the habitat gets destroyed, the population will see a decline in their numbers. Activities that cause loss of habitat include: pollution , urbanization , and agriculture . Another reason that plants and animals become endangered is due to the introduction of invasive species . Invasive species invade and exploit a new habitat for its natural resources as a method to outcompete the native organisms, eventually taking over the habitat. This can lead to either the native species' extinction or causing them to become endangered, which also eventually causes extinction. Plants and animals may also go extinct due to disease. The introduction of a disease into a new habitat can cause it to spread amongst the native species. Due to their lack of familiarity with the disease or little resistance, the native species can die off.

References [ edit ] ^ "IUCN RED LIST CATEGORIES AND CRITERIA" (PDF) . 2000-02-09 . Retrieved 2018-02-06 .

^ "IUCN Red List of Threatened Species" . IUCN . Retrieved January 19, 2024 .

^ "What Is the IUCN Red List?" . IUCN Red List . Retrieved August 13, 2020 .

^ "Endangered Species" .

National Geographic . March 17, 2011 . Retrieved August 13, 2020 .

^ "Summary Statistics" .

www.iucnredlist.org . Retrieved 2017-12-10 .

^ IUCN (February 2014).

"Guidelines for Using the IUCN Red List Categories and Criteria" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 May 2015 . Retrieved 10 December 2018 .

^ Chandler, David (November 22, 2019).

"What Are the Causes of Animals Becoming Endangered?" .

Sciencing . Retrieved August 20, 2020 .

^ "What Causes Extinction" .

American Museum of Natural History . Retrieved October 7, 2022 .

v t e Threatened species Template: Threatened species by region IUCN Red List Categories 1 Extinct Extinct (EX) Extinct in the Wild (EW) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) Endangered (EN) Vulnerable (VU) Lower risk Near Threatened (NT) Least Concern (LC) Lower Risk (LR) Conservation Dependent (LR/cd) Not fully assessed Data Deficient (DD) Not Evaluated (NE) Species Lists Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient WP categories Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient CITES Appendix I Appendix II Appendix III By taxa Threatened arthropods / Endangered arthropods / spiders / Decline in insect populations Decline in amphibian populations Threatened Banksia / rays / sharks / Fungi / Chromista The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates The world's 100 most threatened species Conservation Biodiversity action plan Biodiversity threats Conservation biology CITES ARKive Bird conservation Conservation status Conservation-reliant species Ecoregion conservation status Habitat destruction Latent extinction risk Rare species Vulnerability and susceptibility 1 Pre-2001 categories and subcategories shown in italics .

v t e Threatened species by region By region Blue-listed Environmental Vulnerability Index Regional Red List Australasia Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 ROTAP Threatened Species Protection Act 1995 Threatened ecological community Trade in Endangered Species Act 1989 Canada Species at Risk Act Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada Europe EAZA Ex-situ Programme Funds for Endangered Parrots South Africa Endangered Wildlife Trust United States Distinct population segment Endangered Species Act of 1973 Endangered Species Act Amendments of 1978 Endangered species recovery plan Endangered Wolf Center National Wildlife Refuge NatureServe conservation status The Nature Conservancy Lists Asia List of endangered and protected species of China Endangered mammals of India List of endangered animals in India List of endemic and threatened plants of India List of endangered species in Pakistan List of threatened species of the Philippines List of endangered species in Vietnam Europe Threatened mammals of Europe Endangered plants of Europe Bulgaria Italy Lithuania Russia Ukraine United Kingdom North America List of endangered plants of North America List of endangered animals of North America Endangered mammals and birds of the United States List of threatened mammals of the United States List of threatened birds of the United States List of threatened reptiles and amphibians of the United States Elsewhere Threatened fauna of Australia List of threatened flora of Australia List of endangered flora of Brazil List of threatened mammals of Brazil List of threatened birds of Brazil NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐g88lv
Cached time: 20250812003545
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.343 seconds
Real time usage: 0.439 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 960/1000000
Revision size: 8689/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 82631/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 576/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 53756/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.228/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5513094/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  363.300      1 -total
 34.76%  126.297      1 Template:Reflist
 30.78%  111.809      8 Template:Cite_web
 24.87%   90.362      6 Template:Navbox
 23.19%   84.258      1 Template:Conservation_status
 22.55%   81.914      1 Template:Sidebar
 17.41%   63.251      1 Template:Short_description
 15.86%   57.630      1 Template:Threatened_species
  9.60%   34.872      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.68%   20.646      1 Template:About Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7451605:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812003545 and revision id 1304687087. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Critically_endangered&oldid=1304687087 " Categories : IUCN Red List Biota by conservation status Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 15:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Critically endangered 60 languages Add topic

